                                                                                                  Subhead
      3. COMMUNITY IDENTITY
               Benicia is committed to preserving and enhancing its unique geographic and cultural
               inheritance. It is located at the gate of California’s great waterways.The City’s heritage
               and resources are described in Gateway to the Inland Coast: The Story of the
               Carquinez Strait by Andrew Neal Cohen, (1996, California State Lands Commission);
               Great Expectations: The Story of Benicia California, by Richard Dillon (1980, Benicia
               Heritage Books); and Benicia: Portrait of an Early California Town, by Robert
               Bruegmann (1980, 101 Productions).
               A. HISTORIC RESOURCES
               Benicia has a rich and fascinating past: historic buildings, archaeological sites, and the
               traditions and folkways of the community’s diverse residents.These resources—all
               part of Benicia’s cultural heritage—provide continuity with the past, create jobs,
               improve housing, offer a pleasing visual setting, enhance the quality of life, and have
               the potential to draw thousands of visitors.Appendix B of the Historical and Archeo-
               logical Background Report (March 1996) lists Benicia’s historic landmarks, resources,
               and buildings. Figure 3-1 is a diagram of Benicia’s historical sites.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                            97

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              1. NATIVE AMERICAN PERIOD
              The Vallejo-Benicia area was originally settled by the Southern Patwin group of Native
              Americans.The Southern Patwin inhabited areas west of the Sacramento River and
              north of the Carquinez Strait. By the beginning of the 20th century, the Southern
              Patwin were extinct.
              The Patwin were a hunting and gathering society that depended mostly on acorns
              and marine supplies for sustenance.They settled next to water.The nearest Patwin
              villages definitely located are on the Napa River and near Fairfield, and there are
              mortar sites at the Benicia State Recreation Area.Although early explorers reported
              seeing villages on the north shore of the Carquinez Strait and mapped a village at the
              head of Southampton Bay, it remains unclear if this region was regularly inhabited,
              how it was utilized, and who used it.
              2. HISPANIC PERIOD
              Between the 1820s and 1840s, the Spanish parceled out the land around Benicia in
              large land grants to officers and their families.A large Spanish land grant—the Soscoe
              land grant of Rancho Suscol—covered what were to become the future sites of both
              Vallejo and Benicia. Rancho Suscol was obtained by General Mariano Vallejo in 1844
              from Governor Micheltorena.
              This land ownership pattern lasted until the Mexican-American War, after which
              California was granted to the United States as part of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.
              California was admitted into the union in 1850.
              3. AMERICAN PERIOD
              In 1846, Robert Baylor Semple, an immigrant from Kentucky, arrested General Mariano
              Vallejo and persuaded his prisoner to deed him half-interest in a tract of Rancho
              Suscol. Semple founded Benicia that same year, named in honor of General Vallejo’s
              wife.
              The Benicia Arsenal, located on a large tract of land east of the community and over-
              looking the Strait, was acquired between 1847 and 1849 by the federal government
              for use as a military reservation. Several army installations preceded the Arsenal, which
              was named the “Benicia Arsenal” in 1852. It was one of five permanent arsenals in the
              country and the first on the Pacific Coast.
              In 1850, Benicia and Monterey were the first two cities in the State of California to
              incorporate.Also in 1850, Benicia was named the government seat for Solano County.
              Soon thereafter, Benicia was established as a port of entry by the United States Con-
              gress. On February 4, 1853, the State Legislature voted to move into Benicia’s new City
              Hall and make it the State Capital.
98                                                                       City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                            A. Historic Resources
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Subhead
 HISTORICAL SITES
  1.         Guard House                                                                 14.         St. Mary’s School Site                                                       27.        “Solano Hotel” Site
  2.         Clock Tower                                                                 15.         Captain Walsh Home                                                           28.        What-Not Shop
  3.         Commandant’s Home                                                           16.         St. Catherine’s Academy Site                                                 29.        “Salt Box” House
  4.         Camel Barns                                                                 17.         First Protestant Church Site                                                 30.        “Washington House”
  5.         Powder Magazine                                                             18.         Masonic Temple                                                               31.        Gold!
  6.         Post Hospital                                                               19.         St Paul’s Church                                                             32.        Tannery Sites
  7.         Post Cemetery                                                               20.         St. Paul’s Rectory                                                           33.        Jurgensen’s Saloon
  8.         St. Dominic’s Cemetery                                                      21.         Mills College Site                                                           34.        Pony Express
  9.         “Benicia Boy”                                                               22.         Peabody Hospital Site                                                        35.        Cannery Sites
  10.        Pacific Mail Docks                                                          23.         “California House” Site                                                      36.        Transcontinental Railroad Depot
  11.        St. Dominic’s Church                                                        24.         “Bella Union Saloon”                                                         37.        Train-Ferry Docks Site
  12.        St. Augustine’s College Site                                                25.         Early Capital                                                                38.        Turner Shipyards Site
  13.        Mizner Homesite                                                             26.         Fischer-Hanlon House                                                         39.        Corbett-Choynski Fight Site
                                                                                                                                                                                  40.        Commodore Jones Point
                            Downtown Historic District
                                                                                                                               C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OAD
                                                                                                                                                                             E.
                                                                                                                           CHHEEL SLESA EHAIL LHS I LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PA R K R
                                                                                                                                                        SE
                                                                                                                       E                                                      2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      YSH
                   R O S E DRI V E
                                                                                                          RAMA DRI V
                                                                                                                                                                                     T
                                                                                                                                                    DR IV
                                                                                                                                                                                  dS
                                                                                IVE                                                                                                 RE                                                                                    RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          O
 C                                                                                                                                                                                     ET
PK OLU                                                                      DR
  W M
    Y. B U                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RO
                                                                         NGS                                     O
                                                                                                            PA N
             S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4                         AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                        HASTI                                                                                                                 HI LL CR ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                            T                   8 9                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                E. 5th STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                      INT
BENICIA
                                            ER
                                                 ST                                             M   PTON ROAD
                                                      AT                                     HA
                                                                                                                                                E
                                                           E                          SOUT
                                                                                                                                           STRE
                 S TAT E                                       78
                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               7
                                                                                                                                   W. 7 th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      .
                                     PA R K                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            M         3             2
                                                                                                                                                                                       12 MILITARY E.                                                A
                                                                                                                                                       T                      16                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                                             MILITARY WEST              15         GRANT                                           ST.
                                                                                 39                                                                                          17     13 14
                                                                                                     38
                                                                                                                                                                           18
                                                                                                                                                                        21 19 20                      11
                                                                                                                   40                                                 22
                                                                                                                                                                         23 24
                                                                                                                                                                         26 25                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                    1st ST
                                                                                Southampton
                                                                                                                                                                           27
                                                                                    Bay
                                                                                                                                                                        29 28 32
                                                                                                                                                                           30
                                                                                                                                                                        31     33 35
                                                                                                                                                                               34
                                                                                                                                                                           37 36                                                        SCALE
                                                                                     UINEZ           STRAI
                                                                                CARQ                       T                                                                                                800                         0      800 1600
                                            Figure 3-1. Historic Sites
                                            Benicia was the State Capital for only a year. In 1854 the Legislature was persuaded to
                                            relocate to Sacramento. In 1859, the county seat was moved from Benicia to Fairfield.
                                            Benicia was also home to the earliest of California’s educational institutions. Several
                                            schools were established in Benicia in the mid-19th century, including Dominican
                                            College and Mills College, though both campuses were relocated by 1900. Benicia was
                                            home to the state’s first official Masonic Hall, built in 1850, and the depot and shops of
                                            the Pacific Mail Steamship Company—the first large industrial enterprise in California.
                                            In the late 1800s, Benicia was a center for agricultural and mineral production.The
                                            first railroad ferry west of the Mississippi River began service in 1879 at the foot of
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    99

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              First Street. By 1880, one-third of all leather produced in California was manufactured
              at three locations in Benicia, primarily at the foot of First Street.
              4. ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES
              One known archaeological resource is an underwater site at the Matthew Turner
              Shipyard State Park.There lie the remains of the Stamboul, originally designed and
              built on the east coast to ship ice from New England to India, then converted to a
              whaling ship.The park is a National Register of Historic Places District.
              Six other archaeological sites may also exist within Benicia’s City Limits. One may be
              located in the vicinity of Lake Herman Road and the Suisun Bay marsh.The other
              potential sites are located in the Arsenal and Downtown.
              5. HISTORIC BUILDINGS, SITES, AND AREAS
              WATERFRONT
              Much of Benicia’s history was
              influenced by its location along the
              Carquinez Strait, where the rivers
              of the Central Valley that flow into
              San Francisco Bay shaped the
              transcontinental railway and the
              international shipping trade.
              Benicia’s waterfront and transpor-
              tation activity molded its social,
              commercial, and military history.
              Primary industries—tanneries,
              canneries, and shipyards—located
              along the waterfront.
              The waterfront has been the
              subject of several governmental
              plans.A Special Area Plan for the
              Benicia Waterfront was completed
              in 1977 by the San Francisco Bay
              Conservation and Development
              Commission. The Benicia Urban
              Waterfront Restoration Plan was
              prepared by the City in 1991 for
              the California State Coastal Conser-
              vancy Urban Waterfront Program.
              The Plan focused on the 24 acres
              of Downtown bounded by the
100                                                                       City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                                 Subhead
                                                                                    A. Historic Resources
               Carquinez Strait to the south and west, F and B Streets to the north, and the marina to
               the east. It sought a balance between the needs to preserve the history of the area, to
               preserve open space, to enhance access to the waterfront, and to create new activities
               and commerce.
               ARSENAL
               The Benicia Arsenal was established in 1852 on 345 acres.The buildings were devel-
               oped to serve the needs of different Army sections that used the land. Residential areas
               and quarters were scattered throughout the site.Along with 24 frame, brick, and stone
               structures built between 1854 and 1911, there are many newer buildings constructed
               during World War II.
               The Arsenal was deactivated in 1963 and the Defense Department transferred owner-
               ship to the City of Benicia in 1965.The federal government transferred public trust
               lands within the Arsenal’s waterfront to the State.The State granted these lands to
               Benicia to be managed according to the terms of the grant and consistent with the
               public trust doctrine, a common law generally immune from legislative change.
               At first the City leased land and buildings to Benicia Industries, Inc. Eventually the
               City transferred title to much of the Arsenal to Benicia Industries to develop the
               Industrial Park and operate the Port.The City, however, retained ownership of several
               of the most historically significant structures, including the Commandant’s house, the
               Clocktower building, the Camel Barns, and one of the original powder magazines.
               The Arsenal area includes four distinct historic districts included on the National
               Register of Historic Places, and is also registered as State Historical Landmark No. 176.
               To preserve these historic resources, the City adopted the Arsenal Historic Conserva-
               tion Plan in 1993.This plan includes goals, objectives, design guidelines, and criteria to
               guide development and alterations to existing structures.
               Recently remodeled live/work spaces accommodate part of the Benicia arts commu-
               nity.Thus the Arsenal includes a mix of residential, commercial, and industrial uses
               similar to the historic mix of uses during its long period of military use.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                          101

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              DOWNTOWN
              Benicia’s Downtown, centered on First Street from the waterfront to Military, is the
              historic and cultural heart of the City. Settlement in the Downtown area began soon
              after the town was platted in 1847. Streets were laid out without regard to topography
              in a rectangular grid that extended into the water. Growth intensified when the State
              Capitol was briefly located in Benicia from 1853–1854.Through the remainder of the
              19th century, development spread north from the waterfront, concentrated along two
              ridges of land that ran south from the highlands, to the Strait.
              Recognizing the importance of Benicia’s historic Downtown, the City created an
              expanded historic district and adopted the Downtown Historic Conservation Plan in
              1990 (amended 1992).The Downtown Historic District includes properties along
              both sides of First Street from Solano Square (Military) to the waterfront, and for
              several blocks to the east and west of First Street.The district was created not only to
              preserve historic buildings, but to help maintain and enhance the variety of activities
              that make up the historic quality of the area.
              6. HISTORIC PRESERVATION
              Downtown has been recognized by Benicia as a historic district since 1969. However,
              its boundaries originally encompassed only 150 feet on either side of First Street from
              A Street to Military.This area represented the historic commercial spine of Downtown,
              but it omitted much of the surrounding historic residential neighborhood, the devel-
              opment of which was inextricably linked to First Street.
102                                                                      City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                                 Subhead
                                                                                    A. Historic Resources
               In 1987, the City enacted a provision within its zoning ordinance for a special historic
               overlay district that could be combined with any underlying zoning district. In 1989,
               based on extensive surveys and documentation by volunteers, consultants, and
               historians, the City identified two potential historic districts: one encompasses the
               Downtown commercial and residential area centered along First Street, and the other
               falls within the boundaries of the former Benicia Arsenal. In 1990 and 1993, the city
               prepared and adopted conservation plans for the Downtown and Arsenal historic
               overlay districts respectively.
               GOAL 3.1:               Maintain and enhance Benicia’s historic charac-
                                       ter.
               POLICY 3.1.1:           Encourage reuse of historic buildings; if feasible, encourage
                                       relocation rather than demolition.
               Program 3.1.A:          Continue to maintain a current inventory of historic and
                                       architectural resources in the city.
               POLICY 3.1.2:           Enhance the economic potential of historic and architectural
                                       assets.
               POLICY 3.1.3:           Preserve historic trees and landscapes. (Refer to the Arsenal
                                       Historic Conservation Plan, November 1993, for guidance on
                                       historic trees and landscaping.)
               Program 3.1.B:          Become a Certified Local Government (CLG) by applying to the
                                       State Department of Historic Preservation. (See explanation
                                       below.)
               The CLG program gives local authorities the ability to designate local historic districts,
               structures, and sites and to have more direct participation in federal and statewide
               historic preservation programs. CLGs are eligible for special matching grants for
               projects that further local historic preservation objectives.
               Completion of an historic resources inventory and creation of a local Historic Preser-
               vation Commission would qualify Benicia as a CLG. Benicia would then be eligible for
               federal funds that are available only to CLG cities.
               Program 3.1.C:          Define the boundaries necessary to preserve the historical
                                       significance of the Camel Barn complex.
               Program 3.1.D:          Continue to work and cooperate with the Benicia Historical
                                       Society on historic preservation issues.
               POLICY 3.1.4:           Promote the preservation and enhancement of historic neigh-
                                       borhoods, commercial areas, and governmental districts.
               POLICY 3.1.5:           Permit new development, remodeling and building renovation
                                       in historic districts when consistent with the policies of the
                                       applicable Historic Conservation Plan.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                          103

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              POLICY 3.1.6:          Promote restoration of public and privately-owned historic and
                                     architecturally significant properties.
              Significant City-owned structures in danger of deterioration include the Commanding
              Officer’s Quarters, Powder Magazine, Railroad Depot, and Von Pfister Adobe. Other
              historic and architecturally significant properties where restoration efforts should be
              focused are the Arsenal area and the Camel Barn complex and sites.
              Program 3.1.E:         Develop a program for inspections of historic structures.
              Program 3.1.F:         Seek public and private funding for historic preservation and
                                     maintenance.
              Program 3.1.G:         Develop a program for property tax incentives.
              The City can encourage the rehabilitation of privately owned historic buildings by
              providing potential buyers with information about California’s Mills Act and federal
              Investment Tax Credits.
              Program 3.1.H:         Consider waiving or reducing building permit fees for qualified
                                     work necessary to rehabilitate or restore historic structures.
              Program 3.1.I:         Publicize opportunities and incentives for historic preservation
                                     to owners of historic buildings.
              Program 3.1.J:         Continue to assist owners of historic homes in lower-income
                                     areas with low interest loans through Community Develop-
                                     ment Block Grants (CDBG), when available.
              Program 3.1.K:         Establish a Historic Preservation Commission.
              Program 3.1.L:         Adopt and maintain a landmarks ordinance.
              Program 3.1.M:         Inform title companies that properties in Benicia may be
                                     affected by historic preservation regulations.
104                                                                    City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                                 Subhead
                                                                                   A. Historic Resources
               7. HISTORIC AND ARCHAEOLOGICAL RESOURCES GOALS, POLICIES, AND
                   PROGRAMS
               Goals, policies, and programs in this section deal with protecting archaeological
               resources; preserving and restoring Benicia’s historic assets; and ensuring that new
               development and additions are compatible with historic assets.
               GOAL 3.2:               Protect archaeological (including underwater)
                                       sites and resources.
               POLICY 3.2.1:           Ensure the protection and preservation of artifacts in known,
                                       and as yet unidentified, areas.
               Program 3.2.A:          Work with the California Archaeological Inventory to develop
                                       an inventory of existing and potential archaeological sites.
               Program 3.2.B:          Refer development proposals that may adversely affect archaeo-
                                       logical sites to the California Archaeological Inventory.
               Program 3.2.C:          Develop City regulations regarding inspections, code enforce-
                                       ment, and regulation of pot hunters.
               Program 3.2.D:          Require that all sites with archaeological resources likely to be
                                       disturbed by a proposed project be analyzed by a qualified
                                       archaeologist and an appropriate program developed to
                                       mitigate any impacts from the project.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                          105

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              B. CULTURAL RESOURCES
                                                                      Benicia is a city with history,
                                                                      character, and a good quality of
                                                                      life.This “cultural landscape” is
                                                                      evidenced by the original town
                                                                      plan, the historic buildings, the
                                                                      alleys, and the remnants of piers
                                                                      and shipyards. “Quality of life” is a
                                                                      reflection of how people work,
                                                                      play, travel, and live. Based on the
                                                                      January 1996 community survey,
                                                                      the consensus in Benicia is that
                                                                      the quality of life is worth pre-
                                                                      serving.
                                                                      Benicia’s lifestyle is active and
                                                                      diversified around the
              community’s many assets: First Street, the parks, an abundance of recreational activi-
              ties, the Marina, the Library, and the Arsenal. Public and private organizations sponsor
              activities for every interest area. Many schools, churches, and the Senior Center offer
              their facilities to support community cultural activities.
              Whether formal or informal, all community activities contribute to Benicia’s identity
              and quality of life.The contribution may be impossible to quantify, but it is necessary
              to keep in mind, not only for its short-term benefit to the local economy but ulti-
              mately, to the community’s long-term sustainability.
              1. COMMUNITY CULTURAL FACILITIES AND ACTIVITIES
              Benicia enjoys a variety of public and privately owned cultural facilities that are
              managed by the City and other organizations (see Figure 2-7 for a diagram of publicly
              owned facilities).The civic complex includes the City Hall, the Police Department, a
              youth center, a senior center, a post office, and a public library. Other City-owned
              facilities include two houses used by the Boy Scouts and Girl Scouts, the Clocktower,
              the Commandant’s House, and the Camel Barn complex in the Arsenal. Privately
              owned recreational and cultural facilities include the Southampton Swim Club and
              B.D.E.S. Meeting Hall.
              Benicia is also home to several historic museums: the former State Capitol Building,
              the Camel Barn complex, and the Fire Museum.
106                                                                        City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                  B. Cultural Resources
                                                                                                Subhead
               2. CULTURAL GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
               This section sets goals for community recognition of the existence and value of
               Benicia’s cultural resources and programs. Special attention is given to the Library,
               Camel Barn Museum, and community-wide special events.
               GOAL 3.3:               Increase public awareness of cultural resources
                                       and activities.
               POLICY 3.3.1:           Preserve and enhance cultural organizations, resources and
                                       activities.
               Program 3.3.A:          Utilize the City’s web page and other information sources to
                                       advertise cultural activities.
               Program 3.3.B:          Continue City funding of cultural activities and the Camel Barn
                                       museum.
               Program 3.3.C:          Require periodic reports of the results of City funding.
               Program 3.3.D:          Investigate the creation of a City-appointed cultural commis-
                                       sion.
               Program 3.3.E:          Develop promotional materials that increase community
                                       awareness of the Camel Barn museum.
               Program 3.3.F           Expand the museum to include other historic buildings.
               GOAL 3.4                Support the library and the services it provides to
                                       the community.
               POLICY 3.4.1:           Maintain and expand library services.
               Program 3.4.A:          Keep the library up-to-date with electronic and other techno-
                                       logical developments.
               Program 3.4.B:          Plan for expanding library services into existing unfinished
                                       basement space as needs dictate.
               POLICY 3.4.2:           New development will be required to underwrite additional
                                       library materials.
               Program 3.4.C:          Maintain an adequate “book fee.” (See Glossary for definition.)
               GOAL 3.5:               Promote events with wide community attraction.
               POLICY 3.5.1:           Support community-wide and special events, such as arts in the
                                       park, a farmers’ market, and open studios.
               POLICY 3.5.2:           Plan special events while keeping in mind the need to mini-
                                       mize noise and traffic congestion.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                         107

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              3. THE ART COMMUNITY
                                                    Benicia’s vibrant arts community is one of its
                                                    prominent assets.The availability of large open
                                                    spaces in the Arsenal buildings draws accom-
                                                    plished artists and arts-related businesses to the
                                                    Lower Arsenal.
                                                    The history of Benicia’s art community dates back
                                                    to the post Korean War era.Artists exhibited and
                                                    sold works from the Railroad Depot Gallery and
                                                    the Tipton Tea Room on First Street.
                                                    Since then many diversified activities and events
                                                    have become an established part of the art
                                                    community. Among the most notable are:
              • the Benicia Old Town Theater Group, which began providing high-quality theatrical
                 productions in 1964;
              • establishment of several renowned glass studios;
              • establishment of Benicia Community Arts in 1980, which serves as an umbrella arts
                 organization; and
              • the Camel Barn Museum, established in 1982.
              In 1984, a Mayor’s Committee on Culture was appointed to assess Benicia’s cultural
              heritage and resources, evaluate existing programs, and make recommendations for
              the future of arts and culture in the community. Recommendations included establish-
              ing a cultural commission and a center for library and cultural activities; creating a
              funding structure for cultural pursuits; and inclusion of an arts and culture section in
              the General Plan.
              A direct result of the Mayor’s Committee on Culture was the establishment of Arts
              Benicia in 1988.This organization administers arts-related issues for Benicia, and to
              coordinate, fund, and publicize arts for public benefit.The group was instrumental in
              the adoption of the Live/Work Ordinance, which changed zoning to allow artists to
              live and work in their Arsenal studios.
              In 1993,Arts Benicia opened a gallery in converted warehouse space in the Arsenal.
              The gallery is a nucleus for the evolving Arsenal community.
              Of the 1984 Mayor’s Committee recommendations, the library and an art gallery have
              been built and the Art in Public Places Program has been initiated. However, the issues
              of establishing a cultural commission and a funding structure have yet to be ad-
              dressed.
108                                                                      City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                 B. Cultural Resources
                                                                                              Subhead
               4. ART GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
               This section sets goals for recognition of the
               existence and value of Benicia’s art community. It
               calls for supporting and promoting the arts, and
               installing art in public places.
               GOAL 3.6:                Support and promote
                                        the arts as a major
                                        element in Benicia’s
                                        community identity.
               POLICY 3.6.1:            Attract and retain art-related
                                        businesses.
               POLICY 3.6.2:            Continue to allow and
                                        encourage live/work spaces
                                        for artists.
               Program 3.6.A:           Evaluate where live/work spaces are allowed and what restric-
                                        tions are placed on them.
               Program 3.6.B:           Encourage expansion of art retailing on First Street.
               POLICY 3.6.3:            Enhance public places with art.
               Program 3.6.C:           Work with developers and builders to incorporate public art
                                        into projects, where applicable.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                      109

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              C. VISUAL CHARACTER
              1. WHAT IS VISUAL
                   CHARACTER?
              This section is concerned
              with the location, mass,
              and arrangement of the
              various components of
              development.Visual
              character combines
              elements of city planning,
              architecture, and land-
              scape architecture, and
              attempts to give form, in
              terms of both beauty and
              function, to selected urban
              areas or to whole cities.
              This section focuses on
              how Benicia looks and
              feels. It attempts to trans-
              late an intangible sense of
              place into tangible policies
              and programs that will
              keep Benicia a fine place
              to live, to work, and to
              raise a family.
              2. THE LOOK AND FEEL OF BENICIA
              NATURAL FEATURES
              Benicia is a place of immense natural variety and beauty.The city is connected by salt
              water to the Golden Gate and the Pacific Ocean. Marshes along the Carquinez Strait
              cradle a rich variety of life. Rolling hills rise dramatically from the water’s edge.The
              hills and the water inevitably become a component of the human landscape both
              visually and ecologically.They provide the natural qualities that contemporary devel-
              opment seeks.
              THE HUMAN LANDSCAPE
              The form that settlement in Benicia took over its 150 years is no less dramatic. The
              grid pattern of streets in the south portion of town reflects a mercantile orientation.
110                                                                         City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                       C. Visual Character
                                                                                                  Subhead
               The rectangular blocks and lots were simple to lay out and easily accommodated a
               variety of uses.The scale reflected a time when commerce was conducted in smaller
               increments and manufacturing was primarily by hand.The mix of uses reflected the
               practical needs of daily life and the three miles per hour one could manage on foot.
               By contrast, the curvilinear and auto-oriented street patterns of Southampton would
               not have been possible without contemporary engineering capabilities.
               Streets, plazas, squares, and formal open spaces such as City Park are the living rooms
               of the community.They are the places where random personal contacts can reinforce
               social, political, and commercial relationships.
               The City’s industrial park is largely separated from most of residential Benicia by
               intervening hills. Large expanses of paved areas surround buildings of a size and form
               vastly different from the residential districts. From an urban design perspective, what
               is most important about this industrial area is that it is relatively homogenous and
               completely separate from the rest of the community.
               The Exxon Refinery is an exception. Because it is built among the hills, as opposed to
               most of the industrial area, individual structures are visible as one moves along the
               surrounding roads and from some residential areas and the Downtown.The color of
               the pipelines reinforces their connection to the refinery even as they move out
               beyond the complex and across the landscape.
               3. SCENIC VIEWS, STREETS, AND GATEWAYS
               SCENIC VIEWS
               Benicia is rich with views and vistas; views of the water, of the hills, and of the com-
               munity from within and from external locations define Benicia’s community character.
               Figure 3-2 identifies the more important views and vistas.
               In addition, there are a number of framed streetscape views, such as along First Street,
               that warrant preservation or enhancement. Such streetscape views are more urban,
               intimate, and enclosing as opposed to grand, sweeping views of the hills, water, and
               city.
               WATERFRONT
               The Carquinez Strait and Benicia’s waterfront form the entire southern boundary of
               the City.The shoreline is a unifying visual element, continuous from bridge to bridge,
               that can be enjoyed from the many hillside and hilltop vantage points in town.The
               waterfront provides Benicia with a sense of identity and place, and it recalls the
               town’s history as an early and important riverfront community.The views across the
               Strait to the undeveloped hills of Contra Costa County offer an invaluable reminder of
               what California once looked like. Benicia’s waterfront is a natural and historic re-
               source, and is an essential element of the community’s identity.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                          111

Chapter 3. Community Identity
 VISTAS AND VIEWS
  LEGEND
                                                                         Planning Area
  Views                                                                  Boundary
                                                                         City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      o      dy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               gh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Lights on
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D i s t a n t S h o re
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Vista
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Point
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ER    M A N RO A D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LAK                                                                                                                                                y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ba
                                                                                                                                                                                   RE
                                                                                                                                                                                    SE
                                                                                                                                                                                        RV
                                                                                                                                                                                         OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Suisun
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                         R
                                                                                                                                                                                             RO                                                                        T
                                                                                                                                                                                                  AD                                                        EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 dS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       INDUSTRIAL
                                                                                                   Lake                                                                                                       IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DU
                                                                                                   Herman                                                                                                                ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Mothball
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          R IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Fleet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     INTERSTATE 680
                                                                I   VE
                                                               DR                                                                              IVE
                                                           SE                                                                                  DR
                                                          RO                                                                              A
                                                                                                                                          AM                                                                                                                                                           BA
                                                                                                                                 N   OR                                                                                                                                                                  YS
      CO                                                                                                                      PA                    C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PA RK
           LU
                                                                                                                                                H E L S E A HI LL S D R IVE
                M
                    BU                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RE
                         S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ROA
                             PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RO AD
                                R   KW                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       D
                                         AY                                                   VE
                                                                                         DRI
                                                                                       GS
                                                                                   HA ST IN                                                                                                                                   HIL LC RE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E. 5th STREET
                                                                                                                     N
                                                                                                          M   P TO        ROA D
                                                                                                   SOUTHA
                                              B E N I C I A INTERST
                                                                                                                                                      h ST RE
                                                                   AT
                                                         S T A T E E 780
                                                                                                                                                W. 7t
                                                                PA R K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ADAMS
                                                                                                                                                                 ET                                                      MILITARY EAST
                                                                                                                                                                              MILITARY WEST
  Views from                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GRANT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ST.
 Benicia State
     Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1st STREET
                                                                                         Southampton
                                                                                             Bay
                                                                                                   UINEZ                 STRA
                                                                                              CARQ                            IT                                                                                                                                                                                         Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         U          NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        O                                    TY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L      AN                              UN                                   SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SO                                  CO
                                                                                                                           Panorama                                                                                                                                    CON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              A C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    800   0   800 1600
                                                   Figure 3-2. Vistas and Views
112                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of Benicia General Plan
                                                                                      C. Visual Character
                                                                                                 Subhead
               SCENIC STREETS AND GATEWAYS
               A variety of scenic resources can be viewed from three principal routes:
               • I-780 between Glen Cove Road and the Benicia-Martinez Bridge;
               • I-680 between Morrow Lane and the Benicia-Martinez Bridge; and
               • Lake Herman Road.
               Along these scenic routes are four natural gateways to the community. (A diagram of
               the gateways can be found on Figure 1-3.) The topography and road configuration
               leading to each gateway tend to block views into the community.After passing
               through the gateways, various parts of the community are revealed. Undeveloped
               hillsides and landscaped slopes leading up to the gateways add a rural feeling and help
               separate Benicia from neighboring communities.The features of each of the scenic
               roads and their gateways are discussed below.
               Interstate Freeway 780 between Glen Cove Road and Pine Lake
               Gateway. There is a southern gateway to Benicia where I-780 climbs from the I-680
               intersection and crests in the vicinity of the basin of former Pine Lake.A magnificent
               view over the hilltops of Benicia to the distant Carquinez Bridge opens up as one
               moves west through this gateway.
               The western gateway to Benicia on I-780 is formed by open, low hillsides, freeway
               landscaping, and the Southampton Marsh in the vicinity of the Columbus Parkway
               interchange.Views into the community open up as one moves east, past the Boundary
               Hills.
               Outward Views. The experience of moving along I-780, where views alternate be-
               tween broad vistas and close containment, is particularly exciting. Benicia’s residential
               character is established by views along this route; and views to and across the
               Carquinez Strait to the steep, wooded slopes of northern Contra Costa County impart
               a rural image.
               Visual Corridor. The experience of traveling from west to east along I-780 reveals the
               importance of the Boundary Hills which extend from Dillim Point on the Carquinez
               Strait to north of Lake Herman Road (refer to Figure 1-2.) The Boundary Hills, formed
               of a composite of close and distant hilltops and hillsides, visually separate Benicia from
               Vallejo.They first become apparent along I-780 at the Glen Cove interchange.The
               Boundary Hills also can be seen from various places along I-780 inside Benicia.
               Between the former Pine Lake and East Second Street one can see vacant land and the
               edges of development. Between East Second Street and Southampton Road (West
               Seventh), views are generally contained by open, undeveloped hillsides.A notable
               wooded slope exists at the north side of the highway west of East Second Street. The
               overall impression of Benicia from the I-780 corridor is one of a relatively low density
               residential community.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                          113

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              Interstate Freeway 680 between Morrow Lane and the Benicia-Martinez Bridge
              Open Space Gateway. The northern gateway to Benicia occurs on this route where
              the road passes under the Lake Herman Road overpass and around the point of land
              marking the interchange.The visual experience is enhanced by the open hillsides to
              the west which, as the gateway is passed, recede to reveal Benicia’s major industrial
              area.
              Outward Views. The views along this route establish an initial image of Benicia as a
              place where a high quality environment for manufacturing and import/export activi-
              ties is provided. It becomes immediately clear that industrial activities are contained
              by natural topographic boundaries within the basin formed by the hills below Lake
              Herman Road on the north, the slopes above East Second Street to the west, the main
              ridgeline to the south, and Suisun Bay to the east. To the east, the “mothball fleet” can
              be seen in Suisun Bay.
              Visual Corridor. When traveling from north to south, this route is marked by steep
              grassy slopes dotted with oaks and cattle on the west, and the expanse of Suisun
              Marsh on the east. Once the Benicia City Limits are reached, views briefly open up on
              both sides of the road; however, the focus is directly on several large storage tanks on
              the north side of the main ridge.When traveling from south to north, the focus is
              westward on the rolling hills above and below Lake Herman Road.
              A viaduct carries the highway from its high point on the main ridge at the south to
              the lower grade below. Outward views are generally unobstructed along the viaduct.
              Between the industrial park interchange (north side of the viaduct) and Lake Herman
              Road, the visual corridor is contained on the east by the Union Pacific Railroad berm,
              and on the west by slopes between Park Road and the highway. Industrial Park
              landscaping has enhanced the corridor along part of this western edge.
              Lake Herman Road
              Open Space Gateway. The northwestern gateway to Benicia occurs on this route
              where the road passes through the Boundary Hills west of Lake Herman. Steep, high
              ridges rise at both sides along the road, near the 300 foot elevation, suddenly revealing
              a breathtaking view down and across Lake Herman to the Carquinez Strait beyond.An
              active quarry is located on the south facing slope of the hill along the north side of
              the road.
              Visual Corridor. The Lake Herman Road corridor conveys a rural image for Benicia
              which is unusual so close to an urban area.The visual experience between the natural
              portals of the Boundary Hills and Lake Herman is enhanced by unique rocky ridges
              projecting upward from the grassy slopes south of the road and by riparian vegetation
              along the creek feeding into Lake Herman. Open hillsides within the City-owned
              property surrounding Lake Herman form a pleasant backdrop to the lake on the
              south. Lower, open slopes of the rolling hills north of Lake Herman Road complete the
              visual experience.
114                                                                     City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                     C. Visual Character
                                                                                                Subhead
               PLANNING IN SCENIC CORRIDORS
               Preservation
               “Preservation” means maintaining identified sight lines and minimizing visible devel-
               opment on any land that would block public views. Key visual features visible from
               the identified scenic highways are listed below.
               • Carquinez Strait
               • Suisun Marsh
               • Boundary Hills
               • Lower open slopes (along I-780)
               • Former Pine Lake basin
               • Reservoir Hill
               • Arsenal Cemetery
               • Significant rocky ridges
               • Significant clusters of riparian trees
               • Lake Herman
               • Rolling hills (adjacent to I-680 north of Lake Herman Road)
               4. ARCHITECTURAL AND LANDSCAPE FEATURES
               Buildings shape public spaces, and the details of their street faces have much to do
               with the success and viability of the streets and spaces they border.
               In the last 30-40 years, while attention has been given to the visual character of
               buildings, emphasis has been on convenience for the automobile.An example is the
               preponderance of garage doors in the newer residential areas.
               SOUTHAMPTON
               Southampton displays a typical late 20th century streetscape with curvilinear street
               patterns.Vehicles are parked at curbside much less frequently than occurs Downtown
               because of the lower density and greater number of available garage spaces and
               driveways.The building fronts are dominated by garage doors and large lawns.
               INDUSTRIAL AREAS
               The older industrial areas developed in response to wartime activities.They are
               characterized by large scale, horizontal, boxy buildings, and roads built for temporary
               use.The pavement in some areas is random and chaotic, with little consideration for
               pedestrian safety or comfort. In addition, landscaping and screening of unattractive
               uses is inadequate, and overhead utilities are unattractive.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                        115

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              DOWNTOWN
              Landscape Features
              The block of West J Street between First and West Second Street has a splendid stand
              of vintage palm trees, which were often planted to give importance to major streets in
              19th century California towns.This planting continues across First Street and along
              the East J Street frontage of St. Paul’s Church grounds. Palm trees also distinguish the
              front yards of older residences such as the Riddell-Fish house. Other specimen, or non-
              native trees occur in older landscaped settings such as the grounds of the former State
              Capitol and the Fischer-Hanlon house next door.
              Architectural Features
              Downtown Benicia has three broad categories of buildings: commercial, institutional
              (including civic and religious structures), and residential.The commercial buildings are
              clustered along First Street for the most part. Older institutional buildings are found
              generally on or within a block of First Street, while 20th century examples are more
              widely dispersed. Residential buildings are represented principally on the east-west
              streets, although some are located on First Street as well.
              The old portion of Benicia is characteristic of 19th century and early 20th century
              American neighborhoods.The area is dominated by east/west streets that typically
              have vertical curbs, parallel on-street parking, and parkway planter strips with trees
              between the sidewalk and curb.
              Building fronts are dominated by porches and a vertical massing of windows. Uses are
              mixed, with some streets having office, retail, and housing on the same block.
              Commercial buildings in the 19th and early 20th centuries were often built with
              offices on the upper floors and additional space for storage.Another common com-
              mercial type was more residential in character and had apartments on the upper floor
              or floors.The strictly commercial buildings typically had a block-like form with raised
              parapets that concealed the actual roof, which was often pitched.The mixed residen-
              tial and commercial buildings often revealed pitched or gable roofs. On First Street
              many residences were converted to commercial use but retained the outward charac-
              teristics of a residential building.Although ground floors were often remodeled, one
              typical 19th and early 20th century shopfront design that can still be found on First
              Street has recessed entrance doors flanked by polygonal show windows, so that much
              of the shopfront is glazed.
              Institutional, civic, and religious buildings, because of their public nature, were gener-
              ally larger and more monumental than residential buildings, but frequently similar in
              character and form.Whether used for government offices, museums, or organizations
              of a quasi-civic nature such as the I.D.E.S. or the I.O.O.F., they were built in the domi-
              nant styles of their period.Although churches, their associated parochial buildings, and
              their educational institutions also followed stylistic trends to a certain degree, their
              designs tended to fall within the general styles of Classical or Gothic Revival in the
              19th and early 20th centuries.
116                                                                       City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                     C. Visual Character
                                                                                                 Subhead
               Residential buildings Downtown exhibit the range of styles mentioned above as well
               as typical forms or plans. One house type that occurs very frequently Downtown is
               the pyramidal roofed, single-story cottage with a rectangular or square plan.This basic
               form was used for several styles including Classic Revival, Italianate, and Stick/Eastlake.
               Decorative detail, when present, was mainly confined to porches. Some of the cot-
               tages which now appear totally devoid of detail may always have been so.
               ARSENAL DISTRICT
               Landscape Features
               The open space, landscape features, and urban design elements recognized as contrib-
               uting to the Arsenal District include the former Barracks Parade Ground, the Military
               Cemetery, the rolling hills that form the setting for the Storehouses (Camel Barns),
               Ammunition Shops, and Magazines on the northern part of the district; and notable
               trees of great age or size such as the eucalyptus trees near the site of the former
               Benicia Barracks north of the old Post Hospital building.The specimen trees and
               ornamental landscaping surrounding the officers’ quarters on the ridgetop have
               special significance, along with the mature street trees which line Jefferson Street and
               the ornamental specimen trees which mark the Military Cemetery.Additionally, the
               embankment above Adams and Washington Streets was historically planted with cork
               oak trees to form the original passage that provided a formal entrance to the
               Clocktower.
               Architectural Features
               The Arsenal District has a more limited range of historical building types and architec-
               tural styles than does the Downtown, largely because the buildings were constructed
               by the federal government on a military reservation. However, this controlled situa-
               tion did not mean that the buildings were not well designed or constructed. In fact,
               the Arsenal has some of the state’s most architecturally distinguished buildings,
               notably the Storehouse and Ammunition Shop (Camel Barns), Clocktower, Powder
               Magazine, Shops, and the Officers’ Residences.
               The two broad categories or historic buildings in the Arsenal Historic District are the
               military/industrial buildings that comprise most of the district’s historic structures and
               the residential buildings where military personnel were formerly quartered.The latter
               are concentrated in the middle zone of the district between the Jefferson Street
               embankment and the freeway.The military/industrial buildings are more scattered, but
               are principally in the areas south of Adams Street and north of the freeway.
               VISUAL CHARACTER GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
               This section provides goals, policies, and programs that will maintain and reinforce
               Benicia’s small-town character. In doing so, the goals, policies, and programs focus on
               preserving natural features and vistas, designating and maintaining scenic roads and
               highways, identifying and enhancing the gateways to the city, and improving the
               streetscape.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                          117

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              While this section focuses solely on visual character and community design, there are
              other sections in the General Plan where related goals, policies and programs appear.
              The most significant are listed below.
              Growth Management             Goal 2.1
                                            Policy 2.1.1
                                            Program 2.1.A
              Economic Development          Program 2.6.F
                                            Policy 2.11.3
                                            Program 2.12.H
                                            Program 2.12.J
                                            Program 2.12.K
                                            Program 2.12.O
              Circulation                   Goal 2.14
                                            Policy 2.20.3
              Historic Resources            Goal 3.1
                                            Policy 3.1.5
              GOAL 3.7:              Maintain and reinforce Benicia’s small-town
                                     visual characteristics.
              POLICY 3.7.1:          Ensure that new development is compatible with the surround-
                                     ing architectural and neighborhood character.
              POLICY 3.7.2:          Encourage “place-making”—the arrangement of built elements
                                     to create indoor or outdoor spaces that are recognizable and
                                     suitable for a specific function or functions.
              “Place making” and “place definition” are among the most important functions of
              urban design. “Place” can be manifested in many forms: a street closed off for a
              neighborhood or regional fair; a cafe on the sidewalk or in a courtyard adjacent to it; a
              front porch where neighbors gather; or a small intimate patio or porch on the private
              side of the building where one can take a respite from urban life.
              Program 3.7.A:         Develop design guidelines for public works and private devel-
                                     opment that encourage place-making.
              Program 3.7.B:         Prepare a citywide urban design plan that addresses landscap-
                                     ing, street trees, landmarks, gateway definitions, vista preserva-
                                     tion/enhancement, and protection of shoreline and hillsides.
              Program 3.7.C:         Develop citywide requirements for screening service entrances
                                     and equipment.
              Program 3.7.D:         Develop a schedule and financing plan for undergrounding
                                     power and telephone lines.
118                                                                     City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                            C. Visual Character
                                                                                       Subhead
               POLICY 3.7.3:  Encourage consistent street tree planting, other types of
                              landscaping, and neighborhood gardens.
               Program 3.7.E: Advertise the existence of guidelines for tree preservation,
                              planting, and removal guidelines.
               POLICY 3.7.4:  Where feasible, install and maintain landscape (planter) strips
                              that separate sidewalks from the streets.
               Program 3.7.F: Establish an adequate minimum width for landscape strips so
                              that plant materials (especially trees) do not damage the
                              sidewalk, curb, or gutter.
               Program 3.7.G: Modify the City’s street improvement standards to accommo-
                              date landscape strips.
               POLICY 3.7.5:  Preserve the grid pattern of Benicia streets.
               Program 3.7.H: Require that land use and circulation plans for property along
                              arterials minimize the need for sound walls.
               GOAL 3.8:      Preserve First Street as the community focal point
                              of Benicia.
               POLICY 3.8.1:  Design new and renovated buildings along First Street to
                              accommodate ground level retail commercial.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                               119

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              Program 3.8.A:            Develop urban design improvements to unify Solano Square
                                        with City Park and the Civic Center.
              POLICY 3.8.2:             In the transition areas east and west of First Street, encourage
                                        the adaptive re-use, rather than replacement, of existing residen-
                                        tial structures.
              GOAL 3.9:                 Protect and enhance scenic roads and highways.
              POLICY 3.9.1:             Preserve vistas along I-780 and I-680.
              Program 3.9.A:            Inventory scenic resources along I-780 and I-680.
              Program 3.9.B:            Investigate and apply for State Scenic highway designation of
                                        Interstate Highways I-780 and I-680.
              Program 3.9.C:            Develop a sign enforcement program along the freeways.
              The State scenic highway law calls for careful coordination in planning, design,
              construction, and regulation of land use and development on the band of land “gener-
              ally adjacent” to the freeway.The benefits of the designation to the community are that
              the State will officially refer to the freeways as scenic highways in its publications; the
              freeways will be eligible for “special scenic conservation treatment” and will receive
              special signage; and the law will prevent the placement of Caltrans facilities in the
              right-of-way without City approval.
              POLICY 3.9.2:             Work with the State to complete and maintain landscaping of I-
                                        680 and I-780.
              First priority should be planting the various unfinished cut banks facing I-680 and I-
              780. Planting that blocks views from I-780 to the Carquinez Strait should be avoided.
              Ground cover and shrubs are appropriate for purposes of erosion control and appear-
              ance.
              Program 3.9.D:            Preserve the trees on the northern edge of former Pine Lake.
              POLICY 3.9.3:             Orient individual building/business signage toward city streets,
                                        not toward I-780.
              POLICY 3.9.4:             Develop the City’s five identified gateways to provide a sense of
                                        entry and exit.
              Program 3.9.E:            Prepare land use and design guidelines to direct the nature and
                                        character of development at the city’s five gateways.
              POLICY 3.9.5:             Establish definable neighborhoods in future development and
                                        revitalization projects.
              GOAL 3.10:                Enhance the streetscape along Military East and
                                        West.
120                                                                       City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                             C. Visual Character
                                                                                        Subhead
               Program 3.10.A: Develop a concept and streetscape plan for Military.
               GOAL 3.11:      Enhance the East Side.
               POLICY 3.11.1:  Focus public investment toward undergrounding utilities,
                               completing sidewalks, adding walking paths, park amenities,
                               landscaping, and street trees on the East Side.
               GOAL 3.12:      Improve the appearance of the Industrial Park.
               POLICY 3.12.1:  Encourage additional attractive, quality development in indus-
                               trial areas.
               Program 3.12.A: Continue to implement and revise as necessary the Industrial
                               Design Guidelines.
               Program 3.12.B: Adopt an ordinance establishing minimum standards for
                               outdoor storage and yard maintenance within public view.
               GOAL 3.13:      Improve urban design qualities of the waterfront
                               and public access to the shoreline.
               POLICY 3.13.1:  Enhance waterfront vistas.
               Program 3.13.A: Incorporate public visual areas in new development.
               POLICY 3.13.2:  Improve pedestrian amenities along waterfront streets and
                               walkways.
               POLICY 3.13.3:  Take advantage of water orientation for recreation and indus-
                               trial uses.
               Program 3.13.B: Develop a plan for public and pedestrian access to and along
                               the waterfront and shoreline.
               Program 3.13.C: Complete the pathway system from Point Benicia along the
                               entire shoreline to the intersection of West Second and G
                               Street.
               Program 3.13.D: Use privately dedicated walkways to link to the waterfront.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                121
Chapter 3. Community Identity
              D. OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION OF RESOURCES
              State planning law requires cities to plan for “open space for the preservation of
              natural resources, the managed production of resources, outdoor recreation, and
              public health and safety.”The General Plan Land Use Diagram (found in the back
              pocket of this Plan) recognizes three categories of open space to meet these require-
              ments:
              1. Marsh. Includes identified shoreline wetlands (but excludes freshwater wetlands
              and riparian corridors).
              2. General. Includes publicly-owned open space, land dedicated for permanent open
              space in residential subdivisions, open space for public health and safety (such as
              hillsides with slopes over 30 percent), open space for managed production of re-
              sources (such as mineral resources), and open space for conservation of natural
              resources (such as the Lake Herman watershed). Refer to Policy 2.1.5 and page 209 –
              Urban Growth Boundary for further discussion of uses.
              3. Parks. Includes publicly owned neighborhood, community, and regional parks, as
              well as public recreation facilities, and allows for more intensive recreational uses.
              They are discussed in the previous chapter under Parks and Recreation Chapter 2D:
              Community Services).
122               revised 6.17.03 (res. 03-88)                           City of Benicia General Plan

                                                       D. Open Space and Conservation of Resources
                                                                                                Subhead
               1. REGIONAL AND SUBREGIONAL OPEN SPACE AND TRAILS
               OPEN SPACE
               (A Parks and Open Space diagram is provided in Chapter 2D under Parks and Recre-
               ation.)
               Tri-City and County Open Space
               Benicia is part of the Tri-City and County Cooperative Planning Area that encompasses
               10,000 acres of open space in unincorporated Solano County between Benicia,
               Fairfield, and Vallejo.The Tri-City and County Regional Park and Open Space Preser-
               vation Plan (adopted 1993) is incorporated in the Benicia General Plan as a Special
               Area Plan.The Tri-City and County Plan reserves the Cooperative Planning Area for
               continuing agricultural and other open space uses and establishes a framework for
               regional park planning.
               Southampton Open Space
               The undeveloped open space areas within the Southampton subdivision offer physi-
               cal separation between houses and visual relief from development. Portions of this
               open space have trails that are used for hiking, jogging, and walking.
               Some parts of the Southampton Open Space are “residual” open space areas that were
               too steep for development or recreational use.Though many of these open space
               areas are not connected, there is habitat value to resident wildlife. Corridors could be
               established to permit wildlife access, and efforts could be made to restore native flora.
               Benicia-Vallejo Open Space Buffer
               The hills and ridges at the western edge of the Planning Area, also known as the
               “boundary hills,” are designated open space to maintain a permanent visual and
               physical separation from Vallejo.The boundary hills begin at Dillon Point on
               Southampton Bay Natural Preserve and extend north, incorporating Lake Herman
               Road.This area is protected through a 1979 Benicia/Vallejo “Memorandum of Under-
               standing to Preserve the Buffer Zone.”The two cities agreed that the buffer zone
               should be inviolate, with no urban development.
               Lake Herman Regional Park
               Lake Herman Regional Park is an existing 577-acre lake and open space area located at
               the northernmost edge of the city.Allowed passive activities in the park include
               fishing, hiking, and picnicking. Boating is prohibited since the lake is a secondary
               water supply for the city.A trail system connects Lake Herman with nearby Benicia
               Community Park.
               Northern Area
               An area between Lake Herman and the Tri-City and County Open Space is currently
               designated as open space, but is largely privately held and has faced development
               pressure.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                        123

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              Benicia State Park
              Benicia State Recreation Area
              extends from the shoreline of
              Southampton Bay along the
              Planning Area boundary to the
              west and to Interstate I-780 on the
              north. It includes the tidal flats of
              Southampton Bay, as well as some
              trails and recreation areas.
              Marsh and Shoreline
              Benicia has important marsh and
              shoreline open space resources all
              along Carquinez Strait and Suisun
              Bay.These resources include
              Southampton Bay Natural Preserve
              (formerly Southampton Marsh) in
              Benicia State Recreation Area,
              small parks and shoreline access
              points along the residentially
              developed areas west of Down-
              town, the Downtown waterfront
              and Marina, and marsh areas along
              the Industrial Park.The biotic
              values of these areas are described later in this chapter under the Water Environment
              and Biotic Resources.These areas are also important for the recreation opportunities
              they provide.
              REGIONAL AND SUBREGIONAL TRAILS AND PATHS
              Benicia has a comprehensive system of bikeways and paved community trails.
              Bikeways are classified and identified in Chapter 2C: Circulation and a Bicycle and
              Multi-use Trails diagram is provided in the same chapter (Figure 2-4).
              The Parks,Trails, and Open Space Master Plan (adopted in December 1997) proposes
              new trails to link the City’s parks by foot, bicycle, horseback, and wheelchair.The
              Master Plan’s proposed network of bikeways and trails is extensive and the Parks
              Master Plan serves as a guiding vision for General Plan bikeway and trail planning.
              (Refer to the Master Plan for a detailed description of city trails and paths.)
              Interpretive Trails
              Interpretive Trails are paved and located where there are ecological or historical
              resources of educational value. Signs provide information about significant features.An
              interpretive trail is proposed as part of Lake Herman Regional Park.
124                                                                      City of Benicia General Plan

                                                        D. Open Space and Conservation of Resources Subhead
               Bay and Ridge Trails
               The San Francisco Bay Trail is a proposed 400-mile network that will circle San Fran-
               cisco and San Pablo Bays, passing through all nine Bay Area counties. Benicia is one of
               the Bay Area cities along the pathway.
               Benicia’s Waterfront Trail is already signed as a part of the Bay Trail. It begins at the
               Benicia Marina and follows the commercial district on First Street, winds through the
               community and forks at Benicia State Recreation Area.The southern fork ends at
               Southampton Bay Natural Preserve where it connects with a trail to Glen Cove in
               Vallejo.
               The proposed Bay Trail will enter Benicia from the south on the new Benicia-Martinez
               Bridge.As yet, there is no clear plan as to how bicyclists and pedestrians will connect
               to the Waterfront Trail from the bridge.
               The Bay Area Ridge Trail is a second regional trail that will ultimately circle San Fran-
               cisco and San Pablo Bays, following the hills and ridges that ring the Bay. In Benicia,
               this trail follows the same route as the Bay Trail along the Waterfront, and will require
               the same connection from the Benicia-Martinez Bridge.
               Staging Areas
               The Parks Master Plan proposes staging areas to link the City’s parks and open spaces.
               “Staging areas” are gathering points adjacent to major trails and accessible to major
               roads. Major staging areas are to provide a full range of facilities for the trail user
               including on-site parking and rest rooms. Minor staging areas are to serve short local
               trails and are located in neighborhood parks.
               2. REGIONAL AND SUBREGIONAL OPEN SPACE AND TRAILS GOALS,
                    POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
               The following goals, policies, and programs have a broad reach.They are designed to
               protect and provide access to open space and the waterfront and provide buffers
               between urban communities.
               GOAL 3.14:               Provide a buffer between Benicia and adjacent
                                        communities.
               POLICY 3.14.1:           Continue to implement the provisions of the Tri-City and
                                        County Cooperative Plan for Agriculture and Open Space
                                        Preservation and the 1979 Benicia/Vallejo Memorandum of
                                        Understanding to Preserve the Buffer (often referred to as the
                                        Benicia-Vallejo Open Space Buffer).
               The Tri-City and County Cooperative Plan for Agriculture and Open Space Preserva-
               tion has been adopted by the City and is incorporated in this General Plan by refer-
               ence.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                             125

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              GOAL 3.15:      Provide buffers throughout the community.
              POLICY 3.15.1:  Preserve and protect, through a variety of methods, a pattern of
                              open space buffers and greenbelts throughout the Planning
                              Area.
              Program 3.15.A: Identify and evaluate open spaces (by function, location, size,
                              connectivity, and views of open space).
              Program 3.15.B: Adopt an open space preservation program aimed at acquiring
                              or assisting in acquiring rights to open space within the Plan-
                              ning Area.
              Program 3.15.C: Utilize existing land trusts.
              POLICY 3.15.2:  Preserve public views of public open space and maintain
                              existing vistas (including the Northern Area vistas) wherever
                              possible.
              Program 3.15.D: Where applicable, require that new developments include view
                              corridors that allow viewing open space from public roadways
                              and public use areas.
              POLICY 3.15.3:  Avoid creating difficult-to-use residual open space in new
                              development areas.
              Program 3.15.E: Evaluate each proposed open space area to ensure it is large
                              enough to meet its intended purpose.
              POLICY 3.15.4:  Use open space as a buffer against natural or man-made haz-
                              ards.
              Program 3.15.F: Require open space buffers around known hazardous areas,
                              such as the Exxon Refinery and the IT site.
              POLICY 3.15.5:  Encourage the landscaping of existing open spaces, and land-
                              scape new open spaces with native plants.
              POLICY 3.15.6:  Restore and maintain natural landscapes in a natural manner.
              Program 3.15.G: Develop a landscape master plan for open space areas.
              GOAL 3.16:      Preserve key land forms which separate Benicia
                              physically and visually from adjacent communi-
                              ties.
              POLICY 3.16.1:  Maintain visual and physical separation from Vallejo and
                              Fairfield.
              Program 3.16.A: Use the westernmost parcels designated as open space to
                              provide a buffer with Vallejo.
126                                                              City of Benicia General Plan
                                                         D. Open Space and Conservation of Resources
                                                                                                Subhead
               POLICY 3.16.2:          Work with Vallejo to minimize visible development along the
                                       Boundary Hills.
               POLICY 3.16.3:          Allow no additional access roads between Columbus Parkway
                                       and Lake Herman Road.
               GOAL 3.17:              Link regional and local open spaces.
               POLICY 3.17.1:          Attempt to link existing regional and local open spaces using
                                       trails and open space corridors.
               Program 3.17.A:         Acquire open space corridors that link existing regional and
                                       local open spaces, where feasible.
               “Acquire” may mean purchase, lease, or easement.
               Program 3.17.B:         Construct trails in open space corridors linking regional and
                                       local open spaces.
               GOAL 3.18:              Protect agricultural use.
               POLICY 3.18.1:          Preserve rangeland north of Lake Herman Road.
               Program 3.18.A:         Investigate land trusts and other mechanisms to ensure conti-
                                       nuity of agricultural uses in the northern portion of the Plan-
                                       ning Area.
               3. BIOTIC RESOURCES
               Biotic resources within the Benicia Planning Area include plant life, wildlife, special
               status species, and water bodies. Figure 3-3 shows the sensitive biological resources
               found in Benicia.
               PLANT LIFE
               Vegetation in the Planning Area is dominated by a cover of non-native grassland and
               suburban landscape, bordered by important marshlands at Southampton and Suisun
               Bays. Most of the rolling hills south of the Rose Drive area are developed with urban
               and suburban uses, interspersed with grassland covered slopes and a few undevel-
               oped ravines. These large expanses of open space could be restored with native
               grasses, oaks and other flora. The lands east of East Second Street and north of I-780
               have been highly disturbed by past military and existing industrial uses. Grasslands
               cover most of the rangeland to the north of East Second Street and the Lake Herman
               Road area throughout the northeastern hills. Major creeks, drainages, and the fringe of
               Lake Herman in the undeveloped Northern Area support freshwater marsh and
               riparian vegetation, which varies from cattail to willow forest and scrub. Scattered
               oaks occur in the northeastern hills, primarily on the north and east-facing slopes west
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                         127

Chapter 3. Community Identity
 SENSITIVE
 BIOLOGICAL
 RESOURCES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           G oo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             oo         dd y
                                                     ▲                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ee aa
                                                     ▲                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     r
                                                  ▲▲▲                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        uu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         gg h
                                                                                                                                ✶
                    ▲
                    ▲                   ▲
                                       ▲
                                                                                                                                                Creek
                                           ▲
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CBR
                                                 ▲
                                                 ▲
                                               ▲▲                                                                                      dy                                                        LA K
                                                                                                                                                                                                              E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HERMAN
                                                                                                                                     Pa d
                                                     ✶                                                                                                                                                            RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IR                                                                                T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RO                                                                      EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              INDUSTRIAL WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                    Su                                                AD                                                 TR
                                                                                                                                                                                         lf e                                                                                       dS
                                                                                                                                                                                                rS                                                                             2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                     pr                                                                   E.
                                                                                                                                       Lake                                                               i                                                                                                                                                                                       SSS
                                                ▲                                                                                                                                                         ng
                                                 ▲ ▲▲                                                                                  Herman                                                                 s
                                                  ▲▲
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  re
                                                  ▲▲                                                                                                                                                                  ek
                                                       ▲▲
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           INTERSTATE 680
                                                   ▲▲ ▲ ▲ ▲
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IN
                                                    ▲ ▲ ▲
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               y
                                                                       IVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ba
                                                                  DR
                                                             SE
                                                     R   O
                                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Suisun
                                                                                                                                                              V   I
                                                                                                                                                             DR                                                                                                                                                                               YS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       H
      CO                                                                                                                                                 A                                                                       E.
                                                                                                                                                     M                                                                                                                                                                                                         O
           LU                                                                                                                                   RA                    C                                                           2n                                                                                                                           RE
                                                                                                                                                                       H E LS E
                M                                                                                                                           O
                    BU                                                                                                               PA N                                                                                              dS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RO A
                         S                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TR
                             PK
                                  W                                                                          E                                                                                                                                     EE
                                                                                                                                                                      A HILLS
                                      Y.                                                                IV                                                                                                                                          T                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                    DR
                                                                                                 GS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      R
                                                                                               HASTIN                                                                    D R I VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HILLCREST                          K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E. 5th STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RO
                                                                  INT
                                                                        ER                                                    P T O N ROA D
                                                                             ST
                                                                               AT                                        AM
                                                                                                                 SOUTH
            BENICIA                                                               E
                                                                                                                                                                                ST
                                                                                      78
                                                                                                                                                                         W. 7th
                                                                                           0
              S TAT E
                 PA R K
                                                                                                                                                                                REET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MILITARY EAST                                    GRANT ST.                                  ADAMS ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                MILITARY WEST
                                                                                                    CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1st STREET
                SM
                SS
                SSS                                                                                Southampton
                CCR                                                                                    Bay
                CBR
                SMA
                SBB
                DTP
                CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TY          TY
                                                                                                         UINEZ                     STRA                                                                                                                                                                                                                    UN             UN
                                                                                                    CARQ                                IT                                                                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 L     AN                            A                                                  SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SO                                  ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CO                                                                                     800      0         800 1600
                                                Figure 3-3. Biological Resources
128                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                      D. Open Space and Conservation of Resources              Subhead
 LEGEND
 Planning Area Boundary                                             Special Status Species Occurances
 City Limits                                                          ▲      Callipe Silverspot Butterfly Sighting
                                                                      ✶ Golden Eagle Nest Location
 Sensitive Natural Communities/Unique Vegetation                             General Occurence Records in Suitable Habitat
                                                                                 – Generalized areas where the indicated species have
           Marshland/Northern Coastal Salt Marsh/Coastal Brackish                  been recorded as occuring
           Marsh
                                                                     SM      Salt Marsh Harvest Mouse
           Coast Live Oak Woodland
                                                                     SS      Suisun Shrew
           Valley Needlegrass Grassland                              SSS     Suisun Song Sparrow
           Riparian(Willow Riparian Forest/Willow Scrub)             CCR     California Clapper Rail
           Golden Violet Population (Callipe Silverspot Host Plant)  CBR     California Black Rail
           Eucalyptus Grove (Raptor Roosting & Nesting Substrate)    SMA     Suisun Marsh Aster
                                                                     SBB     Soft Bird's-Beak
 Wetlands/Other Waters
                                                                     DTP     Delta Tule Pea
           Palustrine/Riverine (Streams, Channels, Ponds, Lakes)
                                                                     CT      Congdon's Tar Plant (Note: There is a strong likelihood
                                                                             that this area has been mapped by the CNDDB in an
           Estuarine (Tidal Marshland, Mudflats)                             inaccurate location.)
                       Legend to Figure 3-3 on previous page
                       of I-680. Small areas of northern coastal scrub, freshwater seeps, remnant native
                       grasslands, and stands of eucalyptus also occur in the northern portion of the Planning
                       Area.
                       The various vegetative communities in the Planning Area are summarized below.With
                       the exception of the description of developed areas and eucalyptus stands, each of the
                       descriptions conforms with the classification system developed by the California
                       Department of Fish and Game (CDFG) (1986).
                       Non-native Grassland
                       Non-native grasslands occupy most of the Planning Area: introduced grasses and
                       broadleaf weeds (e.g., fennel, artichoke, and star thistle) which quickly recolonize
                       disturbed areas. Intensive grazing, dry land farming, and other disturbance have
                       eliminated most of the historic range lands in the Planning Area.
                       Developed Areas
                       Ornamental landscaping has been planted throughout developed areas and around
                       rural residences in the northern portion of the Planning Area.Weedy grassland occu-
                       pies vacant lots and heavily disturbed areas, including much of the industrial area.
                       Most species used in landscaping are non-native ornamentals—a wide variety of trees,
                       shrubs, groundcover, and turf. Blue Gum Eucalyptus has been planted as windbreaks
                       and forms woodlands in several locations.
                       Northern Coastal Salt Marsh and Coastal Brackish Marsh
                       Marshland natural communities occur along the Carquinez Strait and Suisun Bay
                       where soils are subject to regular inundation by salt and brackish water. Species are
                       segregated by elevation and degree of inundation. Populations of several special-status
                       plants occur in the marshlands.This vegetation is generally absent along the devel-
                       oped shoreline of Carquinez Strait from the State Recreation Area at Southampton Bay
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                                          129

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              Natural Preserve to just east of the Benicia Bridge, although emergent marshland
              vegetation occurs near the entrance to the Benicia marina and forms a small stand just
              east of Tyler Street.
              The Southampton Bay Natural Preserve, on the southwestern border of the city, and
              the Suisun Marsh northeast of the city are protected from encroachment by develop-
              ment.The Suisun Marsh is the largest remaining wetland around the San Francisco Bay
              and the largest brackish area in the United States. It comprises more than 10 percent
              of California’s total wetland area. Both of these marshes provide wintering habitat for
              waterfowl on the Pacific Flyway and are vital to fish and wildlife production.
              In 1977, the California Legislature passed the Suisun Marsh Preservation Act to pre-
              serve and enhance the quality and diversity of marsh habitats, and to assure retention
              of upland areas adjacent to the Suisun Marsh in uses compatible with its protection.
              This legislation protects the Marsh by implementing policies and programs set forth
              in the Suisun Marsh Protection Plan prepared by the San Francisco Bay Conservation
              and Development Commission. Development in these shoreline areas is prohibited,
              with the exception of minor fill to protect the shoreline, improve its appearance, or
              provide public access and recreation.A portion of the Secondary Management Area
              (SMA) of the Suisun Marsh is within the General Plan Planning Area.The SMA is in-
              cluded in the Suisun Marsh Preservation Act, but has less stringent development
              restrictions.
              In addition to salt water and brackish water marshes, freshwater marshes, typically
              dominated by narrow-leaf cattail, occur at drainages and the fringe of freshwater
              bodies, including portions of Lake Herman and several stock ponds. Freshwater marsh
              species also dominate at numerous freshwater seeps in the Planning Area.
              Coastal Live Oak Woodland
              Over 120 acres of oak woodland—dominated by coast live oak—occurs in the
              northeastern portion of the Planning Area.This includes an extensive stand along the
              upstream half of Paddy Creek and adjacent slopes, scattered stands along a north-
              south ridgeline in the Paddy Creek watershed, and large continuous stands on the east
              and northeast-facing slope along the I-680 corridor north of the Lake Herman Road
              interchange.The understory is generally poorly developed or composed of non-native
              grassland.
              Willow Riparian Forest and Willow Scrub
              Riparian vegetation occurs along stream courses and the eastern fringe of Lake
              Herman, with trees and shrubs forming stands of riparian forest and willow scrub.
              Well-developed riparian corridors, primarily willows, occur along Sulphur Springs and
              Paddy Creeks. Intensive grazing and trampling by cattle has eliminated understory
              species and severely limits regeneration of natural forest and scrub.
130                                                                     City of Benicia General Plan

                                                          D. Open Space and Conservation of Resources
                                                                                                Subhead
               Valley Needlegrass Grassland
               Remnant native grasslands are found in the Northern Area, forming valley needlegrass
               grassland communities which are interspersed with areas dominated by non-native
               species.
               Northern Coastal Scrub
               A few stands of this natural community are scattered in grassland areas. Most consist
               of thickets of coyote brush.
               WILDLIFE
               Although native vegetation within the Planning Area has been substantially altered, the
               marshlands and extensive tracts of undeveloped land contribute to a diverse assem-
               blage of resident and migrant wildlife. Habitat types of particular importance to
               wildlife include the marshlands and open water Carquinez Strait and Suisun Bay, areas
               of well-developed riparian forest and scrub, and oak woodlands. In general, each
               habitat differs in its relative value to specific species, as summarized below.
               Urbanized Habitat
               In general, urbanized areas have low to poor wildlife habitat value.The diversity of
               urban wildlife depends on the extent and type of landscaping, remaining open space
               and proximity to natural habitat.Trees and shrubs used for landscaping provide nest
               sites and cover for wildlife adapted to developed areas. Urban areas provide habitat for
               several species of native mammals (squirrel, raccoon, and skunk). Urbanization now
               separates most of the shoreline habitat along the southern and southeastern edge of
               the city from the undeveloped rolling hills in the Northern Area.
               Tidal and Marshland Habitat
               Carquinez Strait and Suisun Bay are of regional importance to fish and wildlife, provid-
               ing habitat for aquatic plants and animals, open water habitat for birds, and serving as
               the major movement corridor between San Pablo Bay and the Delta. Delta waters
               support game fish, such as largemouth bass, catfish, and sunfish, as well as non-game
               and forage fish.
               The salt and brackish marshlands form the transition between open water and upland
               habitat. Special-status species known to be associated with marshland in the Planning
               Area include: salt marsh harvest mouse, Suisun shrew, California clapper rail, California
               black rail, Suisun song sparrow, and salt marsh yellowthroat. For many of these species,
               the upper limits of the marshland and the remaining adjacent upland habitat are
               essential retreats during extreme high tides. Protection of an adequate buffer to
               preserve sufficient retreat habitat is essential to maintaining the value of the marsh-
               lands. Much of this zone has been developed with industrial uses along the southern
               and eastern edge of Benicia.The importance of this buffer is recognized in the Suisun
               Marsh Protection Plan through establishment of a “secondary management area” for a
               portion of the Planning Area.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                         131

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              Grassland Habitat
              Native and nonnative grasslands support a variety of mammals, birds, and reptiles, and
              provide foraging for raptors. Many species use the grassland for only part of their
              habitat, foraging in the grassland and seeking protection in the limited tree and scrub
              cover. Grassland habitat in the northern portion of the Planning Area supports the
              callippe silverspot butterfly, a special-status insect.
              Freshwater Marsh and Riparian Habitat
              Freshwater aquatic habitats and the associated riparian and marsh vegetation are of
              high value to wildlife, providing a source of drinking water, protective cover, and
              movement corridors. Riparian forest and scrub provides nesting and roosting for
              numerous resident birds, and stopovers for migrant songbirds.The streams, ponds, and
              Lake Herman provide aquatic habitat for amphibians. Dense riparian growth provides
              essential cover in the open grasslands for larger mammals, such as striped skunk,
              raccoon, opossum, and black-tailed deer.
              Oak Woodland Habitat
              These provide important cover for a greater diversity of wildlife than found in the
              adjacent grasslands.The abundant seed crops (acorns and madrone, poison oak, and
              toyon berries) are an important food source for black-tailed deer, woodpeckers, and
              other wildlife.
              Rock Outcrops
              Rock outcrops in the grassland and oak woodlands of the Northern Area provide a
              unique habitat for wildlife. Outcrops occur in the Paddy Creek watershed and the
              dense woodlands in the northeastern hills.The crest of Sulphur Springs Mountain
              forms an exposed bluff with cliffs and ledges just west of the Planning Area.These
              land forms provide perches for raptors and ledges for nests.
              Eucalyptus Habitat
              Although native to Australia, this naturalized species provides important nesting
              habitat for raptors and other birds, and cover for larger mammals. Eucalyptus in the
              open grasslands—where protective cover and perching habitat is scarce—emphasizes
              the importance of the dense tree stands to birds and larger mammals.
              SPECIAL STATUS SPECIES AND SENSITIVE NATURAL COMMUNITIES
              Special-status species1 are plants and animals legally protected under State or federal
              Endangered Species Acts or other regulations, plus other species considered rare
              enough by the scientific community and trustee agencies to warrant special consider-
              1
                Special-status species include: officially designated (rare, threatened, or endangered) and candidate spe-
                 cies for listing by the CDFG; officially designated (threatened or endangered) and candidate species for
                 listing by the US Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS); species considered to be rare or endangered under
                 the conditions of Section 15380 of the CEQA Guidelines; and other species considered sensitive or of
                 special concern due to limited distribution or lack of adequate information.
132                                                                                  City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                  D. Open Space and Conservation of Resources
                                                                                                          Subhead
               ation. Species with legal protection under the Endangered Species Acts often repre-
               sent major constraints to development, particularly when they are wide ranging or
               highly sensitive to habitat disturbance and where proposed development would result
               in a “take”2 of these species.
               The primary information source on the distribution of special-status species in Califor-
               nia is the California Natural Diversity Data Base (CNDDB) inventory, which is main-
               tained by the Natural Heritage Division of CDFG.A record search indicates several plant
               and animal species with special-status in the Planning Area, mostly in the tidal marsh-
               land habitat.
               4. BIOTIC RESOURCES GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
               GOAL 3.19:                    Preserve and enhance habitat for special-status
                                             plants and animals.
               POLICY 3.19.1:                Protect essential habitat of special-status plant and animal
                                             species.
               Program 3.19.A:               Require biological assessments in sensitive habitat areas as part
                                             of environmental review of proposed development.
               Program 3.19.B:               Require retention of essential habitat for special status species.
                                             If infeasible, require adequate mitigation for loss of special
                                             status species and/or habitat in compliance with State and
                                             federal regulations.
               GOAL 3.20:                    Protect and enhance native vegetation and habi-
                                             tats.
               POLICY 3.20.1:                Protect native grasslands, oak woodlands, and riparian habitat.
               POLICY 3.20.2:                Restore native vegetation, such as birch grasses and oaks,
                                             wherever possible for open spaces of existing developed areas.
               Program 3.20.A:               Encourage community groups to carry out native plant restora-
                                             tion efforts.
               Program 3.20.B:               Limit the loss of native vegetation or require mitigation, or both.
               Program 3.20.C:               Require native and compatible non-native plant species, espe-
                                             cially drought-resistant species, to the extent possible in land-
                                             scaping new development and public areas.
               2
                 “Take” as defined by the Federal Endangered Species Act (FESA) means “to harass, harm, pursue, hunt,
                  shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture, or collect” a threatened or endangered species.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                    133

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              POLICY 3.20.3:          Encourage preservation of existing trees. Especially preserve
                                      and protect mature, healthy trees whenever practicable, par-
                                      ticularly where such trees are of significant size or are of
                                      significant aesthetic value to the immediate vicinity or to the
                                      community as a whole.
              Program 3.20.D:         Strive to incorporate existing mature, healthy trees into pro-
                                      posed developments.
              POLICY 3.20.4:          Require protection of movement corridors.
              Program 3.20.E:         Require preservation of open space corridors between Lake
                                      Herman, Sulphur Springs Mountain, the Northern Area, the
                                      northeast hills, the Benicia State Recreation Area, and the
                                      marshlands east of I-680.
              GOAL 3.21:              Permanently protect and enhance wetlands so
                                      that there is no net loss of wetlands within the
                                      Benicia Planning Area.
              POLICY 3.21.1:          Encourage avoidance and enhancement of sensitive wetlands
                                      as part of future development.
              Program 3.21.A:         Continue to require wetland delineation and mitigation as part
                                      of environmental review of proposed development.
              POLICY 3.21.2:          Require replacement for wetlands eliminated as a result of
                                      development at a higher wetlands value and acreage than the
                                      area eliminated.
              Replacement ratios are initially determined by State and federal agencies. The City
              desires to take an aggressive approach in promoting wetland enhancement. If the
              City desires a higher ratio, a nexus must be established between the loss and the
              desired replacement ratio.
              Program 3.21.B:         Continue to coordinate with the California Department of Fish
                                      and Game, United States Fish and Wildlife Service, and the
                                      United States Army Corps of Engineers in reviewing proposed
                                      wetland modifications.
              POLICY 3.21.3:          Encourage development of a Suisun Marsh interpretive center
                                      near the I-680/Lake Herman Road interchange.
              Program 3.21.C:         Work with responsible agencies to develop the Suisun Marsh
                                      interpretive center near Lake Herman Road and I-680.
              POLICY 3.21.4:          Restore and increase marshland areas.
              Program 3.21.D:         Prepare a Local Protection Program (LPP) for the portion of the
                                      Suisun Marsh Secondary Management Area within the Benicia
                                      General Plan Planning Area.
134                                                                      City of Benicia General Plan
                                                         D. Open Space and Conservation of Resources
                                                                                                Subhead
               Program 3.21.E:         Identify small wetlands and require their protection, restoration,
                                       and enhancement as part of open space dedication in pro-
                                       posed development and in citywide open space improve-
                                       ments.
               5. WATER RESOURCES
               Carquinez Strait
               Benicia has joined the cities of Vallejo, Martinez, and Hercules, the State Lands Com-
               mission, Solano and Contra Costa counties, the East Bay Regional Park District, and the
               Greater Vallejo Recreation District to protect and enhance the resources of the
               Carquinez Strait. Funding for this planning project was provided as part of a 1993
               State Lands Commission agreement with the Crockett Cogeneration Project.The plan
               calls for the protection, restoration, and enhancement of resources, balanced with
               other public trust uses (recreation, public access, commerce, navigation, and shipping)
               which will contribute to the long-term economic vitality of the Strait.
               Ravines and Streambeds
               The ravine northeast of Columbus Parkway, the ravines oriented east from the “view
               hill” in Southampton, and the streambeds associated with the former Paddy Lake and
               Lake Herman are important water resources and are protected from development by
               this Plan. By reducing overland runoff and filtering water-borne pollutants, these
               naturally occurring watercourses aid in flood prevention and water quality preserva-
               tion.
               Marshes
               The Southampton Bay Natural Preserve (formerly called Southampton Marsh), on the
               southwestern border of the City, and the Suisun Marsh northeast of the City are
               protected from encroachment by development.The Suisun Marsh is the largest
               remaining wetland around the San Francisco Bay and the largest brackish area in the
               United States. It comprises more than 10 percent of California’s total wetland area.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                         135

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              Both of these marshes provide wintering habitat for waterfowl on the Pacific Flyway
              and are vital to fish and wildlife production.They are protected by this Plan.
              In 1977, the California Legislature passed the Suisun Marsh Preservation Act to pre-
              serve and enhance the quality and diversity of marsh habitats, and to assure retention
              of upland areas adjacent to the Suisun Marsh in uses compatible with its protection.
              This legislation protects the Marsh by implementing policies and programs set forth
              in the Suisun Marsh Protection Plan prepared by the San Francisco Bay Conservation
              and Development Commission. Development in these shoreline areas is prohibited,
              with the exception of minor fill to protect the shoreline, improve its appearance, or
              provide public access and recreation.A portion of the Secondary Management Area
              (SMA) of the Suisun Marsh is within the General Plan Planning Area.The SMA is in-
              cluded in the Suisun Marsh Preservation Act, but has less stringent development
              restrictions.
              6. WATER RESOURCES GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
              (Goals, policies, programs for marshes are found in the prior section: Biotic Re-
              sources.)
              GOAL 3.22:               Preserve water bodies.
              POLICY 3.22.1:           Avoid development that will degrade existing lakes and
                                       streams.
              Program 3.22.A:          Require that all development in watersheds flowing into lakes
                                       and unchannelized streams include features to preserve run-off
                                       water quality.
              Program 3.22.B:          Require a minimum setback of 25 feet from the top of bank of
                                       streams and ravines. Do not allow development within the
                                       setback.
              GOAL 3.23:               Preserve Lake Herman as a municipal water
                                       resource.
              POLICY 3.23.1:           Ensure the biological, chemical, and physical integrity of Lake
                                       Herman.
              Program 3.23.A:          Continue to monitor water quality in Lake Herman and at
                                       upstream sources of potential pollution.
              POLICY 3.23.2:           Prohibit uses that would adversely affect water quality (such as
                                       motorized boats or swimming).
              GOAL 3.24:               Protect watersheds.
              POLICY 3.24.1:           Identify the Benicia watersheds to preserve.
136                                                                      City of Benicia General Plan
                                                       D. Open Space and Conservation of Resources
                                                                                                Subhead
               7. MINERAL RESOURCES
               Mineral resources consist of surface soils for agricultural uses or domestic gardens and
               subsurface materials such as mined rock or minerals. State planning law requires the
               general plan to identify mineral resources and provide for their continued availability.
               The one mineral resource area in the Planning Area which is required to be protected
               and preserved for extraction is shown on Figure 3-4.
               SOILS
               The Department of Agriculture’s Soil Survey of Solano County identifies the predomi-
               nant soil in the Planning Area as the Dibble and Altamont Series of expansive clay
               formations.These soils have the greatest limitations for the types of plants which can
               be grown without special soil treatment and are best suited to open rangeland or
               recreational purposes if left undeveloped.The amount of rainfall and low permeability
               of the soils contribute to the limited variety of natural vegetation supported. Past use
               of the unurbanized land in the Planning Area has been for grazing.
               The Northern Area, particularly along Paddy Creek, is comprised of the richer, Rincon
               Series of clay loams which is capable of more intensive agriculture.These are alluvial
               soils formed from erosion of the sedimentary rocks of surrounding slopes.According
               to the Soil Survey, the predominant soil types are suitable for management of small
               birds such as quail and doves and for impounding water for waterfowl habitat or fish.
               SUBSURFACE RESOURCES
               The only regionally significant mineral resource in the Planning Area is a deposit of
               igneous rock from which aggregate is produced. The aggregate is used in the manu-
               facture of asphaltic concrete, Portland cement concrete, rip-rap, drain rock and road
               base.
               The Sulphur Springs Mountain Deposit was designated by the State of California as a
               Mineral Resource of Regional Significance pursuant to the Surface Mining and Recla-
               mation Act (SMARA).An active quarry within the deposit exists along Lake Herman
               Road west of Lake Herman in the boundary hills between Benicia and Vallejo, outside
               of the Planning Area. Quarrying there has resulted in a cut face, which is visible from
               the Lake Herman area.To the extent possible given the requirements of the Surface
               Mining and Reclamation Act (SMARA), City policy discourages further expansion of the
               visible cut in an eastern direction.
               Several abandoned mercury mines exist in the Sulphur Springs Mountain area.These
               mines have not been in production since the mid 1940s.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                         137

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              8. MINERAL RESOURCE GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
              GOAL 3.25:               Conserve and, where appropriate, develop the
                                       mineral resources of regional significance within
                                       the Planning Area.
              POLICY 3.25.1:           Maintain in open space the mineral resource area of regional
                                       significance designated on Sulphur Springs Mountain until a
                                       mineral resource extraction and reclamation plan that ad-
                                       dresses all potentially significant impacts of extraction has been
                                       approved by the responsible agencies.
              GOAL 3.26:               Minimize environmental impacts of mineral
                                       production.
              POLICY 3.26.1:           Minimize exposure of the quarry face from residential areas.
              POLICY 3.26.2:           Allow extraction of mineral resources within the Planning Area
                                       but beyond the currently permitted quarry area on Sulphur
                                       Springs Mountain, only upon approval by the appropriate
                                       agencies.
              POLICY 3.26.3:           Maintain a variable ridgeline and natural landform representa-
                                       tive of the scenic character of the Planning Area.
              Program 3.26.A:          Work with adjacent jurisdictions to establish mineral resource
                                       management measures.
              POLICY 3.26.4:           Prohibit extraction of mineral resources outside the State-
                                       designated mineral resource area, and permit extraction of
                                       mineral resources inside the State-designated mineral resource
                                       area only if applicable policies, mitigation measures, perfor-
                                       mance standards, rules, and regulations are met.
              POLICY 3.26.5:           Require mitigations, setbacks, buffers, and scrdÏ6ing.
              POLICY 3.26.6:           Require that residential buildings to be constructed within
                                       2,000 feet of the ultimate mineral extraction boundary be
                                       analyzed by a qualified engineer to ensure economically
                                       feasible measures that minimize the amplification of ground
                                       vibration.
              9. ENERGY CONSERVATION GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
              Developing and maintaining urban areas, including the open space within developed
              areas, utilizes energy in various forms. For development projects, there are “indirect”
              energy costs involved in the manufacture of building materials, and there are “direct”
138                                                                        City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                       D. Open Space and Conservation of Resources
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Subhead
 WATER AND
 MINERAL RESOURCES
   LEGEND
   Planning Area Boundary
   City Limits
                Watershed Boundary
                Intermittent Creek Channel
                Mineral Resource Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        o       dy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        gh
                              SULPHUR
                              SPRINGS
                             WATERSHED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GOODYEAR SLOUGH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    WATERSHED
                                                        Hastings
                                                        Merang
                                           Sulf
                                                         Mine ✖
                                            er
                                                                                                                                                         City
                                                Sp                                                                                                                Limit
                                                                                                                                                                               s
                                                  rin
                    MINERAL
                                                                                                                 C re ek
                                                      gs
                                                        C
                   RESOURCE                                re
                                                            ek
                     ZONE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           R OA
                                                                                                            dy
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ER             MAN
           Syar                                                                                                                                                                                   E H
                                                                                                          Pad                                                                               LAK
          Quarry
            ✖                                                                                                                                                                                IT Panoche
                                                                                                                                                                                   RE        Hazardous
                                                                                                                                                                                       SE      Waste
                                                                                                                                                                                        RV     Facility
                                                                                                                                                     Su
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         INDUSTRIAL WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                                                                          lf e                               IR
                                                                                                                                                                 rS                               RO                                             T
                                                                                                                                                                      pr                               AD                                      EE
                                                                                                                                                                           i                                                                 TR
                                                                                                           Lake                                                            ng                                                              dS
                                                                                                                                                                               s                                                       . 2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                           Herman                                                                  C
                                                                                                                                                                                   re
                                                                                                                                                                                       ek
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       INTERSTATE 680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EXXON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Benicia                                                                                                                         Ba
                                                IVE
                                           DR
                                       E                                                                                                                                                                           Refinery
                                    OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Suisun
                                R
                                                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                   V   I                                                                                                                                           BA
                                                                                                                                  DR                                                                                                                                                 YS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  H
                                                                                                                              A
                                                                                                                          M                                                                                   T
                                                                                                                                                                                                            EE
                                                                                                                                            C                                                                                                                                                         O
                                                                                                                     RA                                                                                                                                                                                   RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                          TR
                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                                           H EL SE A
                                    SOUTHAMPTON                                                           PA N
                                                                                                                                                                                                        dS
                                                                                                                                                                                                      2n                                                                                                       R OA
                                        BAY                                    E                                                                                                                   E.                                                                                                              D
                                                                          IV
                                     WATERSHED                        S DR
                                                                                                                                           H IL LS
                                                                   IN G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RK
                                                                                                                                              DR IV E
                                                                 H A ST
                                                                                   WEST BENICIA                                                                                                                                            HILLCREST            PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E. 6th STREET
                                                                                    WATERSHED                                                                                                                                                                          AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RO
                                           INT
                                              ER                                                  M P T O N ROA D
                                                ST
                                                  A                                          HA
                                       TE                                            SOUTH
                        BENICIA
                                                                                                                                                          T
                                                           78
                                                                                                                                                     STREE
                                                             0
                            S TAT E                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ST
                                                                                                                                              W. 7th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N
                                PA R K                                                                                                                                                                                      MILITARY EAST                GRANT ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FF
                                                                                                                                                                 MILITARY WEST                                                                                                          JE
                                                                                                                                                                                                            1st STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EAST 3RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AND "H"
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          STREET
                                                                    Southampton                                                                                                                                          WATERSHED
                                                                        Bay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TY             TY
                                                                          UINEZ                        STRA                                                                                                                                                                                           UN                 UN
                                                                     CARQ                                   IT                                                                                                                                                                          CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S   OL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A                                              SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CO                                                                              800   0        800 1600
                         Figure 3-4. Hydrology and Mineral Resources
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                139

Chapter 3. Community Identity
              costs involved in the ongoing operation (heating, lighting, etc.) of the project.The
              State has adopted comprehensive energy conservation standards (“Title 24”) which
              must be incorporated into all new development projects, including remodelings.
              Those standards are implemented in Benicia through the building permit review
              process.The State conducts periodic audits of local building departments to ensure
              that energy standards are being properly administered.
              GOAL 3.27:             Improve energy efficiency.
              POLICY 3.27.1:         Promote energy conservation in all new development and
                                     during rehabilitation of existing homes.
              Program 3.27.A:        Distribute information on weatherization and energy conserva-
                                     tion.
              Program 3.27.B:        Implement State energy conservation requirements in new
                                     housing.
140                                                                    City of Benicia General Plan

       4. COMMUNITY HEALTH
                AND SAFETY
                A. HEALTHY COMMUNITY
                1. DIMENSIONS OF OPTIMAL HEALTH
                A comprehensive definition of a healthy community is described by the following
                categories:
                Physical Environment. This category focuses on a clean environment, fitness,
                nutrition, safety, and medical care. Specific issues include affordable and safe housing,
                parks and open space, streets, and sanitation.
                Social Environment. Friends, families, and communities fall under this category.
                Specific issues include hunger, food bank utilization, school lunches, homelessness,
                substance abuse, cost of living, earned wages, percent of the population in poverty,
                and broader issues of social justice.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                          141
Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
              Emotional Health. Stress management and care during individual emotional crises
              affect the community’s overall emotional health as do community balance (racial,
              economic, age), resource distribution, and participation in decision-making.
              Intellectual Environment. Education, career development, and personal achieve-
              ment fall under this category. Education issues include drop-out rates, graduation rates,
              continuing education programs, and other educational opportunities. Career develop-
              ment deals with issues such as unemployment rates, job types and availability, com-
              mute distance, and economic development.
              Spiritual. This category deals with sense of purpose, love, hope, and charity.
              The comprehensiveness of the above factors requires that broad segments of the
              community participate in addressing health issues and finding and implementing
              solutions to improve local health care.
              2. HEALTHY COMMUNITY GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
              GOAL 4.1:                Make community health and safety a high prior-
                                       ity for Benicia.
              POLICY 4.1.1:            Strive to protect and enhance the safety and health of Benicians
                                       when making planning and policy decisions.
              POLICY 4.1.2:            Promote a wide range of health-related services.
              Such services will address the physical environment and social climate.
              Program 4.1.A:           Develop a citizen input planning process with the Human
                                       Services Fund Board to address locally identified community
                                       health and health-related concerns.
              POLICY 4.1.3:            All City departments should attempt to address the underlying
                                       causes of health, social, and safety issues.
              Program 4.1.B:           Promote measurable health goals and work with health-related
                                       agencies to monitor their implementation.
              For example, work with “California Healthy Cities” on a project to reduce measurably
              the sale of cigarettes to children.
              POLICY 4.1.4:            Compile available information pertinent to the health and
                                       safety of Benicians.
              Program 4.1.C:           Require the Human Services Fund Board to report annually to
                                       the City Council and public on the health, well-being, and safety
                                       of the community, along with recommendations for improve-
                                       ments.
              POLICY 4.1.5:            Clarify City role in providing health services.
142                                                                         City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                   A. Healthy Community
                Program 4.1.D:         Inventory health needs, identify holes in the network, and focus
                                       on those issues not being addressed.
                Program 4.1.E:         Delegate a formal group (e.g., Human Services Fund Board) to
                                       be responsible for community health promotion, and require
                                       the group to coordinate with a broad range of community
                                       representatives.
                Program 4.1.F:         Expand the role of the City staff person liaison to the Human
                                       Services Fund Board, as needed to support additional tasks
                                       assigned to the Board.
                GOAL 4.2:              Improve access to medical, mental health, and
                                       social services for all Benicians, including the
                                       elderly and low-income.
                POLICY 4.2.1:          Fully utilize and coordinate available resources and efforts
                                       through the City’s Human Services Fund Board and other
                                       governmental and non-governmental agencies.
                Program 4.2.A:         Work with existing health care providers, neighboring cities,
                                       and the county, State and federal governments.
                Program 4.2.B:         Provide and maintain affordable transportation services to and
                                       from health facilities (in and out of town), especially for the
                                       elderly and disabled.
                GOAL 4.3:              Attract additional health services to Benicia.
                POLICY 4.3.1:          Promote preventive health care in line with the Child and Adult
                                       Preventive Care Guidelines published by the US Public Health
                                       Service (1994).
                The guidelines recommend tests, examinations, immunizations, and other preventive
                measures for all ages.
                Program 4.3.A:         Support the development of a “Center for Human Services”.
                POLICY 4.3.2:          Evaluate the need for and feasibility of new medical facilities in
                                       Benicia including a branch of the County Health and Social
                                       Services Department.
                Program 4.3.B:         Promote prenatal care, health care for children, teen activities,
                                       education and counseling, and intergenerational activities.
                Program 4.3.C:         Investigate the feasibility of utilizing existing City buildings to
                                       deliver health-related services, and expand the scope of the
                                       buildings’ uses in conjunction with established neighborhood
                                       groups.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                            143

Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
              POLICY 4.3.3:      Promote establishment of demonstration gardens at schools,
                                 churches, fire stations, and other sites.
              Program 4.3.D:     Consider utilizing vacant City property for gardening of fruits
                                 and vegetables.
              GOAL 4.4:          Reduce the incidence of substance abuse and
                                 strive for a drug-free community.
              POLICY 4.4.1:      Support the development of the education of all age groups in
                                 the prevention of substance abuse.
              Program 4.4.A:     Include law enforcement, the School District, and proprietors
                                 of nicotine, alcohol, and prescription drugs in planning and
                                 operating substance abuse prevention programs.
              Program 4.4.B:     Identify at-risk populations and work to develop programs and
                                 services to address their needs.
              POLICY 4.4.2:      Promote safe driving by youth.
              GOAL 4.5:          Establish after-school programs and other con-
                                 structive activities for youth.
              Program 4.5.A:     Work with the School District on appropriate after-school
                                 youth activities.
              GOAL 4.6:          Prevent and reduce crime in the community.
              POLICY 4.6.1:      Encourage building designs that help to reduce crime.
              Program 4.6.A:     Review the design of new and rehabilitated buildings for ways
                                 to increase resident safety.
              POLICY 4.6.2:      Develop a corrective action plan to deal with high crime areas.
              Program 4.6.B:     Strengthen and expand neighborhood watch programs. Include
                                 businesses.
              Program 4.6.C:     Promote the education of citizens on how not to be a victim.
              POLICY 4.6.3:      Maintain an adequate officer-to population ratio in all areas, as
                                 approved by the City Council.
144                                                                   City of Benicia General Plan
                                                                           B. Hazards to the Community
                B. HAZARDS TO THE COMMUNITY
                1. GEOLOGIC
                Within Benicia, the most significant geologic hazards are those associated with land-
                slides, debris flows, and ground shaking during earthquakes. Other significant geologic
                hazards include the potential for settlement of structures constructed on filled bay
                land, expansive soils, cut and fill slopes, and flooding.These and other possible hazards
                are discussed below.A list of geological web site internet addresses is provided in
                Appendix H.
                SEISMIC HAZARDS
                Earthquakes
                Benicia lies within a seismically active region.The principal faults in the area are
                capable of generating large earthquakes that could produce strong to violent ground
                shaking in Benicia.
                In the event of an earthquake, seismic risk to a structure will depend on the character-
                istics of the earthquake, the distance to the earthquake epicenter, the subsurface
                conditions underlying the structure and its immediate vicinity, and the characteristics
                of the structure. It is impossible to predict precisely when, where, or exactly what
                kind and amount of movement will occur on local faults. However, the intensity of
                ground shaking can be amplified by local geologic conditions.Areas most susceptible
                to a significant amplification of ground shaking are underlain by soft sediments such
                as Bay Mud. In several areas along the Benicia waterfront, fill and buildings have been
                placed over Bay Mud.These areas are likely to experience substantially stronger
                ground shaking than areas underlain by bedrock. Figure 4-1 shows ground shaking
                amplification in the Planning Area.
                Unreinforced Masonry Buildings
                Most susceptible to earthquake damage are older structures (those constructed before
                1950) and unreinforced masonry buildings (URMs). Structural damage occurs in older
                wood frame structures as a result of poorly designed foundations or a lack of struc-
                tural bonding between the foundation and the building.The risk of structural damage
                can often be significantly reduced by securely attaching the structure to the founda-
                tion. Shear walls and other structural reinforcements are useful in improving resis-
                tance to earthquakes.
                URMs—buildings constructed with brick, cinder block, or stone without steel rein-
                forcement—were common in California in the early part of the 20th century. URMs are
                prone to collapse during large earthquakes, but can often be brought up to acceptable
                earthquake design standards by adding structural reinforcement.
                The risk associated with URMs is addressed in Benicia’s Seismic Hazards Identification
                Program (Chapter 15.60, Benicia Municipal Code).The program requires that the City
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                         145

Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
              notify owners and tenants of URMs of the hazards.The notification by the City was
              completed in 1990.
              Liquefaction
              Liquefaction occurs in granular materials as a result of ground shaking, and is often
              followed by sudden local settling or slope failure.The potential for liquefaction is
              considered to be highest in areas underlain by saturated, unconsolidated, granular
              sediments.Within Benicia, the areas most at risk from liquefaction are along the Bay
              margin and in the flat-lying valley bottoms, in areas underlain by Bay Mud or Alluvium.
              Figure 4-2 shows areas with potential liquefaction hazard.
              Although liquefaction often causes severe damage to structures, structural collapse is
              uncommon.The risk to public safety from liquefaction, therefore, is relatively low.
              Structures can be protected from liquefaction through the use of special foundations.
              Earthquake-related Ground Failure
              Various forms of ground failure occur during or immediately following an earthquake,
              as a result of ground shaking.The nature and severity of these effects are determined
              by the magnitude and duration of shaking and the local geologic and groundwater
              conditions. Earthquake-related ground failures include lateral spreading, lurch crack-
              ing, and landsliding.
              Fault Rupture
              The Green Valley fault is the only active fault known in the Planning Area. Fault
              rupture is likely to occur along the Green Valley fault as a result of an earthquake
              there.The risk of fault rupture elsewhere in the Planning Area is very low.
              SLOPE STABILITY HAZARDS
              Landslides
              Landslides are significant geologic hazards in the Planning Area. Since the 1906
              earthquake, damage from landslides has far exceeded that from earthquakes. Land-
              slides are relatively rare in the developed portions of Benicia, but are numerous in the
              hilly, undeveloped areas.A map of the landslides in the Planning Area is shown on the
              Landslide Map, Plate 2 of the Public Safety Background Report, February 28, 1996.
              Another reference is the Department of Mines and Geology Open File Report 86-17
              “Landslide Hazards in the Benicia Valley Area.” Figure 4-2 shows areas with potential
              landslide hazard.
              Landslides can cause extensive damage to buildings, roadways, or other facilities
              located on the landslide, and often result in large property losses. Because landslides
              are slow moving, people are rarely injured or killed. Landslides often result from
              poorly placed or poorly drained fill.
146                                                                       City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B. Hazards to the Community
 GROUND SHAKING                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Planning Area Boundary
 AMPLIFICATION                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Shaking Amplification
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Extremely High
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Very High (none in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    study area)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    High
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Moderately High
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Moderate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Moderately Low
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Low
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ea
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Slo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ug
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  D
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                            AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ERM
                                                                                                                                                                                                      E H
                                                                                                                                                                                                   LAK
                                                                                                                                                                                    RE
                                                                                                                                                                                      SE
                                                                                                                                                                                         RV
                                                                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                                                                              IR                                                                  ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              INDUSTRIAL WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                   R
                                                                                                                                                                                                       OA                                             RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                              D                                  ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2   nd
                                                                                                                 Lake                                                                                                                E.
                                                                                                                 Herman
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             INTERSTATE 680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AY                                                                                                   y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ba
                                                                       IVE
                                                                 DR
                                                             E
                                                    R   OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Suisun
                                                                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                                   V   I
                                                                                                                                                  DR                                                                                                                                                 BA
      CO                                                                                                                                      A                                                                                                                                                        Y
                                                                                                                                          M                 C                                                     T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                EE
           LU
                                                                                                                                     RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S
                                                                                                                                                                                                              TR
                M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HO
                                                                                                                                                           H E L SEA
                    BU                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                          PA N
                         S                                                                                                                                                                                  dS                                                                                                     RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                          2n
                             PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                       E.
                                R   KW
                                                                                                     E                                                                                                                                                                                                              R
                                                                                                 IV
                                         AY                                                     DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OA
                                                                                                                                                           H IL LS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                         NGS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RK
                                                                                      H AS TI                                                                 D R IVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HILLCREST                  PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E. 5th STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RO
                                                                 INT
                                                                       ER                                             PTON ROAD
                                         BENICIA          ST
                                                            AT                                                   AM
                                                                                                         SOUTH
                                                                                                                                                                    STRE
                                                               E
                                                                             78
                                               S TAT E                            0
                                                                                                                                                             W. 7th
                                                    PA R K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MILITARY EAST                             GRANT ST.
                                                                                                                                                                        ET                                                                                                                     ADAMS ST.
                                                                                                                                                                             MILITARY WEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                        1st STREET
                                                                                          Southampton
                                                                                              Bay
                                                                                                 UINEZ                   STRA
                                                                                            CARQ                              IT                                                                                                                                                       TY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    UN        TY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CO        U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              O        CO                                                          SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L           A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SO          ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              C O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TR
Modified from Perkins and Boatwright (1995a, b)                                                                                                                                                                                                                 C     ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             800    0       800 1600
                                              Figure 4-1. Ground Shaking Amplification
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    147
Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
              Debris Flows
              Debris flows are fast moving, highly fluid landslides. Debris flows originate where
              hillside swales filled with unstable colluvium on steep slopes become saturated
              during a period of very heavy rainfall. Once the colluvium slides a short distance, the
              soil loses its structure, liquefies, and moves rapidly down the swale or ravine, coming
              to rest in the near-level valley bottom.
              A large number of debris flows were mapped in the Planning Area, mostly in the hilly
              region northeast of Lake Herman Road.
              The risk of loss of property or life as a result of debris flows can be reduced.The most
              effective strategy is to avoid placing structures or facilities in debris flow paths.Where
              structures exist within areas at risk of debris flows, measures can be taken to stabilize
              the debris flow source areas through retaining walls, regrading, or subdrainage,
              constructing basins to retain debris, or diverting debris away from structures.
              2. FLOOD HAZARDS
              Flooding that causes damage to lands and property within the Planning Area occurs
              primarily in response to severe rainstorms coincident with near-saturated soil condi-
              tions or high tides, or both.The most recent severe flooding occurred in February
              1986 when the area received 7.66 inches of nearly continuous rainfall in nine days.
              FEMA FLOOD MAPS
              Based on the results of a revised hydrologic study commissioned by the City in 1987,
              The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), prepared a revised Flood Insur-
              ance Study and Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) in 1989. Flood hazard zones delin-
              eated for Benicia and adjacent portions of Solano County within the Planning Area are
              shown in Figure 4-3.
              The figure shows low-lying areas subject to flooding during a 100-year storm:
              (1) the lower reaches of the Sulphur Springs Creek Watershed downstream of Lake
              Herman; (2) the lands flanking the Benicia shoreline east of East 3rd Street; and (3) the
              wetlands associated with Benicia State Park on Southampton Bay.A “100-year storm”
              means that in any year there is one chance out of 100 for a serious flood to occur.
              STORMWATER MASTER PLAN/FLOOD CONTROL IMPROVEMENTS
              Since adoption of the 1982 and 1989 Stormwater Master Plans, the City has com-
              pleted over 40 storm drainage improvement projects (see Appendix A of the Public
              Safety Background Report, February 28, 1996).These improvements have significantly
              reduced the spot flooding which formerly occurred in Benicia.Two large stormwater
              detention basins were constructed as part of the Southampton D-Unit subdivisions
              which have helped to minimize flooding problems Downtown.
148                                                                         City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               B. Hazards to the Community
 GEOLOGIC HAZARDS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LEGEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Planning Area Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sphere of Influence
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Potential Landslide
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      and Debris Flow
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Hazards
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Potential Liquefaction,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Lateral Spreading and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Settlement Hazards
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Alquist-Priolo Special
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Studies Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Green Valley Fault
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ye
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Slo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ug
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                             AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ERM
                                                                                                                                                                                                       E H
                                                                                                                                                                                                    LAK
                                                                                                                                                                                     RE
                                                                                                                                                                                       SE
                                                                                                                                                                                          RV
                                                                                                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                                                                                                               IR                                                                    T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  INDUSTRIAL WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                                                                                                                                        OA                                          TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                               D                               dS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E.
                                                                                                                    Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 INTERSTATE 680
                                                                                                                    Herman
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A         Y                                                                                                      y
                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Ba
                                                                     D   RIV
                                                                SE
                                                        R   O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Suisun
                                                                                                                                                     VE
                                                                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                                                                    DR                                                                                                                                                   BA
      CO                                                                                                                                        A                                                                                                                                                          Y
                                                                                                                                            M                                                                      T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EE
           LU
                                                                                                                                       RA                    C                                                                                                                                                     SH
                                                                                                                                                                                                               TR
                M
                                                                                                                                                               H E L SE
                    BU                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                                            PA N                                                                                                                                                                                    OR
                         S                                                                                                                                                                                   dS
                                                                                                                                                                                                           2n                                                                                                           E R
                             PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                        E.
                                R   KW
                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                                             A H IL LS
                                                                                                    IV                                                                                                                                                                                                                    O
                                         AY                                                       DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AD
                                                                                            I NGS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RK
                                                                                                                                                                 DRIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PA
                                                                                          HA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HILLCREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E. 5th STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RO
                                                                     INT
                                                                           ER                                           PTON ROAD
                                              BENICIA         ST
                                                                AT                                                 AM
                                                                                                           SOUTH
                                                                                                                                                                      STRE
                                                                   E
                                                                                 78
                                                    S TAT E                           0
                                                                                                                                                               W. 7th
                                                        PA R K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ADAMS ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MILITARY EAST                                     GRANT ST.
                                                                                                                                                                         ET
                                                                                                                                                                              MILITARY WEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                         1st STREET
                                                                                             Southampton
                                                                                                 Bay
                                                                                                       UINEZ               STRA
                                                                                                  CARQ                          IT                                                                                                                                                                                  TY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               UN                     TY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CO                              N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NO                                 CO                                        SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LA                     A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SO                       ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CO                                                                                       800    0       800 1600
                                                  Figure 4-2. Areas with Potential Landslide and Liquefaction Hazards
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               149
Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
 FLOOD HAZARD
   LEGEND
   Planning Area Boundary
   City Limits
                      FEMA 100-Year Flood Hazard Zone
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        o      dy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  gh
                                                                                                                                                                                      City
                                                                                                                                                                                             Limit
                                                                                                                                                                                                  s
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ERM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                      RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                           RV
                                                                                                                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                IR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        INDUSTRIAL WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ST
                                                                                                                                      Lake                                                                                                                  2   nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E.
                                                                                                                                      Herman
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       INTERSTATE 680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AY                                                                                                    y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ba
                                                                      IVE
                                                                 DR
                                                             E
                                                        OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Suisun
                                                    R
                                                                                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                                                                             V   I                                                                                                                                                 BA
                                                                                                                                                            DR                                                                                                                                                       YS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 H
       CO                                                                                                                                               A
                                                                                                                                                    M                                                                           T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EE
                                                                                                                                                                      C                                                                                                                                                              O
            LU                                                                                                                                 RA                                                                                                                                                                                        RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TR
                 M                                                                                                                         O
                                                                                                                                                                     H EL SE A
                     BU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dS
                                                                                                                                    PA N
                          S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2n                                                                                                                R OA
                              PA
                                 R   KW                                                                     E                                                                                                        E.                                                                                                                       D
                                                                                                       IV
                                          AY
                                                                                                   S DR
                                                                                                                                                                     H IL LS
                                                                                                IN G
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RK
                                                                                              H A ST                                                                    DR IV E                                                                                 HILLCREST                       PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E. 5th STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RO
                                                                 INT
                                                                       ER                                                    P T O N ROA D
                                                                            ST
                                                                              AT                                        AM
                                                                                 E                              SOUTH
                                                                                                                                                                               ST
                                                                                                                                                                        W. 7th
                                                                                     78
                                               BENICIA                                    0
                                                  S TAT E
                                                        PA R K                                                                                                                 REET                                                        MILITARY EAST                                GRANT ST.                       ADAMS ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                         MILITARY WEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1st STREET
                                                                                                 Southampton
                                                                                                     Bay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TY            TY
                                                                                                       UINEZ                      STRA                                                                                                                                                                                               UN            UN
                                                                                                  CARQ                                 IT                                                                                                                                                                               CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A   NO                        A                                             SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S   OL                            ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RA
 Source: Federal Emergency Management Administration                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NT                                                                       800    0       800 1600
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CO
                                               Figure 4-3. Flood Hazards
150                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              City of Benicia General Plan
                                                                          B. Hazards to the Community
                SEA LEVEL RISE
                BCDC’s 1988 study of sea level rise and its impacts on San Francisco Bay predicts a rate
                of sea level rise of between 0.005 and 0.05 feet per year over the coming tidal epoch.
                While rising sea level will not be enough to endanger existing developed areas of
                Benicia, it may mean that flooding could be exacerbated in low lying areas at high
                tide.The height of wave run-up and related shoreline erosion during storms may also
                increase. As a result, existing sea walls and levees may have to be raised, and the
                maintenance and design of shoreline stabilization works will also be affected.
                3. FIRE HAZARDS
                The City’s jurisdiction includes extensive
                open space (primarily grassland). Residen-
                tial and industrial uses occur in proximity
                to these open space areas, posing potential
                fire safety problems. Figure 4-4 shows that
                most of the Planning Area is a potential fire
                hazard.To address fire prevention in open
                space areas, the Fire Department adminis-
                ters a vegetation control program.
                4. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS AND
                     WASTE
                Improper handling of hazardous substances
                can result in public health hazards through
                contamination of soils or groundwater or
                through airborne releases in vapors, fumes,
                or dust. Particularly susceptible populations that may be exposed, such as children,
                pregnant or lactating women, people with immune deficiencies, and seniors are called
                “sensitive receptors”.The presence or proximity of hazardous substances could pose
                restrictions on the types of land use that would be appropriate for future develop-
                ment. Even if handled correctly and in accordance with applicable regulations, hazard-
                ous substances could present a potential health risk to the surrounding population if
                released during an accident or an emergency.
                HAZARDOUS SITES
                Regulatory agencies involved in sites that have been investigated may have decided—
                based on federal and State regulatory guidelines—to allow residual contamination to
                be left in place or to take other remedial actions.This is because hazardous waste that
                is below the ground at an undeveloped or existing residential or commercial site can
                pose a health threat if the contaminated soil is disturbed by construction, landscaping,
                or similar activities.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                        151

Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
 FIRE HAZARD AREAS
  LEGEND
  Planning Area Boundary
   City Limits
       Brush/Grasslands/Wildlands
      10 Acres
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    o         dy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         gh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ER         M A N RO A D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LAK
                                                                                                                                                                                          RE
                                                                                                                                                                                           SE
                                                                                                                                                                                               RV
                                                                                                                                                                                                OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                R
                                                                                                                                                                                                     R O                                                                            T
                                                                                                                                   Lake                                                                    AD                                                            EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     INDUSTRIAL WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              dS
                                                                                                                                   Herman                                                                                                                2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   INTERSTATE 680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AY                                                                                                                  y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ba
                                                                             IV E
                                                                        DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Suisun
                                                                    E
                                                               OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                    E. 2
                                                           R
                                                                                                                                                                                                     nd S
                                                                                                                                                    IVE                                                TRE                                                                                                             BA
                                                                                                                                                 DR     C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         YS
       CO                                                                                                                                    A                                                             ET
                                                                                                                                          AM                                                                                                                                                                                          HO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PA RK
                                                                                                                                                       H E L S E A HI LL S D R IVE
            LU
                 M                                                                                                                     OR                                                                                                                                                                                              RE
                     BU                                                                                                         PA N
                          S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ROA
                              PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RO AD
                                 R   KW                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                          AY                                                          VE
                                                                                                 DRI
                                                                                              GS
                                                                                          HA ST I N                                                                                                                            HIL LC RE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E. 5th STREET
                                                                        INT                                              T O N ROA D
                                               BENICIA        ER
                                                                 STA                                                MP
                                                                    TE                                     SOUTHA
                                                                                                                                                                    h ST RE
                                                                                    78
                                                     S TAT E                          0
                                                                                                                                                              W. 7t
                                                          PA R K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ADAMS
                                                                                                                                                                                ET                                        MILITARY EAST
                                                                                                                                                                                     MILITARY WEST                                                                             GRANT ST.
                                                                                                 Southampton
                                                                                                     Bay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                1st ST
                                                                                                           UINEZ              STRA
                                                                                                      CARQ                         IT                                                                                                                                                                                                      Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       U              NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     O                                         TY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L      AN                                   UN                           SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SO                                      CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CON                                                                       800    0       800 1600
                                                   Figure 4-4. Fire Hazards
152                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City of Benicia General Plan
                                                                              B. Hazards to the Community
                General locations of identified known or suspected hazardous substances and waste
                sites in Benicia are shown in Appendix G.There are 57 identified hazardous waste
                sites in the Planning Area.With four exceptions—the IT Panoche Hazardous Waste
                Disposal Facility (Site 1), the Braito Landfill (Site 2), the landfill at the Benicia State Park
                site (Site 54), and the leaking underground storage tank at 510 West J Street (Site 36)—
                all of the sites are located within Downtown or in industrial areas of Benicia.
                HAZARDOUS MATERIAL AND WASTE HANDLERS
                Hazardous substances are commonly used and handled within Benicia under a wide
                variety of permitted activities and land uses.The potential for contamination at a site
                which handles hazardous substances depends on the type of business, types and
                quantities of hazardous substances, handling and management practices, control and
                spill containment systems, adequacy of accident prevention and safety programs,
                training programs and emergency response plans, and adjacent land uses.When
                handled properly and when used in compliance with permitting and other regulatory
                requirements, hazardous substances do not necessarily pose a human health concern
                or a threat to the environment. Nevertheless, the nature of hazardous materials implies
                an inherent risk to human health and the environment.
                Benicia has a wide range of industries.Toxic hazards from any industry typically
                include hazards to employees relating to chemical use during the manufacturing
                processes, or inadvertent or accidental spillage during transport and handling, which
                could also potentially release toxic chemicals to the soil or groundwater. Other toxic
                hazards include inadvertent releases of airborne substances, including toxic gases,
                fumes, or dust, which could expose workers or the community to health hazards. In
                addition to toxic hazards, public health and safety concerns relate to the potential for
                fire and explosive hazards and transportation-related accidents.
                TOXIC AIR CONTAMINANT SOURCES
                As of April 1996, there were 38 inventoried sources of known Toxic Air Contaminants
                (TACs) in Benicia.They ranged from small dry cleaning operations to major refineries.
                The names and addresses of TAC sources in Benicia as well as a listing of the BAAQMD
                TAC inventory for sources within Benicia can be found in Table 8 and Appendix D of
                the Public Safety Background Report.
                HAZARDOUS BUILDING MATERIALS
                Some building materials commonly used in older buildings could present a public
                health risk if disturbed during an accident or during demolition of an existing build-
                ing.These materials include asbestos, electrical equipment such as transformers and
                fluorescent light ballasts that contain polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), fluorescent
                lights containing mercury vapors, and lead based paints. If they are in a deteriorated
                condition, asbestos and lead based paint present a health risk to building occupants. If
                removed during demolition, these materials require special disposal procedures.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                153

Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
              5. UTILITY HAZARDS
              Utility networks provide water, energy, and information.These networks are widely
              distributed geographically, so access to all components of a network in an emergency
              may be difficult.The sections below discuss the transmission networks in place within
              the Planning Area and evaluate expected performance in emergencies. Figure 4-5
              shows the location of these transmission lines and critical facilities in the Planning
              Area.
              ELECTRIC POWER
              Pacific Gas & Electric Company (PG&E) supplies electric power to the Planning Area.A
              230 kilovolt transmission line enters the Planning Area from the west, roughly parallel-
              ing Lake Herman Road, and terminates at the Bahia substation near East Second Street
              and Industrial Way.This substation provides power to most of Benicia.A 115 kilovolt
              transmission line roughly parallels the western edge of the Planning Area.A substation
              located near Glen Cove, outside the Planning Area, provides power to a portion of
              western Benicia.
              Failure of electrical power systems during or after an emergency may result from a
              temporary imbalance within the system or damage to its components.The systems
              have a high degree of redundancy, allowing for restoration of power before complete
              repairs are made.The most vulnerable component appears to be high voltage trans-
              mission substations. Steel lattice high voltage transmission towers generally perform
              well in response to ground shaking. However, tower failure may occur as a result of
              ground displacement of the tower foundations from earthquake-induced landsliding
              or liquefaction.Towers and lines could also be damaged in a fire.
              NATURAL GAS
              PG&E also supplies natural gas to the Planning Area.A major transmission pipeline
              traverses the northwestern corner of the Planning Area, with a pipeline branching off
              and paralleling Lake Herman Road, terminating in the vicinity of Industrial Way.
              Another pipeline enters the Planning Area from the west via I-780, continues along
              Military West Street to terminate at First Street, with short branches on K Street to
              West Thirteenth Street, and West Seventh Street to Southampton Road. Smaller diam-
              eter distribution lines run throughout the developed portion of the Planning Area.
              Disruption to natural gas service may result from severe ground shaking and perma-
              nent ground deformation in areas of unconsolidated sediments and fill.Although some
              damage to transmission lines may result from landslides or liquefaction, the majority of
              the damage is expected within the distribution system.Areas along the Bay margin,
              underlain by Bay mud, alluvium, and old fill, are particularly susceptible to damage.
154                                                                       City of Benicia General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            B. Hazards to the Community
 TRANSMISSION LINES
  LEGEND
                                                                                E l e c t r i c a l ( 1 1 5 k Va )
                                                                                Wa t e r - R aw
   R e s e r vo i r                                      Pump
                                                                                Wa t e r - D i s t r i b u t i o n M a i n
                                                                                S ewe r - G ra v i t y
             Lift Station
                                                                                S ewe r - Fo rc e M a i n
                                                                                E x x o n - Pe t ro l e u m                                                                                                                                                                                        Go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      o  dy
                                                                                H u n t way - R e f i n e r y                                                                                                                                                                                                               ear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S
                                                                                Te l e p h o n e - Tr u n k                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       u
                                                                                Te l e p h o n e -                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       gh
                                                                                Important City Services
                                                                                Planning Area Boundary
                                                                                City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ER   M A N RO A D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LAK                                                                                                                                                 y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Wa t e r                                                                                                                                                    Ba
                                                                                                                                                                                            RE
                                                                                                                                                                                             SE                   Tre a t m e n t
                                                                                                                                                                                        Lake     RV
                                                                                                                                                                                                  OI              Plant,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Suisun
                                                                                                                                                                                        Herman    R
                                                                                                                                                                                                      RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                           AD     R6/R6A                                                        T                                                WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EE
                                                                                                                                                                                        Pump                                                               dS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     INTERSTATE 680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             INDUSTRIAL
                                                                                                             Lake                                                                                                        IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DU
                                                                                                             Herman                                                                                                                 ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L
                                                                                                                                                                                         Rose                                                    WA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Y
                                                                                                                                                                                         Pump
                                                                                                                                                                                                                R a w Wa t e r
                                                                       I
                                                                      DR
                                                                           VE                                               R13/R13A                                                                            to Exxon
                                                                                                                                                           IVE
                                                                  SE                                                                                       DR
                                                                 RO                                                                                   A
                                                                                                                                                      AM                                                                                                                                                                BA
                                                                                                                                             N   OR                                                                                                                                                                       YS
            CO                                                                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                                                          PA                                                                                                                                                                                  HO
                 LU
                                                                                                                                                                 HE LSEA                                                                                                        PA RK
                      M                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RE
                          BU
                               S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ROA
                                   PA
                                      R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Huntway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RO AD
                                          KW                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                               AY                                                       VE
                                                                                                   DRI
                                                                                                                                                                H ILL S
                                                                                                                                                                                           P13 R8                                        P8                                                                                                                Refinery
                                                                                                GS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Pipeline
                                                                                             HA ST IN                                                             D RIV E                                                                                  HILLCREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E. 5th STREET
                                                                                                                               N
                                                                                                                      M   P TO       ROA D
                                                                                                             SOUTHA
                                                    B E N I C I A INTER                                                                                                                                                                                                                       R1
                                                                                                                                                                                   ET
                                                                        ST
                                                               S T A T E ATE 78
                                                                                                                                                                           h ST RE
                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                     W. 7t
                                                                      PA R K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ADAMS
                                                                                                                                    MIL ITA RY WE                                                                                                               MILITARY EAST
                                                                                                                                                  ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GRANT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Exxon
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Refinery
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1st STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       P e t ro l e u m
                                                                                                   Southampton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Lines
                                                                                                       Bay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Wa s t e
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Tre a t m e n t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Plant
                                                                                                             UINEZ                 STRA
                                                                                                        CARQ                            IT                                                                                                                                                                                            Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         U   NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      O                                    TY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               L   AN                             UN                                SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SO                            CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CON                                                                           800   0     800 1600
                                                         Figure 4-5. Transmission Lines and Critical Facilities
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       155
Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
              WATER SUPPLY
              The water treatment plant located near Lake Herman Road produces drinking water
              for areas within the City limits. Water is supplied to the treatment plant through the
              Cordelia Transmission Main that runs along I-680 from Cordelia to Lake Herman Road,
              and from there to the treatment plant.
              Disruption to the water supply may result from damage to pipelines, water treatment
              plants, storage tanks, reservoirs, or the distribution network. Damage to supply and
              distribution pipelines typically results from earthquake-related ground deformation
              such as landsliding, lurching, or liquefaction. Damage to storage tanks and reservoirs
              may result from severe ground shaking, resulting in deformation of the tank or con-
              nections, and possible loss of the contents. Damage to reservoirs may result from
              permanent ground deformation within or adjacent to the dam or shoreline.An ad-
              equate water supply needs to be available through normal means for firefighting.
              Water treatment plants have generally performed well in past disasters.
              WASTE WATER
              Damage to waste water collection and treatment systems may result from damage to
              the collection network and treatment facilities.The risks that face the waste water
              collection system also apply to the underground natural gas and potable water
              networks. In general, damage to pipes is related to the amount of permanent ground
              deformation.
              The Benicia Waste Water Treatment Plant is located within an area of alluvium near the
              waterfront, and ground shaking during a large, local earthquake may result in some
              damage.The collection network may suffer damage in areas subject to soft sediment
              deformation, such as parts of Downtown and along the waterfront, or areas subject to
              landsliding or fill settlement, such as in the hilly areas.
              6. AIR QUALITY/CONTAMINATION
              Air Quality in Benicia
              Benicia is within the Bay Area Air Quality Management District (BAAQMD).The District
              operates a network of monitoring sites throughout the Bay Area.The BAAQMD main-
              tains a site in Benicia to monitor sulfur dioxide. From 1990 to 1994, the Benicia
              monitoring site did not record any violations of the State or federal standards for sulfur
              dioxide.
              The closest multi-pollutant monitoring site is in Vallejo. From 1990 to 1994, the State
              and federal standards for carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, and sulfur dioxide were
              met every day at the Vallejo monitoring site.The federal standard for ozone was also
              met, although the more stringent State standard for ozone was exceeded from one to
              three days per year.
156                                                                        City of Benicia General Plan
                                                                          B. Hazards to the Community
                Because of the relatively strong winds and the movement of air between the Bay Area
                and the Central Valley through the Carquinez Strait, Benicia does not experience air
                pollution problems as severe as those found in other more confined parts of the Bay
                Area.
                Air quality forecasts are expected to continue to improve through 2000.The longest
                forecasts available, however, do not demonstrate attainment of all state and federal air
                quality standards.
                Standards
                Both the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and the California Air Resources
                Board have established ambient air quality standards for common pollutants.These
                ambient air quality standards establish levels of contaminants which represent safe
                levels that avoid specific adverse health effects associated with each pollutant.The
                federal and State ambient standards were developed independently with differing
                purposes and methods, although both processes attempt to avoid health-related
                effects. In general, the California state standards are more stringent.
                Another group of substances known as Toxic Air Contaminants (TACs), are injurious in
                small quantities and are regulated despite the absence of criteria documents. No safe
                ambient levels have been established for TACs.The identification, regulation and
                monitoring of TACs is relatively recent compared to that for criteria pollutants.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                         157
Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
              C. RESPONSES TO HAZARDS
              1. COMMUNITY RIGHT-TO-KNOW
              California first adopted its “Community Right-to-know” program in 1985 to oversee
              the handling of hazardous materials by local regulatory agencies; a succession of State
              statutes amended the program in 1986 and 1989. In 1986, Congress enacted the
              Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act, Title III: The Emergency Plan-
              ning and Community Right-to-Know Act (EPCRA).Together, these statutes establish
              requirements relating to emergency responses to hazardous materials releases or
              threatened releases, and to avoidance of accidents involving certain hazardous materi-
              als.The basic requirements of Community Right-to-know include:
              • Immediate reporting of releases of hazardous materials.
              • Submission and update of a Hazardous Materials Business Plan and inventory as
                 required by the local administering agency.
              • Notification to the local administering agency of the handling of specified quantities
                 of hazardous material and submission of a Risk Management Prevention Program on
                 request.
              • Annual submission by manufacturing facilities of a Toxic Chemical Release Report
                 (Form R) if threshold amounts of certain toxic chemicals are made, processed, or
                 used.
              • Requirements for hazardous materials storage imposed by local administering
                 agencies and Cal-OSHA standards.
              2. EMERGENCY RESPONSE PLANS AND PROCEDURES
              Recent disasters in California have tested communities’ emergency preparedness.The
              1989 Loma Prieta Earthquake, the 1991 Oakland Hills Fire, the 1993 chemical release
              at a Richmond refinery, and the 1994 Northridge earthquake all demonstrated the
              need for preparedness in government operations, transportation and evacuation
              routes, utility lifelines, and emergency alert and notification.
              EMERGENCY OPERATIONS PLAN
              The City of Benicia maintains an Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) adopted by the
              City Council in 1989. It is a “multi-hazard” plan that identifies procedures for various
              types of emergencies. It is intended to ensure that City government can continue to
              function in the event of a disaster. The EOP provides guidance for the community’s
              response to extraordinary situations and disasters. It provides an overview of opera-
              tional concepts, identifies components of the City Emergency Management Organiza-
              tion, and describes the overall responsibilities of federal, State, County and City offi-
              cials in an emergency.The plan is periodically updated, and drills evaluating the
              effectiveness of the plan are conducted from time to time.The EOP designates the City
158                                                                        City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                C. Responses to Hazards
                Manager as the Director of Emergency Services, responsible for overall emergency
                management in the City.The Fire Chief is designated as the Assistant Director of
                Emergency Services, responsible for maintaining the Plan and for the operation of the
                City Emergency Operations Center (EOC).
                EVACUATION ROUTES
                In an emergency, the major arterials identified in Chapter 2C, Circulation, would serve
                as the principal routes for evacuating people to undeveloped areas north of the City.
                These arterials would also serve as the principal routes for moving emergency equip-
                ment and supplies. Of particular importance are those routes which parallel I-780 in
                the event the freeway overpasses collapse or are blocked. Evacuation routes relating
                to site-specific plans are contained in Appendix H of the EOP.
                3. PUBLIC SAFETY SERVICES
                CRIME
                Benicia has a relatively low crime rate. Benicia’s crime rate appears to have generally
                held steady since the mid-1980s, although there have been annual fluctuations.
                POLICE SERVICES
                The City of Benicia Police Department provides police services to City residents. In
                addition to its responsibilities within the City Limits, the Department provides first
                response service to areas within the City’s Sphere of Influence.The Department
                shares responsibility for policing the Benicia Industrial Park with private guards
                employed by individual industries in the park.The Department operates out of a
                single station in the civic complex.
                FIRE SERVICES
                City Fire Protection Standards
                Each fire jurisdiction has independent authority to adopt and administer its own fire
                code (Health & Safety Code §13869). Most do so by adopting all or portions of the
                Uniform Fire Code (UFC), with additions or deletions appropriate to the jurisdiction.
                The City’s Fire Department has adopted the standards defined in the latest edition of
                the California Uniform Fire Code, with a few local amendments to these standards.
                Fire Department Services
                The Benicia Fire Department provides fire suppression, fire prevention, basic and
                advanced life support (ALS) medical services, technical rescue services, disaster pre-
                paredness, and weed abatement services for all areas within the City Limits and some
                nearby areas outside the city.The Department has two fire stations, with a total of two
                engines and one rescue squad staffed 24 hours per day. Future growth may require
                additional fire stations.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                          159

Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
              The City maintains mutual aid agreements with several agencies.An interagency
              agreement encompasses mutual responses with all other fire departments in Solano
              County.The City also has a contract with the State Office of Emergency Services (OES);
              the City has agreed to staff a State-owned engine at Station Two in exchange for an OES
              commitment to respond as needed. In addition to these contracts, the City has specific
              agreements for special hazards with the Cordelia Fire Protection District, the Contra
              Costa Fire Protection District for emergency responses on the Benicia - Martinez
              Bridge, and the Napa County Hazardous Materials Team.
              In addition to fire protection services, the Fire Department responds to certain
              emergency incidents such as rail accidents, spills of hazardous materials, or similar
              accidents.The Benicia Fire Department and Exxon have joint responsibility for fire
              protection at the Exxon refinery. Primary fire protection at the refinery is provided by
              the refinery fire brigade, which is composed of firefighters and trained Emergency
              Medical Technicians (EMTs).All technicians and operating team supervisors at the
              refinery are trained in industrial fire fighting.
              In order to ensure an effective response to hazardous materials incidents, industrial
              businesses using hazardous materials are required to prepare a business plan which
              identifies hazardous materials used in the operation of the business and the means for
              addressing potentially hazardous situations. In addition to detailed descriptions of
              materials used on a business site, the business plan must contain a description of how
              and where the hazardous materials are handled, sufficient for fire, safety, health and
              other appropriate agencies to prepare for emergency response (Health & Safety Code
              §25501[e]).These plans are discussed in Chapter 5 of the Public Safety Background
              Report.
              4. MEDICAL SERVICES
              There are no hospitals located in the city. Residents most commonly use Sutter Solano
              Medical Center and Kaiser Permanente, both in Vallejo. Nearby hospitals include
              Kaiser-Martinez, Mt. Diablo Hospital, and Contra Costa Regional Medical Center in
              Contra Costa County. Benicia does have a number of medical offices and clinics within
              the City limits.
              5. COMMUNITY HAZARDS GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
              GOAL 4.7:               Ensure that existing and future neighborhoods
                                      are safe from risks to public health that could
                                      result from exposure to hazardous materials.
              POLICY 4.7.1:           Actively recruit industries and businesses that sustain environ-
                                      mental quality and have sound, responsible environmental
                                      practices and policies, such as “best available control technol-
160                                                                       City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                  C. Responses to Hazards
                                        ogy” (BACT), source reduction, reduced use of hazardous materi-
                                        als in production, and reduced waste.
                POLICY 4.7.2:           Establish a “Community Right-to-know” program to promote
                                        general public understanding of Benicia’s toxics problems as
                                        they affect current and future generations.
                The Federal Environmental Protection Agency, under the Emergency Planning Com-
                munity Right to Know Act (EPCRA) and the Superfund Amendments Reauthorization
                Act (SARA) Title 3, 1986, mandated the right of the public to information which would
                affect emergency response and preparedness for “credible worst case scenarios” from
                potential industrial hazards. (Superfund Amendments Reauthorization Act,Title 3: The
                Emergency Planning and Community Right-to-Know Act, enacted by Congress in
                1986).
                Program 4.7.A:          Using documents that are already publicly available, make
                                        available in the Library a list of all known contaminated sites in
                                        Benicia, their chemical contents and conditions, and how
                                        contamination occurred.
                Program 4.7.B:          Provide readers with easy directions on how to access informa-
                                        tion about contaminated sites in Benicia.
                Program 4.7.C:          Consider establishing an ad hoc environmental task force to
                                        collect and disseminate information on environmentally
                                        sensitive sites in Benicia.
                The task force would help to gather information on community toxic problems to
                inform and safeguard public health and safety.
                Program 4.7.D:          Identify, inventory, and then update sources of hazards in
                                        Benicia.
                Program 4.7.E:          Assess and evaluate Benicia’s preparedness to respond to
                                        hazard emergencies.
                This program should be a part of the “Community Right-to-know” program and
                conform with the Emergency Planning Community Right-to-know Act (EPCRA).
                POLICY 4.7.3:           Protect existing and future development from contaminated
                                        sites, hazardous landfill waste and debris, chemical spills, and
                                        other hazards including unexploded ordnance and explosive
                                        waste.
                Information on unexploded ordnance on Arsenal properties can be found in the Army
                Archives Search Report for the Benicia Arsenal and other federal documents.
                Program 4.7.F:          Work with state and federal agencies to require that unautho-
                                        rized hazardous substances be removed from neighborhoods
                                        or that other appropriate measures are taken to ensure that
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                           161

Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
                                 such substances do not present health risks to the neighbor-
                                 hood.
              POLICY 4.7.4:      Promote enforcement of regulatory requirements over the
                                 entire term of monitoring of identified hazardous sites within
                                 the City Limits, especially sites located in residential neighbor-
                                 hoods and near school playing fields and parks.
              POLICY 4.7.5:      Require that all sites known or suspected to have unexploded
                                 ordnance and/or a toxic history be tested and remediated
                                 before any development can occur.
              POLICY 4.7.6:      Prohibit residential development on any land formerly operated
                                 as landfill or dump, including land formerly owned or used by
                                 the military for military wastes, until the waste and contamina-
                                 tion is removed with proper agency oversight, or remediated as
                                 required by the appropriate regulatory agencies.
              POLICY 4.7.7       Where environmental testing has been required by State
                                 regulatory agencies but is not yet completed withhold City
                                 approvals for site grading and other construction activities until
                                 a site evaluation is available that provides a reasonable basis for
                                 determining that it is safe to commence such activities.
              GOAL 4.8:          Protect sensitive receptors from hazards.
              Program 4.8.A:     Identify sensitive receptors in the community and develop
                                 methods of protection.
              Program 4.8.B:     Establish guidelines to separate sensitive receptors from those
                                 who carry, use, process, store or generate hazardous material,
                                 including ordnance.
              POLICY 4.8.1:      Evaluate potential hazards and environmental risks to sensitive
                                 receptors before approving development.
              GOAL 4.9:          Ensure clean air for Benicia residents.
              POLICY 4.9.1:      Establish whether a significant air pollution problem exists in
                                 Benicia and the City’s role in resolving it.
              Program 4.9.A:     Prepare a review of existing air quality information and data
                                 sources, the quality and extent of this data, and existing regula-
                                 tory requirements.
              Program 4.9.B:     Consult with the staff of the BAAQMD and prepare recommenda-
                                 tions for actions that the City will take to reduce identified air
                                 quality problems toward meeting ambient air quality standards.
162                                                                   City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                C. Responses to Hazards
                GOAL 4.10:              Support improved regional air quality.
                POLICY 4.10.1:          Support implementation of Bay Area Clean Air Plan.
                The Bay Area Clean Air Plan provides a strategy for attaining all the air quality stan-
                dards in the nine-county Bay Area Air Quality Management District. Benicia would
                demonstrate consistency with the Bay Area Clean Air Plan by implementing Transpor-
                tation Control Measures (TCMs) including expanding employer assistance programs,
                improving bicycle access and facilities, improving arterial traffic management, estab-
                lishing transit use incentives, and adopting a local clean air plan, policies, and pro-
                grams.
                Program 4.10.A:         Coordinate air quality planning efforts with other local, re-
                                        gional, and State agencies.
                Program 4.10.B:         Require that projects with identified significant air quality
                                        impacts include all feasible mitigation measures needed to
                                        reduce impacts to less than significant levels.
                POLICY 4.10.2:          Encourage designs and land use strategies that reduce automo-
                                        bile use and promote mixed use, jobs/housing balance,
                                        telecommuting, bicycle, and pedestrian facilities, and transit.
                GOAL 4.11:              Minimize harm from geologic hazards.
                Program 4.11.A:         Require geotechnical engineering reports to address site
                                        stability and building foundation integrity for projects involving
                                        substantial grading.
                Program 4.11.B:         Develop guidelines for site-specific geologic and geotechnical
                                        reports.
                Program 4.11.C:         Require peer review of geotechnical engineering reports if it is
                                        determined that City staff does not have the technical expertise
                                        to review such reports.
                Program 4.11.D:         Prepare a planning-level geologic hazards map of the Planning
                                        Area as needed.
                Program 4.11.E:         Update the geologic hazards map as new information becomes
                                        available.
                Program 4.11.F:         Develop a Planning Area data base of geologic information for
                                        use when making planning decisions and as a resource for the
                                        community.
                Program 4.11.G:         Continue and expand the Unreinforced Masonry building
                                        program (URM).
                Program 4.11.H:         Consider financial assistance for retrofitting of unreinforced
                                        masonry buildings.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                            163
Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
              POLICY 4.11.1:       Promote public awareness of earthquake-related hazards and
                                   safety that includes training the populace to provide stop-gap
                                   emergency services following earthquakes.
              Program 4.11.I:      Consider implementing a citizen earthquake response system
                                   based on the San Francisco model.
              The San Francisco model involves hands-on training and practice by all citizens on
              how to respond during an earthquake. Funding may come from private contributions.
              GOAL 4.12:           Accommodate runoff from existing and future
                                   development.
              Flooding problems exist along Sulphur Springs Creek in the Industrial Park. Future
              upstream development in the Paddy Creek watershed could exacerbate existing
              flooding.There are many localized flooding problems within the City south of I-780.A
              new citywide storm drain master plan is needed, and funding will have to be identi-
              fied before improvements can be implemented.
              POLICY 4.12.1:       Regulate runoff from new development so that post-develop-
                                   ment site peak flow rates are no greater than pre-development
                                   levels.
              POLICY 4.12.2:       Upgrade existing drainage facilities as necessary to correct
                                   localized drainage problems.
              POLICY 4.12.3:       Ensure that new development pays its fair share cost of drain-
                                   age system improvements.
              Program 4.12.A:      Prepare a new citywide storm drain master plan.
              Program 4.12.B:      Adopt a combination of drainage improvement fees and other
                                   mechanisms to fund drainage improvements.
              Program 4.12.C:      Accelerate implementation of the existing Storm Drain Master
                                   Plan.
              POLICY 4.12.4:       Where practicable, discourage the use of storm drain systems,
                                   and promote stormwater management strategies which maxi-
                                   mize opportunities for absorption of rainfall, overland convey-
                                   ance of runoff, non-reservoir surface storage, and other mea-
                                   sures that reduce development-induced impacts on peak flow
                                   rates.
              GOAL 4.13:           Prevent property damage caused by flooding.
              POLICY 4.13.1:       Continue to implement the floodplain management policy
                                   currently followed by the City.
              Program 4.13.A:      Require all potential developers in the Sulphur Springs Creek
164                                                                    City of Benicia General Plan
                                                                        C. Responses to Hazards
                                floodplain to provide flood hazard mitigation measures that
                                ensure the subject properties are not at risk of flooding during
                                the FEMA-designated 100-year base flood.
                POLICY 4.13.2:  Promote non-structural solutions to flood problems, where
                                feasible.
                Program 4.13.B: Where appropriate, promote the use of stormwater retention
                                basins rather than standard engineering modifications to
                                natural channels.
                Program 4.13.C: Encourage use of meandering drainage channels in all new
                                developments and wherever channels are replaced.
                GOAL 4.14:      Prevent ground and surface water contamination.
                Program 4.14.A: Inform businesses and the public of current technology and
                                standards for preventing ground and surface water contamina-
                                tion, and regulations governing hazardous material use, storage,
                                and disposal, plus agency reporting requirements.
                Program 4.14.B: Continue to communicate with State, regional, and local
                                agencies and legislatures to relay information on Benicia’s
                                current and potential water quality contamination concerns,
                                particularly regarding hazardous waste sites, existing and closed
                                landfills, new and existing waste-generating industries and
                                commercial operations, and City waste disposal and water/
                                sewage treatment facilities.
                POLICY 4.14.1:  Implement non-point source pollution strategies.
                Program 4.14.C: Provide information to the public on provisions of the City’s
                                Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) program and
                                preparation of SWPPPs for all construction projects of five acres
                                or more. Implement Best Management Practices (BMPs) for
                                stormwater runoff and erosion controls for all development.
                Program 4.14.D: Conduct an outreach program to industry and residents on
                                how to reduce storm water-related pollution.
                GOAL 4.15:      Reduce fire hazards.
                POLICY 4.15.1:  Promote the creation and maintenance of natural and artifi-
                                cially constructed firebreaks between development and open
                                space areas through the use of fire resistive landscaping, weed
                                abatement, discing, and other methods.
                Program 4.15.A: Develop a Fire Hazards Response Plan for the urban wild land
                                interface area.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                  165

Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
              Program 4.15.B:    Conduct a fire-hazard outreach program to neighborhood
                                 groups, the elderly, and the handicapped.
              Program 4.15.C:    Continue and expand routine fire inspections for businesses for
                                 compliance with the Uniform Fire Code and the California Fire
                                 Code.
              Program 4.15.D:    Continue the yearly weed abatement program.
              POLICY 4.15.2:     Promote the use of fire-resistant landscaping in public and
                                 private developments.
              GOAL 4.16:         Require hazardous materials and hazardous waste
                                 management handling and disposal procedures
                                 that are protective of human health and the envi-
                                 ronment.
              POLICY 4.16.1:     Support the Solano County Hazardous Waste Management Plan
                                 and its goals, policies, and implementation guidelines for
                                 hazardous waste reduction, hazardous waste facility siting,
                                 hazardous waste handling and disposal, public education and
                                 involvement, and program coordination with regulatory
                                 requirements.
              Program 4.16.A:    As part of the permitting process, ensure that the County
                                 reviews the design and operating plans for handling and
                                 disposal of hazardous wastes for existing and proposed new
                                 businesses.
              Program 4.16.B:    Contact the Solano County Environmental Management
                                 Department annually to confirm that hazardous waste genera-
                                 tors in Benicia have been granted permits for handling hazard-
                                 ous substances in compliance with federal and State laws, that
                                 they dispose of their wastes in accordance with applicable
                                 laws, and that they have filed Hazardous Materials Management
                                 Plans and Risk Management and Prevention Plans.
              Program 4.16.C:    Continue reviewing monitoring records for new and existing
                                 hazardous waste storage areas for compliance with federal and
                                 State law.
              POLICY 4.16.2:     Continue, promote, and expand the City’s Household Hazard-
                                 ous Waste Program.
              Program 4.16.D:    Promote use of Benicia’s and Pacheco’s “drop-off” facilities.
              POLICY 4.16.3:     Control water runoff that comes from hazardous substance
                                 handling or that enters hazardous substance handling areas.
166                                                                  City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                         C. Responses to Hazards
                Program 4.16.E: Investigate the potential for the collection and testing of
                                industrial area surface runoff prior to discharge to prevent
                                discharge of hazardous substances into the environment.
                GOAL 4.17:      Minimize hazardous waste generation.
                POLICY 4.17.1:  Ensure enforcement of Title 22, §67100 of the California Code
                                of Regulations regarding preparation and implementation of
                                source reduction plans by hazardous waste generators.
                Program 4.17.A: Contact the Solano County Environmental Management
                                Department each September to confirm that new businesses
                                have filed their source reduction plans, if applicable.
                Program 4.17.B: Situate all new hazardous material storage and handling areas to
                                minimize the possibility of environmental contamination in the
                                event of an accidental spill.
                Program 4.17.C: Enclose areas where hazardous liquids are handled to minimize
                                any rain or moisture coming into contact with hazardous
                                substances.
                GOAL 4.18:      Ensure the proper and thorough clean-up of
                                hazardous waste sites including the Rose Drive/
                                Braito landfill area.
                POLICY 4.18.1:  Monitor and participate in the remedial planning process for
                                major hazardous waste sites within the City and monitor
                                implementation of any selected remedial actions to ensure that
                                human health and the environment are protected over the long
                                term.
                Program 4.18.A: Continue to work with the California Department of Toxic
                                Substances Control (DTSC) to expedite the proper and thorough
                                clean-up of waste in the Rose Drive area.
                GOAL 4.19:      Ensure the best possible closure of IT, consider-
                                ing the long-term health effects upon sensitive
                                receptors in the community.
                Program 4.19.A: For the IT site, continue to communicate Benicia’s position that
                                the only acceptable closure plan is a groundwater-divide-based
                                alternative (i.e., a closure plan based on removing waste and
                                contamination that lie outside the main site drainage).
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                 167

Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
              GOAL 4.20:         Reduce health and safety hazards associated with
                                 hazardous materials users, hazardous waste gen-
                                 erators, and hazardous waste disposal sites and
                                 toxic air contaminants.
              POLICY 4.20.1:     Establish buffer zones between sensitive land uses and those
                                 land uses which involve the significant use, storage, or disposal
                                 of hazardous materials, hazardous waste, or toxic air contami-
                                 nants.
              Program 4.20.A:    Maintain and designate land along East Second Street for non-
                                 residential purposes.
              Program 4.20.B:    Follow siting criteria for Treatment, Storage, and Disposal (TSD)
                                 facilities contained in the Solano County Hazardous Waste
                                 Management Plan. (22 California Code of Regulations (CCR)
                                 §66260-18; State Health and Safety Code §25201.)
              Program 4.20.C:    Evaluate the potential for requiring risk assessment for any new
                                 TSD facility, and if indicated by the risk assessment, require a
                                 larger buffer zone that will be protective of human health.
              Program 4.20.D:    Review building applications for any proposed TSD facilities to
                                 ensure that the requirements of the Solano County Hazardous
                                 Waste Management Plan are met.
              Program 4.20.E:    Coordinate with Solano County Environmental Management
                                 Department to ensure enforcement of community Right-to
                                 know laws (Chapter 6.95 of the Health and Safety Code,
                                 §25500, et seq.).
              Program 4.20.F:    Enforce the Hazardous Waste Property and Border Zone
                                 Property Law (Health and Safety Code,Article 11, §25520
                                 through §25241).
              GOAL 4.21:         Reduce significant hazards associated with pipe-
                                 lines, and high voltage transmission lines.
              Program 4.21.A:    Continue to implement existing adopted policies governing
                                 development near pipelines.
              Program 4.21.B:    Set back all residential uses, schools, and public buildings at
                                 least 150 feet from the edge of 230 kilovolt electric transmis-
                                 sion line easements.
              GOAL 4.22:         Update and maintain the City’s Emergency Re-
                                 sponse Plan.
168                                                                    City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                       C. Responses to Hazards
                POLICY 4.22.1:  Provide an early community alert and notification system and
                                safe evacuation plan for emergency incidents.
                Program 4.22.A: Provide the public with information and training on what to do
                                until help arrives in emergency situations.
                Program 4.22.B: Develop a siren system to alert and notify the community in an
                                emergency.
                Program 4.22.C: Request voluntary donations from identified sources of hazards
                                to implement the Emergency Response Plan.
                Program 4.22.D: Consider a City radio station to inform residents in the event of
                                an emergency.
                POLICY 4.22.2:  Develop at least two exit routes, where feasible, for new
                                developments. One of the exits could be a pedestrian route.
                POLICY 4.22.3:  Provide the public with information on specified emergency
                                evacuation routes.
                Program 4.22.E: Provide an evacuation route from the Arsenal in addition to
                                Military East.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                 169
Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
              D. NOISE
              The principal noise generator in Benicia is vehicular traffic. People are most sensitive
              to noise levels which disturb their comfort at home.
              The Noise section describes the existing and projected future noise environments in
              Benicia so that harmful and annoying sound levels can be avoided or minimized.
              Major noise sources are identified, estimated noise levels throughout the community
              are reported, the effects of noise on the community are discussed, and ways to mini-
              mize unwanted noise are outlined.
              1. HUMAN REACTION TO NOISE
              Three qualities characterize the subjective effect of noise on the listener: (1) the
              frequency of the noise, (2) the intensity of the noise, and (3) the time-varying charac-
              ter of the noise.
              Researchers have grappled with how to translate objective measurements of sound
              into directly correlated measures of public reaction to noise.The descriptors of
              community noise in current use are the results of these efforts and represent simpli-
              fied, practical measurement tools to gauge community response.
              Table 4-1 shows the decibel levels of common noises.
              Table 4-1. Decibel Levels of Common Noises
              20       Soft whisper
              40       Quiet office, living room, bedroom—away from traffic.
              50       Light traffic at a distance, refrigerator, gentle breeze.
              60       Average conversation, air conditioner at 20 feet, sewing machine.
              65       Quiet typewriter.
              70       Busy traffic, office tabulator, noisy restaurant.
                       (This level may begin to affect hearing if one is constantly exposed.)
              75       Vacuum cleaner.
              80       Subway, heavy city traffic, ringing alarm clock at two feet, average factory noise.
                       (Dangerous if exposure continues for more than eight hours.)
              85       Truck traffic, noisy home appliances (washing machine, blender, food processor),
                       power lawn mower. (Dangerous, even if exposure is less than eight hours.)
              95       Noisy factory, shop tools.
              100      Elevated train, chain saw, pneumatic drill.
                       (Dangerous, even if exposure is less than two hours.)
              120      Rock concert in front of speakers, sandblasting, thunderclap.
                       (Danger is immediate.)
              140      Jet airplane at 200 feet, gunshot blast.
                       (Any length of exposure is extremely dangerous.)
170                                                                            City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                                  D. Noise
                The known effects of noise on people include hearing loss (not generally a factor with
                community noise), communication interference, sleep interference, physiological
                responses, and annoyance.Although the wide range of individual reactions to noise
                makes it extremely difficult to measure how noise affects individual health, medical
                studies suggest a correlation between noise and mental stress.
                A decibel is a unit of measurement which indicates the relative amplitude of a sound.
                The zero on the decibel scale is based on the lowest sound level that the healthy,
                unimpaired human ear can detect. Sound levels in decibels are calculated on a
                logarithmic basis. An increase of 10 decibels represents a ten-fold increase in acoustic
                energy, while 20 decibels is 100 times more intense, 30 decibels is 1,000 times more
                intense, etc. There is a relationship between the subjective noisiness or loudness of a
                sound and its intensity. Each 10 decibel increase in sound level is perceived as ap-
                proximately a doubling of loudness over a fairly wide range of intensities.
                COMMUNICATION INTERFERENCE
                Communication interference is one of the primary environmental noise problems,
                and includes speech interference and interference of activities such as watching
                television. Normal conversational speech is in the range of 60 to 65 dB, and any noise
                in this range or louder may interfere with speech.
                SLEEP INTERFERENCE
                Sleep interference is a major noise concern. Noise can make it difficult to fall asleep,
                can create momentary disturbances of natural sleep patterns by causing shifts from
                deep to lighter stages, and can cause awakening.
                Extensive research has been conducted on the effect of noise on sleep disturbance.
                Recommended values for desired sound levels in residential bedroom space range from
                25 to 45 dB with 35 to 40 dB being the norm.The National Association of Noise Control
                Officials published data on the probability of sleep disturbance with various single event
                noise levels. Based on experimental sleep data related to noise exposure, a 75 dB interior
                noise level event will cause noise-induced awakening in 30 percent of all cases.
                PHYSIOLOGICAL RESPONSES
                Physiological responses are those measurable effects of noise on people which are
                realized as changes in pulse rate, blood pressure, etc. While such effects can be in-
                duced and observed, it is not known to what extent these physiological responses
                cause harm. Generally, physiological responses are a reaction to a loud, short-term
                noise such as a rifle shot or a very loud jet overflight.
                ANNOYANCE
                Annoyance is the most difficult of all noise responses to describe.Annoyance is a very
                individual characteristic and can vary widely from person to person.What one person
                considers tolerable can be quite unbearable to another.The level of annoyance
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                          171
Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
              depends on the characteristics of the noise (i.e., loudness, frequency, time, and dura-
              tion), and how much activity interference (e.g., speech interference and sleep interfer-
              ence) results from the noise. However, the level of annoyance is also a function of the
              attitude of the receiver. Personal sensitivity to noise varies widely. It has been esti-
              mated that 2 to 10 percent of the population is highly susceptible to noise not of their
              own making, while approximately 20 percent are unaffected by noise.Attitudes are
              affected by the relationship between the person and the noise source. (Is it our dog or
              the neighbor’s?) Whether we believe that someone is trying to abate the noise will
              also affect our level of annoyance.
              The following conclusions have been established through extensive study:
              1. Except in carefully controlled laboratory experiments, an increase of only one
                   dBA cannot be perceived by humans.
              2. Outside of the laboratory, a three dBA increase is considered to be just noticeable.
              3. A change of five dBA is required before any noticeable change in community
                   reaction would be expected.
              4. A 10 dBA increase is subjectively heard as a doubling of loudness and would most
                   certainly cause community response.
              2. NOISE IN THE COMMUNITY
              EXISTING NOISE LEVELS
              Once noise levels are computed or measured, they can be mapped. Noise levels are
              mapped as contours. Each contour line indicates an area on the inside of the line
              which has a higher noise level than the contour’s value; the area on the outside of the
              line has a lower noise level than the contour’s value. Because local topography, vegeta-
              tion, or intervening structures may significantly affect noise exposure at a particular
              location, the noise contours should not be considered site-specific. Figure 4-6 shows
              existing noise contours in Benicia.
              These noise contours were formulated based on a community noise survey con-
              ducted in October and November 1995.The results indicated that typical exterior
              noise levels in noise sensitive areas (i.e., nursing homes, churches, theaters, residential
              uses, parks, libraries, and schools) are in the range of 51 dB to 63 dB Ldn.Traffic on local
              roadways and I-680 and I-780, industrial activities, and neighborhood activities are the
              contributing factors for background noise levels in the majority of the study area.
              Table 4-2 is a summary of the survey.
              PROJECTED NOISE LEVELS
              Traffic on I-680 and I-780 is expected to increase through the year 2015.The hourly
              traffic flow and mix of trucks and private automobiles during a typical 24-hour period
              is not expected to change. No major increase in railroad operation is expected to
              occur in the near future. Figure 4-7 indicates future noise contours.
172                                                                        City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            D. Noise
  EXISTING NOISE EXPOSURE CONTOURS
    LEGEND
    Planning Area Boundary
    City Limits
                                           60 dB Ldn contours
                                           (For roadways which have no contours
                                           shown, 60 dB is within roadway R.O.W.)
                                           SP Railroad 60 dB Ldn contours
                                           Residential Areas
     ✶           Sensitive Receptors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    G
     1           Matthew Turner Elementary School                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       o
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            o
     2           Joe Henderson Elementary School                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                dy
     3           Benicia Middle School                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ea
     4           Benicia High School
     5           Mary Farmer Elementary School                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Slo
     6           Robert Semple Elementary School                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ug
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        h
     7           Benicia Senior Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 INTERSTATE 680
     8           Mills Elementary School
     9           Liberty High School
     10          St. Dominic's School
     11          Casa de Vilarrasa                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ER       MAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LA K
                                                                                                                                                                                                    RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                      SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                         RV
                                                                                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                                                                                              IR
                                                                                                                                                Lake                                                               RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AD                                                                         T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EE
                                                                                                                                                Herman
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        INDUSTRIAL WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          dS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AL
                                                                             IVE
                                                                                                                                 ✶       1                                                                                                                                    W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A          Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     y
                                                                        DR
                                                                   SE
                                                               O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Suisun
                                                           R
       CO
            LU
                                                                                                                  ✶2                                     M
                                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                  VE
                                                                                                                                                                 DR
                                                                                                                                                                      I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    YS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HO
                                                                                                                                                    RA
                                                                                                                                                                          C
                 M                                                                                                                                                                                                          dS
                                                                                                                                                                            H E LSE
                     BU                                                                                                                         O
                          S                                                                                                              PA N                                                                                        TR                                                                                             RE
                              PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EE
                                 R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RO
                                                                                                             VE
                                                                                                                                                                          A HI LLS
                                     KW                                                                                                                                                                                                   T
                                          AY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AD
                                                                                                         I
                                                                                                     S DR
                                                                                                   ING                                                                                                                                                                                                     R
                                                                                                                                                                             D RI VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PA
                                                                                                  HAST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     HILLCREST                              K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E. 5th STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AD
                                                                                                                  SOUTH
                                                                                                                          A   MP
                                                                                                                                 TO N   RO A D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ✶6                                                              RO
                                                                                                                           ✶3
                                                                        INT
                                                                            E   RS
                                                                                   TAT
                                                                                                                                                                                 th STR
                                                                                       E
                                                                                           78
                                               BENICIA                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                            W. 7
                                                 S TAT E
                                                                                                                          ✶4 ✶5                                                      EET   MILITARY WEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MILITARY E.                                        GRANT ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ADAMS ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ✶7 ✶✶
                                                      PA R K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8 11
                                                                                                    Southampton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1st STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ✶✶                       10
                                                                                                        Bay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TY        TY
                                                                                                          UINEZ                         STRA                                                                                                                                                                                        UN                        UN
                                                                                                     CARQ                                    IT                                                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L      AN                       T       A                                              SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SO                              OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CO                                                                                   800      0        800 1600
                                                  Figure 4-6. Existing Noise Contours
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             173

Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
                    Table 4-2. Summary of Measured Exterior Noise Levels and Estimated
                    Day-Night Average Levels (Ldn) in Areas Containing Noise-Sensitive Land Uses
  Site     Location                           Time/Period                     Sound Level, dB
                                                                  Leq       L50       L90    Lmax     Estimated Ldn
  1*       329 Columbia Circle                     —             —         —         —        —            54.2
  2*       507 Bristol Court                       —             —         —         —        —            54.0
  3*       803 Elaine                              —             —         —         —        —            50.8
  4*       1781 Lindo Street                       —             —         —         —        —            63.2
  5        Corner of Reservoir Road                Ld(1)        51.5       39        32      66.0
           and Lake Herman Road                    Ld(2)        55.5       48        37      70.5          53.1
                                                   Ln           41.0       35        30      60.0
  6        Benicia Community Park                  Ld(1)        46.0       45        40      57.0
                                                   Ld(2)        46.0       44        40      62.5          52.0
                                                   Ln           45.5       37        32      60.0
  7        Southampton Park                        Ld(1)        56.5       53        46      72.0
                                                   Ld(2)        53.5       47        39      68.5          56.0
                                                   Ln           47.0       40        36      59.0
  8        Turnbull Park                           Ld(1)        48.5       45        43      63.0
                                                   Ld(2)        53.5       48        44      70.5          52.2
                                                   Ln           43.0       39        37      57.5
  9        City Park                               Ld(1)        57.0       57        55      64.9
           (Second St. & West K Street)            Ld(2)        57.6       56        53      67.2          60.7
                                                   Ln           53.5       51        48      65.0
  10       Bridgeview Park                         Ld(1)        51.9       45        41      67.8
                                                   Ld(2)        49.8       45        43      60.7          51.6
                                                   Ln           42.8       40        38      58.0
  11       Benicia Middle School                   Ld(1)        54.5       54        52      61.6
           Athletic Fields/                        Ld(2)        53.1       53        50      58.2          58.0
           Bay View Villas                         Ln           51.0       49        47      56.0
  12       Matthew Turner                          Ld(1)        58.4       58        54      63.1
           Shipyard Park                           Ld(2)        53.1       51        48      63.1          56.8
                                                   Ln           47.3       45        42      58.0
* Continuous Monitoring Site
Ld =      Measured noise level during daytime hours (7:00 am - 10:00 pm)
Ln =      Measured noise level during nighttime hours (10:00 pm - 7:00 am)
Leq = The average noise level during a given time period
L50, 90 = The average noise level experienced 50 and 90 percent of a given time period
Lmax = The maximum sound level recorded during a noise event
Ldn = The average noise level during a 24-hour day after 10 decibels has been added to the levels between 10 pm and 7
          am.
174                                                                                     City of Benicia General Plan

  FUTURE NOISE EXPOSURE CONTOURS
    LEGEND
    Planning Area Boundary
    City Limits
                                           60 dB Ldn Roadway noise contours/
                                           Year 2010
                                           60 dB Ldn Railroad noise contours
                                           Residential Areas
     ✶               Sensitive Receptors
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Go
     1               Matthew Turner Elementary School                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           od
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ye
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ar
     2               Joe Henderson Elementary School
     3               Benicia Middle School
     4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ough
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sl
                     Benicia High School
     5               Mary Farmer Elementary School
     6               Robert Semple Elementary School
     7               Benicia Senior Center
     8               Mills Elementary School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   INTERSTATE 680
     9               Liberty High School
                                                                                                                                                                                     City
     10              St. Dominic's School                                                                                                                                                   Limit
                                                                                                                                                                                                 s
     11              Casa de Vilarrasa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ER       M AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                     RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                       SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                          RV
                                                                                                                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                                                                                                                               IR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RO
                                                                                                                                           Lake                                                                          AD                                                                          T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         INDUSTRIAL WAY
                                                                                                                                           Herman                                                                                                                           dS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AL
                                                                             IVE
                                                                                                                            ✶       1                                                                                                                                           W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     y
                                                                        DR
                                                                    E
                                                               OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Suisun
                                                           R
       CO
            LU
                                                                                                             ✶2                                     M
                                                                                                                                                        A
                                                                                                                                                             V
                                                                                                                                                            DR
                                                                                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                                                                                 I
                                                                                                                                                                      C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     E.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      YS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     H
                                                                                                                                               RA
                 M                                                                                                                                                                                                           dS
                                                                                                                                                                     H E L SEA
                     BU                                                                                                                    O                                                                                                                                                                                          RE
                          S                                                                                                         PA N                                                                                              TR                                                                                             O
                              PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EE
                                 R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RO
                                     KW                                                                 VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T
                                          AY                                                        I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              A      D
                                                                                                                                                                     H IL LS
                                                                                                S DR
                                                                                             IN G                                                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                                                                                        DR IV E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PA
                                                                                           H A ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HILLCREST                              K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                E. 5th STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AD
                                                                                                             SOUTH
                                                                                                                     A   MP
                                                                                                                            TO N   ROA D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ✶6                                                               RO
                                                                                                                      ✶3
                                                                        INT
                                                                           ER
                                                                             ST
                                                                               AT
                                                                                                                                                                            th STR
                                                                                 E
                                                                                     78
                                               BENICIA                                 0
                                                                                                                                                                       W. 7
                                                 S TAT E
                                                                                                                     ✶4 ✶5                                                        EET       MILITARY WEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MILITARY E.                                      GRANT ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ADAMS ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ✶7 ✶✶
                                                      PA R K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 8 11
                                                                                              Southampton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1st STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ✶✶                        10
                                                                                                  Bay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TY            TY
                                                                                                     UINEZ                         STRA                                                                                                                                                                                                  UN                        UN
                                                                                                CARQ                                    IT                                                                                                                                                                       O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L         AN                       T      A                                             SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SO                                 OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CO                                                                                800       0        800 1600
                                                  Figure 4-7. Future Noise Contours
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             175

Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
              3. PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR NOISE SENSITIVE USES
              TRANSPORTATION NOISE SOURCES
              Table 4-3 provides specific standards for determining the compatibility of proposed
              noise-sensitive land uses with transportation noise sources (refer to glossary for
              definition). Where noise-sensitive projects are proposed within areas which exceed
              the standards contained in Table 4-3, it is necessary to prepare a report that (a) per-
              forms an analysis of noise impacts, and (b) recommends mitigation measures to
              reduce noise levels on the site to comply with the standards in Table 4-3. This table is
              only to be used with proposed projects; the City’s noise ordinance governs noise
              associated with existing uses.
              Table 4-3. Maximum Allowable Noise Exposure for New Noise-Sensitive Uses
              From Transportation Noise Sources
              Land Use                                    Outdoor Activity Areas1                Interior Spaces
                                                                  Ldn/cnel, dB                Ldn/dB         Leq, dB2
              Residential                                              603                      45              —
              Transient Lodging                                        654                      45
              Hospitals, Nursing Homes                                 603                      45              —
              Theaters, Auditoriums, Music Halls                       —                        —               35
              Churches, Meeting Halls                                  603                      —               40
              Office Buildings, Commercial Uses,                       —                        —               45
              Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities5
              Schools, Libraries, Museums                              603                      —               45
              Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks                          65                       —               —
              1 Where the location of outdoor activity areas is unknown, or does not exist, the exterior noise level
                standard will be applied to the property line of the receiving land use. Refer to glossary for definition
                of outdoor activity area.
              2 As determined for a typical worst-case hour during periods of use.
              3 Where it is not possible to reduce noise in outdoor activity areas to 60 dB Ldn/CNEL or less using a
                practical application of the best-available noise reduction measures, an exterior noise level of up to 65
                dB Ldn/CNEL may be allowed provided that available exterior noise level reduction measures have been
                implemented and interior noise levels are in compliance with this table. If these noise levels cannot
                be complied with this will constitute a significant environmental impact.
              4 In the case of hotel/motel facilities or other transient lodging, with no proposed outdoor activity
                areas such as pool areas, only the interior noise level criterion will apply.
              5 Standards would only apply to areas requiring good speech intelligibility such as offices, conference
                rooms, etc.
176                                                                                   City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                                 D. Noise
                STATIONARY NOISE SOURCES
                Table 4-4 provides specific performance standards for determining the compatibility
                of proposed noise-sensitive land uses with stationary noise sources.The performance
                standards are for new noise-sensitive developments which may be affected by an
                existing stationary noise source.The performance standards also apply to new devel-
                opments that include a stationary noise source which may affect an existing noise-
                sensitive development.
                The intent of these performance standards is both to prevent new noise sources from
                encroaching on existing noise-sensitive developments and to prevent new noise-
                sensitive developments from encroaching on existing uses.
                Noise sources evaluated relative to the performance standards in Table 4-4 should be
                considered with respect to their standard daily or weekly operating conditions. Noise
                sources may produce unusual noise levels due to temporary equipment malfunction,
                or unusual atmospheric conditions. Noise levels associated with these infrequent
                conditions are exempt from the performance standards contained in Table 4-4. In
                addition, the performance standards are not to be applied to safety signals or warning
                devices. In the event an acoustical study is required of an applicant, refer to Appen-
                dix I: “Requirements for an Acoustical Analysis.”
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                         177

Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
                 Table 4-4. Noise Level Performance Standards for Noise-Sensitive Land Uses
                 Which May Be Affected by Stationary Noise Sources
Land Use                             Exterior Hourly Leq’ dB                          Interior Hourly Leq’ dB
                                 Daytime                 Nighttime                 Daytime                  Nighttime
                           7 a.m. to 10 p.m.          10 p.m. to 7 a.m.     7 a.m. to 10 p.m.          10 p.m. to 7 a.m
Residential                           55                     50                        40                        35
Transient Lodging                    55                      50                        40                        35
Hospitals                             —                      —                         40                        35
Nursing Homes                        55                      50                        40                        35
Theaters, Auditoriums                 —                      —                         35                        35
Churches                             55                      50                        40                        40
Schools                               55                     50                        45                        45
Libraries                            55                      50                        45                        45
                 Stationary noise sources include industrial operations, outdoor recreation facilities, HVAC units, loading
                 docks, etc.
                 The above standards may be adjusted upwards to allow for an increase in the existing ambient hourly
                 Leq caused by a proposed project. An increase of less than 3dB is permitted, even if the standards in
                 Table 4-4 are exceeded; an increase of 3dB or greater constitutes a significant environmental impact,
                 unless the increase does not cause the standards in Table 4-4 to be exceeded.
                 The noise level standards contained above shall be applied to a typical hour of operation. When a peak
                 hour of operation is expected to occur consistently during daily or weekly operations, the standards
                 shall also be applied to those operations.
                 Each of the noise standards specified above shall be lowered by five dB for tonal noises (humming, high-
                 pitched tones, speech music, or recurring impulsive noises).This lowering of the standard does not
                 apply to residential units established in conjunction with industrial or commercial caretaker dwellings.
                 (See Glossary for definition of tonal noise).
                 The City may choose to apply the noise level performance standards at designated outdoor activity
                 areas, in lieu of the property line.
                 The above standards do not apply to safety signals or warning devices.
                 For noise sources that occur on an infrequent basis and are considered to be safety equipment (such as
                 flaring or pressure relief valves), a maximum noise level of 75 dB is acceptable, as measured from the
                 receiver’s property line. Noise levels which are projected to exceed this maximum are considered a
                 significant environmental impact.
                 Where outdoor activity areas do not exist and/or are not expected to be affected, the City may choose
                 to only apply the interior noise level criteria. For example, in the case of single family residences which
                 do not have second story patios or outdoor activity areas, the City may choose to only apply an interior
                 noise level standard at the second story interior spaces.
178                                                                                      City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                            D. Noise
                4. COMMUNITY NOISE GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
                GOAL 4.23:      Reduce or eliminate the effects of excessive noise.
                POLICY 4.23.1:  Evaluate the compatibility of proposed projects with respect to
                                existing and future transportation noise levels by utilizing
                                Tables 4-3 and 4-4.
                Program 4.23.A: Investigate and implement techniques to reduce traffic noise.
                POLICY 4.23.2:  Use noise dampening building standards, site design, landscap-
                                ing, and setbacks instead of sound walls, wherever possible.
                POLICY 4.23.3:  Use available techniques such as building insulation, berms,
                                building design and orientation, buffer yards, and staggered
                                operating hours to minimize noise at the source.
                POLICY 4.23.4:  Control development of noise-sensitive land uses in areas
                                exposed to existing or projected noise which exceed the levels
                                specified in Tables 4-3 and 4-4 unless the project includes
                                specific, effective mitigation measures to reduce interior and
                                exterior noise levels to those specified in Tables 4-3 and 4-4.
                Program 4.23.B: Investigate conditioning construction of live/work units with a
                                requirement to record a “notice of special restrictions” which
                                would acknowledge the noisy nature of existing adjacent
                                industrial uses.
                POLICY 4.23.5:  Accommodate roadway improvement projects for build-out of
                                the General Plan by recognizing that existing noise-sensitive
                                uses may be exposed to increased noise levels from roadway
                                repairs, increased traffic, and increased travel speeds.When it is
                                not practical to reduce traffic noise levels to those in Table 4-4,
                                the following criteria will be used as a test of significance for
                                the environmental review of roadway improvement projects:
                                (a) Where existing noise levels are less than 60 dB Ldn at the
                                outdoor activity area of a noise-sensitive use, a 5 dB Ldn increase
                                in noise levels due to a roadway improvement project will be
                                considered significant;
                                (b) Where existing noise levels range between 60 and 65 dB
                                Ldn at the outdoor activity area of a noise-sensitive use, a 3 dB Ldn
                                increase in noise levels due to a roadway improvement project
                                will be considered significant; and
                                (c) Where existing noise levels are greater than 65 dB Ldn at the
                                outdoor activity area of a noise-sensitive use, a 1.5 dB Ldn
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                    179

Chapter 4. Community Health and Safety
                                 increase in noise levels due to a roadway improvement project
                                 will be considered significant.
              Program 4.23.C:    If needed, revise the City’s noise ordinance and consider incor-
                                 porating the noise level performance standards in Table 4-4.
              POLICY 4.23.6:     Attempt to reduce noise in areas already highly impacted by
                                 excessive noise.
              Program 4.23.D:    Identify sources of noise in the community (such as flight
                                 patterns, construction noise, traffic, railroads, industrial, and
                                 amplified sound). Develop measures to reduce excessive noise
                                 to acceptable levels.
180                                                                   City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                   Subhead
               GLOSSARY
               ABBREVIATIONS
               ABAG   Association of Bay Area          CEQA  California Environmental
                      Governments                            Quality Act
               ADA    Americans with Disabilities Act  CIP   Capital Improvements Program
               ADT    Average daily trips made by      CLG   Certified Local Government
                      vehicles or persons in a 24-hour
                                                       CMP   Congestion Management
                      period
                                                             Program
               AFDC   Aid for Families with
                                                       CNEL  Community Noise Equivalent
                      Dependent Children (federal
                                                             Level
                      program)
                                                       COG   Council of Governments
               BAAQMD Bay Area Air Quality
                      Management District              dB    Decibel
               BACT   Best available control           DEIR  Draft Environmental Impact
                      technology                             Report
               BART   Bay Area Rapid Transit           DRC   Design Review Commission
               BCDC   Bay Area Conservation and        DTSC  Department of Toxic
                      Development Commission                 Substances Control
               BIP    Benicia Industrial Park          EIR   Environmental Impact Report
                                                             (State)
               BMR    Below-market-rate dwelling unit
                                                       EOC   Emergency Operations Center
               BMP    Best Management Practices
                                                       EOP   Emergency Operations Plan
               BUSD   Benicia Unified School District
                                                       EPCRA Emergency Planning and
               CA     California
                                                             Community Right-to-Know Act
               CBD    Central Business District
                                                       FAR   Floor Area Ratio
               CCR    California Code of Regulations
                                                       FEMA  Federal Emergency
               CDBG   Community Development Block            Management Agency
                      Grant
City of Benicia General Plan                                                            181
Glossary
         GPOC     General Plan                   PG&E  Pacific Gas & Electric
                  Oversight Committee
                                                 PD    Planned Development
         GPPs     Goals, Policies, and Programs
                                                 R & D Research and Development
         HCD      Housing and Community
                                                 RMPP  Risk Management Prevention
                  Development Department of
                                                       Program
                  the State of California.
                                                 RWQCB Regional Water Quality Control
         HETF     Housing Element Task Force
                                                       Board
         HUD      U S Department of Housing and
                                                 §     Section
                  Urban Development
                                                 SMARA Surface Mining and Reclamation
         HHWP     Hazardous Household Waste
                                                       Act
                  Program
                                                 SOI   Sphere of Influence
         IGPs     Issues, Goals, and Policies
                                                 TAC   Toxic Air Contaminants
         I.O.O.F. International Order of Odd
                  Fellows                        TSD   Treatment, Storage, and
                                                       Disposal (facility)
         IT       International Technology
                  Corporation                    TSM   Transportation Systems
                                                       Management
         LAFCO    Local Agency Formation
                  Commission                     UBC   Uniform Building Code
         LOS      Level of Service               UFC   Uniform Fire Code
         MTC      Metropolitan Transportation    UGB   Urban Growth Boundary
                  Commission
                                                 UPRR  Union Pacific Railroad
         OES      Office of Emergency Services
                                                 URM   Unreinforced Masonry Building
         OSHA     Occupational Health and Safety
                                                 WWTP  Waste Water Treatment Plant
                  Administration
         PCB      Polychlorinated Biphenyl
182                                                       City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                       Access/Egress / Apartment
                                                                                               Subhead
               GLOSSARY
               Access/Egress • The ability to enter a      Agriculture • Use of land for the
               site from a roadway and exit a site onto a  production of food and fiber, including
               roadway by motorized vehicle.               the growing of crops and/or the grazing
               Acres, Gross • The area of a lot or site    of animals on natural prime or improved
               including easements and right-of-way to     pasture land.
               be dedicated, but excluding existing        Air Pollution • Concentrations of
               public rights-of-way.                       substances found in the atmosphere that
               Acres, Net • The portion of a site that     exceed naturally occurring quantities and
               can actually be built upon.The following    are undesirable or harmful in some way.
               generally are not included in the net       Alley • A narrow service way, either
               acreage of a site: public or private road   public or private, that provides a perma-
               rights-of-way, public open space, water     nently reserved but secondary means of
               bodies and flood ways.                      public access not intended for general
               Adverse Impact • A negative conse-          traffic circulation.Alleys typically are
               quence for the physical, social, or eco-    located along rear property lines.
               nomic environment resulting from an         Alquist-Priolo Act, Earthquake Fault
               action or project.                          Zone • A state designated seismic
               Affordability Requirements •                hazard zone along traces of potentially
               Provisions established by a public agency   and recently active faults, in which
               to require that a specific percentage of    specialized geologic investigations must
               housing units in a project or develop-      be prepared prior to approval of certain
               ment remain affordable to very low- and     types of new development.
               low- income households for a specified      Alluvium • Sediment deposited by
               period.                                     flowing water, as in a riverbed, flood
               Affordable Housing • Housing ca-            plain, or delta.
               pable of being purchased or rented by a     Ambient • Surrounding on all sides;
               household with very low, low, or moder-     used to describe measurements of
               ate income, based on a household’s ability  existing conditions with respect to traffic,
               to make monthly payments necessary to       noise, air and other environments.
               obtain housing. Housing units for moder-    Analysis • The examination of a
               ate income must sell or rent for a          subject, particularly its component parts
               monthly cost not greater than 30 percent    and their interrelationships.
               of area median income.
                                                           Annex, v. • To incorporate a land area
               Agency • The governmental entity,           into an existing district or municipality,
               department, office, or administrative unit  with a resulting change in the boundaries
               responsible for carrying out regulations.   of the annexing jurisdiction.
               Agricultural Preserve • Land desig-         Apartment • (1) One or more rooms of
               nated for agriculture or conservation. (See a building used as a place to live, in a
               “Williamson Act.”)                          building containing at least one other
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                        183

Glossary
         unit used for the same purpose. (2) A       Arterial (Major) • A roadway which
         separate suite, not owner occupied, that    connects freeways to minor arterials and
         includes kitchen facilities and is designed collector streets. Major arterials generally
         for and rented as the home, residence, or   provide four to six lanes.
         sleeping place of one or more persons       Arterial (Minor) • A roadway which
         living as a single housekeeping unit.       connects major arterials to collectors and
         Appropriate • An act, condition, or         local streets. Minor arterials generally
         state that is considered suitable.          provide two to four travel lanes.
         Archaeological • Relating to the            Assisted Housing • Generally multi-
         material remains of past human life,        family rental housing, but sometimes
         culture, or activities.                     single-family ownership units, whose
         Architectural Control; Architectural        construction, financing, sales prices, or
         Review • Regulations and procedures         rents have been subsidized by federal,
         requiring the exterior design of struc-     state, or local housing programs includ-
         tures to be suitable, harmonious, and in    ing, but not limited to Federal Section 8
         keeping with the general appearance,        (new construction, substantial rehabilita-
         historic character, and/or style of sur-    tion, and loan management set-asides),
         rounding areas.A process used to exer-      Federal Sections 213, 236, and 202,
         cise control over the design of buildings   Federal Section 221(d)(3) (below-market
         and their settings. (See “Design Review.”)  interest rate program), Federal Section
                                                     101 (rent supplement assistance), CDBG,
         Area; Area Median Income • As used          FmHA Section 515, multi-family mortgage
         in State of California housing law with     revenue bond programs, local redevelop-
         respect to income eligibility limits        ment and in lieu fee programs, and units
         established by the US Department of         developed pursuant to local inclusionary
         Housing and Urban Development (HUD),        housing and density bonus programs. By
         “area” means metropolitan area or non-      January 1, 1992, all California Housing
         metropolitan county. In non-metropolitan    Elements are required to address the
         areas, the “area median income” is the      preservation or replacement of assisted
         higher of the county median family          housing that is eligible to change to
         income or the statewide non-metropoli-      market rate housing by 2002.
         tan median family income.
                                                     Attainment • Compliance with State
         Area of Interest • That area having a       and federal ambient air quality standards
         direct physical and social influence on a   within an air basin.
         city’s planning area but not appropriate
         for annexation.                             Base Flood • In any given year, a 100-
                                                     year flood that has a one percent likeli-
         Arterial • Streets that link residential,   hood of occurring, and is recognized as a
         commercial, and industrial districts with   standard for acceptable risk.
         the highway system.They serve primarily
         through-travel as opposed to providing      Below-market-rate (BMR) • (1) Any
         direct access to adjacent land uses.        housing unit specifically priced to be
                                                     sold or rented to low- or moderate-
                                                     income households for an amount less
184                                                              City of Benicia General Plan

                                  Appropriate / California Environmental Quality ActSubhead       (CEQA)
               than the fair-market value of the unit.      Buffer Zone • An area of land separat-
               Both the State of California and the US      ing two distinct land uses that acts to
               Department of Housing and Urban              soften or mitigate the effects of one land
               Development set standards for determin-      use on the other.
               ing which households qualify as “low         Building • Any structure used or
               income” or “moderate income.” (2) The        intended for supporting or sheltering any
               financing of housing at less than prevail-   use or occupancy.
               ing interest rates.
                                                            Building Height • The vertical dimen-
               Best Management Practices • A                sion measured from the finished grade at
               policy, program, practice, rule, regulation, all points on the site to a warped plane
               or ordinance for which sufficient data are   an equal height above all points on the
               available to indicate that identified        site.
               objectives can be met; that the practice is
               technically and economically reasonable      Buildout; Build-out • Development of
               and not environmentally or socially          land to its full potential or theoretical
               unacceptable; and that the practice is not   capacity as permitted under current or
               otherwise unreasonable for most of the       proposed planning or zoning designa-
               stated industry organizations to carry out.  tions. (See “Carrying Capacity (3).”)
               Bicycle Path (Class I facility) • A          Business Park • (See “Industrial Park.”)
               paved route not on a street or roadway       Business Services • A subcategory of
               and expressly reserved for bicycles          commercial land use that permits estab-
               traversing an otherwise unpaved area.        lishments primarily engaged in rendering
               Bicycle paths may parallel roads but         services to other business establishments
               typically are separated from them by         on a fee or contract basis, such as adver-
               landscaping.                                 tising and mailing; building maintenance;
               Bicycle Lane (Class II facility) • A         personnel and employment services;
               corridor expressly reserved for bicycles,    management and consulting services;
               existing on a street or roadway in addi-     protective services; equipment rental and
               tion to any lanes for use by motorized       leasing; photo finishing; copying and
               vehicles.                                    printing; travel; office supply; and similar
                                                            services.
               Bicycle Route (Class III facility) •
                                                            CALFED • A joint State and federal pro-
               A facility shared with motorists and
               identified only by signs, a bicycle route    gram to develop a long-term solution to
               has no pavement markings or lane             Bay-Delta water resources and endan-
               stripes.                                     gered species issues.
               Bikeways • A term that encompasses           California Environmental Quality
               bicycle lanes, bicycle paths, and bicycle    Act (CEQA) • A State law requiring State
               routes.                                      and local agencies to regulate activities
                                                            with consideration for environmental
               Book Fee • A charge the City makes in        protection. If a proposed activity has the
               association with the granting of building    potential for a significant adverse envi-
               permits to provide money for City Library    ronmental impact, an Environmental
               acquisition of books.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                          185

Glossary
         Impact Report (EIR) must be prepared          Channelization • The straightening
         and certified as to its adequacy before       and/or deepening of a watercourse for
         taking action on the proposed project.        purposes of storm-runoff control or ease
         General Plans require the preparation of      of navigation. Channelization often
         a “program EIR.”                              includes lining of stream banks with a
         California Housing Finance Agency             retaining material such as concrete.
         (CHFA) • A State agency, established by       Character • Special physical character-
         the Housing and Home Finance Act of           istics of a structure or area that set it
         1975, which is authorized to sell revenue     apart from its
         bonds and generate funds for the devel-       surroundings and contribute to its
         opment, rehabilitation, and conservation      individuality.
         of low-and moderate-income housing.           Circulation Element • One of the
         Caltrans • California Department of           seven State-mandated elements of a local
         Transportation.                               general plan, it contains adopted goals,
         Capital Improvements Program                  policies, and implementation programs
         (CIP) • A program, administered by a city     for the planning and management of
         or county government and reviewed by          existing and proposed thoroughfares,
         its planning commission, which sched-         transportation routes, and terminals, as
         ules permanent improvements, usually          well as local public utilities and facilities,
         for a minimum of five years in the future,    all correlated with the land use element
         to fit the projected fiscal capability of the of the general plan.
         local jurisdiction.The program generally      Circulation System • A network of
         is reviewed annually, for conformance to      transit, automobile, bicycle and pedes-
         and consistency with the general plan.        trian rights-of-way that connect origins
         Carrying Capacity • Used in determin-         and destinations.
         ing the potential of an area to absorb        City • City with a capital “C” generally
         development: (1) The level of land use,       refers to the government or administra-
         human activity, or development for a          tion of the City of Benicia. City with a
         specific area that can be accommodated        lower case “c” may mean any city, or may
         permanently without an irreversible           refer to the geographical area of a city
         change in the quality of air, water, land, or (e.g., the city’s bikeway system.)
         plant and animal habitats. (2) The upper      Community Noise Equivalent Level
         limits of development beyond which the        (CNEL) • The average equivalent sound
         quality of human life, health, welfare,       level during a 24-hour day, obtained after
         safety, or community character within an      addition of approximately five decibels to
         area will be impaired. (3) The maximum        sound levels in the evening from 7:00
         level of development allowable under          p.m. to 10:00 p.m. and ten decibels to
         current zoning. (See “Buildout.”)             sound levels in the night before 7:00 a.m.
         Census • The official decennial enu-          and after 10:00 p.m.
         meration of the population conducted by       Collector • Streets which link arterials
         the federal government.                       and local streets that are generally two
                                                       lanes in width.
186                                                                 City of Benicia General Plan

                                   California Housing Finance Agency (CHFA) / Conservation    Subhead
               Commercial • A land use classification      Community Service Area • A geo-
               that permits facilities for the buying and  graphic subarea of a city or county used
               selling of commodities and services.        for the planning and delivery of parks,
               Commercial Strip • Commercial               recreation, and other human services
               development, usually one store deep, that   based on an assessment of the service
               fronts on a major street for a distance of  needs of the population in that subarea.
               one city block or more. Includes indi-      Compatible • Capable of existing
               vidual buildings on their own lots, with or together without conflict or ill effects.
               without on-site parking, and small linear   Composting • The treatment of solid
               shopping centers with shallow on-site       organic refuse through aerobic, biologic
               parking in front of the stores.             decomposition.
               Community Center • A public facility        Concurrency • Installation and opera-
               in which educational, therapeutic and/or    tion of facilities and services needed to
               recreational programs are provided.         meet the demands of new development
               Community Development Block                 simultaneous with the development.
               Grant (CDBG) • A grant program admin-       Condominium • A structure of two or
               istered by the US Department of Housing     more units, the interior spaces of which
               and Urban Development (HUD) on a            are individually owned; the balance of the
               formula basis for entitlement communi-      property (both land and building) is
               ties, and by the State Department of        owned in common by the owners of the
               Housing and Community Development           individual units. (See “Townhouse.”)
               (HCD) for non-entitled jurisdictions.This
               grant allots money to cities and counties   Congestion Management Plan
               for housing rehabilitation and community    (CMP) • A mechanism employing growth
               development, including public facilities    management techniques, including traffic
               and economic development.                   level of service requirements, standards
                                                           for public transit, trip reduction programs
               Community Noise Equivalent Level            involving transportation systems manage-
               (CNEL) • A 24-hour energy equivalent        ment and jobs/ housing balance strate-
               level derived from a variety of single-     gies, and capital improvement program-
               noise events, with weighting factors of 5   ming, for the purpose of controlling and/
               and 10 dBA applied to the evening (7 PM     or reducing the cumulative regional
               to 10 PM) and nighttime (10 PM to 7 AM)     traffic impacts of development.AB 1791,
               periods, respectively, to allow for the     effective August 1, 1990, requires all cities,
               greater sensitivity to noise during these   and counties that include urbanized
               hours.                                      areas, to adopt by December 1, 1991, and
               Community Park • Land with full             annually update a Congestion Manage-
               public access intended to provide recre-    ment Plan.
               ation opportunities beyond those sup-       Conservation • The management of
               plied by neighborhood parks. Community      natural resources to prevent waste,
               parks are larger in scale than neighbor-    destruction, or degradation. (See “Conser-
               hood parks but smaller than regional        vation Element.”)
               parks.They serve people within a three
               mile radius.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                        187

Glossary
         Conservation Element • One of the               in the event of an earthquake or flood,
         seven State-mandated elements of a local        such as hospitals, fire, police, and emer-
         general plan, it contains adopted goals,        gency service facilities, utility “lifeline”
         policies, and implementation programs           facilities, such as water, electricity, and gas
         for the conservation, development, and          supply, sewage disposal, and communica-
         use of natural resources including water        tions and transportation facilities.
         and its hydraulic force, forests, soils, rivers Cul-de-sac • A short street or alley with
         and other waters, harbors, fisheries,           only a single means of ingress and egress
         wildlife, minerals, and other natural           at one end and with a large turnaround at
         resources.                                      its other end.
         Consistency, Consistent With •                  Cumulative Impact • As used in CEQA,
         Free from significant variation or contra-      the total impact resulting from the
         diction.The various diagrams, text, goals,      accumulated impacts of individual
         policies, and programs in the general plan      projects or programs over time.
         must be consistent with each other, not
         contradictory or preferential.The term          dB • Decibel; a unit used to express the
         “consistent with” is used interchangeably       relative intensity of a sound as it is heard
         with “conformity with.”The courts have          by the human ear.
         held that the phrase “consistent with”          dBA • The “A-weighted” scale for
         means “agreement with; harmonious               measuring sound in decibels; weighs or
         with.”Webster defines “conformity with”         reduces the effects of low and high
         as meaning harmony, agreement when              frequencies in order to simulate human
         used with “with.”The term “conformity”          hearing. Every increase of 10 dBA
         means in harmony therewith or agree-            doubles the perceived loudness though
         able to (§58 Ops.Cal.Atty. Gen. 21, 25          the noise is actually ten times more
         [1975]). California State law also requires     intense.
         that a general plan be internally consis-       Density, Residential • The number of
         tent and also requires consistency              permanent residential dwelling units per
         between a general plan and implementa-          acre of land. Densities specified in the
         tion measures such as the zoning ordi-          General Plan are expressed in units per
         nance.                                          gross acre of land (excluding water
         County • County with a capital “C”              bodies). (See “Acres, Gross.”)
         generally refers to the government or           Density Bonus • The allocation of
         administration of a county. County with a       development rights that allow a parcel to
         lower case “c” may mean any county, or          accommodate additional square footage
         may refer to the geographical area of a         or additional residential units beyond the
         county (e.g., the county’s road system.)        maximum for which the parcel is zoned,
         Criterion • A standard upon which a             usually in exchange for the provision or
         judgment or decision may be based. (See         preservation of an amenity at the same
         “Standards.”)                                   site or at another location. Under Califor-
         Critical Facility • Facilities housing or       nia law, a housing development that
         serving many people, that are necessary         provides 20 percent of its units for lower
                                                         income households, or ten percent of its
188                                                                    City of Benicia General Plan

                                                             Conservation Element / Developer Subhead
               units for very low-income households, or    Detention Dam/Basin/Pond •
               50 percent of its units for seniors, is     Dams may be classified according to the
               entitled to a density bonus. (See “Develop- broad function they serve, such as
               ment Rights,Transfer of.”)                  storage, diversion, or detention. Detention
               Density, Control of • A limitation on       dams are constructed to retard flood
               the occupancy of land. Density can be       runoff and minimize the effect of sudden
               controlled through zoning in the follow-    floods. Detention dams fall into two main
               ing ways: use restrictions, minimum lot-    types. In one type, the water is tempo-
               size requirements, floor area ratios, land  rarily stored, and released through an
               use-intensity ratios, setback and yard      outlet structure at a rate that will not
               requirements, minimum house-size            exceed the carrying capacity of the
               requirements, ratios comparing number       channel downstream. Often, the basins
               and types of housing units to land area,    are planted with grass and used for open
               limits on units per acre, and other means.  space or recreation in periods of dry
               Allowable density often serves as the       weather.The other type, most often called
               major distinction between residential       a Retention Pond, allows for water to be
               districts.                                  held as long as possible and may or may
                                                           not allow for the controlled release of
               Density Transfer • A way of retaining       water. In some cases, the water is allowed
               open space by concentrating densities–      to seep into the permeable banks or
               usually in compact areas adjacent to        gravel strata in the foundation.This latter
               existing urbanization and utilities–while   type is sometimes called a Water-Spread-
               leaving unchanged historic, sensitive, or   ing Dam or Dike because its main pur-
               hazardous areas. In some jurisdictions, for pose is to recharge the underground
               example, developers can buy develop-        water supply. Detention dams are also
               ment rights of properties targeted for      constructed to trap sediment.These are
               public open space and transfer the          often called Debris Dams.
               additional density to the base number of
               units permitted in the zone in which they   Developable Land • Land that is
               propose to develop.                         suitable as a location for structures and
                                                           that can be developed free of hazards to,
               Design Review • The comprehensive           and without disruption of, or significant
               evaluation of a development and its         impact on, natural resource areas.
               impact on neighboring properties and
               the community as a whole, from the          Developer • An individual who or
               standpoint of site and landscape design,    business that prepares raw land for the
               architecture, materials, colors, lighting,  construction of buildings or causes to be
               and signs, in accordance with a set of      built physical building space for use
               adopted criteria and standards. In          primarily by others, and in which the
               Benicia’s Design Review system, projects    preparation of the land or the creation of
               are reviewed against certain standards      the building space is in itself a business
               and guidelines by the Design Review         and is not incidental to another business
               Commission and the Planning Depart-         or activity.
               ment. (See “Architectural Control.”)
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                        189

Glossary
         Development • The physical extension        (“receiver”) site chosen on the basis of its
         and/or construction of urban land uses.     ability to accommodate additional units
         Development activities include: subdivi-    of development beyond that for which it
         sion of land; construction or alteration of was zoned, with minimal environmental,
         structures, roads, utilities, and other     social, and aesthetic impacts. (See “Devel-
         facilities; installation of septic systems; opment Rights.”)
         grading; deposit of refuse, debris, or fill Disability • Physical or mental impair-
         materials; and clearing of natural vegeta-  ment that substantially limits one or more
         tive cover (with the exception of agricul-  of the major life activities of an individual,
         tural activities). Routine repair and       or a record of such impairment, or being
         maintenance activities are exempted.        regarded as having such an impairment.
         Development Agreement • A                   Discourage, v. • To advise or persuade
         legislatively-approved contract between a   to refrain from.
         jurisdiction and a person having legal or
         equitable interest in real property within  Distribution Use • (See “Warehousing
         the jurisdiction (California Government     Use.”)
         Code §5865 et. seq.) that “freezes” certain District • (1) An area of a city or county
         rules, regulations, and policies applicable that has a unique character identifiable as
         to development of a property for a          different from surrounding areas because
         specified period of time, usually in        of distinctive architecture, streets, geo-
         exchange for certain concessions by the     graphic features, culture, landmarks,
         owner.                                      activities, or land uses. (2) A portion of the
         Development Fee • (See “Impact Fee.”)       territory of a city or coun–ty within
                                                     which uniform zoning regulations and
         Development Rights • The right to           requirements apply; a zone.
         develop land by a land owner who
         maintains fee-simple ownership over the     Diversity • Differences among other-
         land or by a party other than the owner     wise similar elements that give them
         who has obtained the rights to develop.     unique forms and qualities. E.g., housing
         Such rights usually are expressed in        diversity can be achieved by differences
         terms of density allowed under existing     in unit size, tenure, or cost.
         zoning. For example, one development        Duplex • A detached building under
         right may equal one unit of housing or      single ownership that is designed for
         may equal a specific number of square       occupation as the residence of two
         feet of gross floor area in one or more     families living independently of each
         specified zone districts. (See “Develop-    other.
         ment Rights,Transfer of [TDR].”)            Dwelling Unit • A room or group of
         Development Rights, Transfer of             rooms (including sleeping, eating, cook-
         (TDR) • Also known as “Transfer of          ing, and sanitation facilities, but not more
         Development Credits,” a program that can    than one kitchen), that constitutes an
         relocate potential development from         independent housekeeping unit, occu-
         areas where proposed land use or            pied or intended for occupancy by one
         environmental impacts are considered        household on a long-term basis.
         undesirable (the “donor” site) to another
190                                                               City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                          Development / ExactionSubhead
               Easement • Usually the right to use        Encourage, v. • To stimulate or foster a
               property owned by another for specific     particular condition through direct or
               purposes or to gain access to another      indirect action by the private sector or
               property. For example, utility companies   government agencies.
               often have easements on the private        Endangered Species • A species of
               property of individuals to be able to      animal or plant is considered to be en–
               install and maintain utility facilities.   dangered when its prospects for survival
               Easement, Conservation • A tool for        and reproduction are in immediate
               acquiring open space with less than full-  jeopardy from one or more causes.
               fee purchase, whereby a public agency      Enhance, v. • To improve existing
               buys only certain specific rights from the conditions by increasing the quantity or
               land owner.These may be positive rights    quality of beneficial uses or features.
               (providing the public with the opportu-
               nity to hunt, fish, hike, or ride over the Environment • CEQA defines environ-
               land) or they may be restrictive rights    ment as “the physical conditions which
               (limiting the uses to which the land       exist within the area which will be
               owner may devote the land in the future.)  affected by a proposed project, including
                                                          land, air, water, mineral, flora, fauna, noise,
               Ecology • The interrelationship of         and objects of historic or aesthetic
               living things to one another and their     significance.”
               environment; the study of such interrela-
               tionships.                                 Environmental Impact Report
                                                          (EIR) • A report complying with the
               Economic Development Board                 California Environmental Quality Act
               (EDB) • The agency charged with            which assesses all the environmental
               identifying, investigating, and promoting  characteristics of an area and determines
               economic needs, opportunities, and         what effects or impacts will result if the
               interests in Benicia.                      area is altered or disturbed by a proposed
               Ecosystem • An interacting system          action. (See “California Environmental
               formed by a biotic community and its       Quality Act.”)
               physical environment.                      Environmental Impact Statement
               Elderly Persons age 62 and older. (See     (EIS) • Under the National Environmen-
               “Seniors.”)                                tal Policy Act, a statement on the effect of
               Emergency Shelter • A facility that        development proposals and other major
               provides immediate and short-term          actions that significantly affect the
               housing and supplemental services for      environment.
               the homeless. Supplemental services may    Erosion • (1) The loosening and
               include food, counseling, and access to    transportation of rock and soil debris by
               other social programs. (See “Homeless”     wind, rain, or running water. (2) The
               and “Transitional Housing.”)               gradual wearing away of the upper layers
               Emission Standard • The maximum            of earth.
               amount of pollutant legally permitted to   Exaction • A contribution or payment
               be discharged from a single source, either required as an authorized precondition
               mobile or stationary.                      for receiving a development permit;
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                         191

Glossary
         usually refers to mandatory dedication     Feasible • Capable of being accom-
         (or fee in lieu of dedication) require-    plished in a successful manner within a
         ments found in many subdivision regula-    reasonable time taking into account
         tions.                                     economic, environmental, social, and
         Fair Market Rent • The rent, including     technological factors.
         utility allowances, determined by the      Finding(s) • The result(s) of an investi-
         United States Department of Housing and    gation and the basis upon which deci-
         Urban Development for purposes of          sions are made. Findings are used by
         administering the Section 8 Existing       government agents and bodies to justify
         Housing Program.                           action taken by the entity.
         Family • (1) Two or more persons           Fiscal Impact Analysis • A projection
         related by birth, marriage, or adoption    of the direct public costs and revenues
         [US Bureau of the Census]. (2) An indi-    resulting from population or employ-
         vidual or a group of persons living        ment change to the local jurisdiction(s)
         together who constitute a bona fide        in which the change is taking place.
         single-family housekeeping unit in a       Enables local governments to evaluate
         dwelling unit, not including a fraternity, relative fiscal merits of general plans,
         sorority, club, or other group of persons  specific plans, or projects.
         occupying a hotel, lodging house or        Fiscal Impact Report (FIR) • A report
         institution of any kind [California].      projecting the public costs and revenues
         Farmland • Refers to eight classifica-     that will result from a proposed program
         tions of land mapped by the US Depart-     or development. (See “Fiscal Impact
         ment of Agriculture Soil Conservation      Analysis.”)
         Service.The five agricultural classifica-  Flood, 100-Year • The magnitude of a
         tions defined below–except Grazing         flood expected to occur on the average
         Land–do not include publicly owned         every 100 years, based on historical data.
         lands for which there is an adopted        The 100-year flood has a 1/100, or one
         policy preventing agricultural use.        percent, chance of occurring in any given
         Grazing Land • Land on which the           year.
         existing vegetation, whether grown         Flood Insurance Rate Map
         naturally or through management, is        (FIRM) • For each community, the official
         suitable for grazing or browsing of        map on which the Federal Insurance
         livestock.This classification does not     Administration has delineated areas of
         include land previously designated as      special flood hazard and the risk pre-
         Prime Farmland, Farmland of Statewide      mium zones applicable to that commu-
         Importance, Unique Farmland, or Farm-      nity.
         land of Local Importance, and heavily
         brushed, timbered, excessively steep, or   Flood Plain • The relatively level land
         rocky lands which restrict the access and  area on either side of the banks of a
         movement of livestock.                     stream regularly subject to flooding.That
                                                    part of the flood plain subject to a one
         Fault • A fracture in the earth’s crust    percent chance of flooding in any given
         forming a boundary between rock            year is designated as an “area of special
         masses that have shifted.
192                                                              City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                    Fair Market Rent / Guidelines
                                                                                               Subhead
               flood hazard” by the Federal Insurance       mandatory elements. (See Chapter 1 of
               Administration.                              this Plan which explains how elements
               Floodway • The channel of a river or         are in the format of this General Plan.)
               other watercourse and the adjacent land      Geologic Review • The analysis of
               areas that must be reserved in order to      geologic hazards, including all potential
               discharge the “base flood” without           seismic hazards, surface ruptures, lique-
               cumulatively increasing the water surface    faction, landsliding, mudsliding, and the
               elevation more than one foot. No devel-      potential for erosion and sedimentation.
               opment is allowed in floodways.              Geological • Pertaining to rock or solid
               Floor Area Ratio (FAR) • The gross           matter.
               floor area permitted on a site divided by    Goal • A general, overall, and ultimate
               the total net area of the site, expressed in purpose, aim, or end toward which the
               decimals to one or two places. For           City or County will direct effort.
               example, on a site with 10,000 net sq. ft.
               of land area, a FAR of 1.0 will allow a      Grasslands • Land reserved for pastur-
               maximum of 10,000 gross sq. ft. of           ing or mowing, in which grasses are the
               building floor area to be built. On the      predominant vegetation.
               same site, a FAR of 1.5 would allow 15,000   Greenhouse Effect • The warming of
               sq. ft. of floor area; an FAR of 2.0 would   the Earth’s atmosphere due to accumu-
               allow 20,000 sq. ft.; and a FAR of 0.5 would lated carbon dioxide and other gases in
               allow only 5,000 sq. ft.Also commonly        the upper atmosphere.These gases
               used in zoning, FARs typically are applied   absorb energy radiated from the Earth’s
               on a parcel-by-parcel basis.                 surface,“trapping” it in the same manner
               Freeway • A high-speed, high-capacity,       as glass in a greenhouse traps heat.
               limited-access transportation facility       Potential sea-level rise is a concern.
               intended to serve regional and sub-          Ground Failure • Ground movement
               regional travel.At times they are also used  or rupture caused by strong shaking
               for intra-city travel in large cities.       during an earthquake. Includes landslide,
               Gateway • A point along a roadway            lateral spreading, liquefaction, and
               entering a city or county at which a         subsidence.
               motorist gains a sense of having left the    Ground Shaking • Ground movement
               environs and of having entered the city      resulting from the transmission of seismic
               or county.                                   waves during an earthquake.
               General Plan • A compendium of city          Groundwater • Water under the
               or county policies regarding long-term       earth’s surface, often confined to aquifers
               development, in the form of maps and         capable of supplying wells and springs.
               accompanying text.The General Plan is a      Growth Management • (See Appen-
               legal document required of each local        dix A.)
               agency by the State of California Govern-
               ment Code §65300 et seq. and adopted         Guidelines • General statements of
               by the City Council or Board of Supervi-     policy direction around which specific
               sors. In California, the General Plan has 7  details may be later established.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                        193

Glossary
         Habitat • The physical location or type     rehabilitation of the building(s) to a
         of environment in which an organism or      former condition.
         biological population lives or occurs.      Homeless • Persons and families who
         Handicapped • A person determined           lack a fixed, regular, and adequate night-
         to have a physical impairment or mental     time residence. Includes those staying in
         disorder expected to be of long or          temporary or emergency shelters or who
         indefinite duration. Many such impair-      are accommodated with friends or others
         ments or disorders are of such a nature     with the understanding that shelter is
         that a person’s ability to live indepen-    being provided as a last resort. California
         dently can be improved by appropriate       Housing Element law, ß65583(c)(1)
         housing conditions.                         requires all cities and counties to address
         Hazardous Material • Any substance          the housing needs of the homeless. (See
         that, because of its quantity, concentra-   “Emergency Shelter” and “Transitional
         tion, or physical or chemical characteris-  Housing.”)
         tics, poses a significant present or poten- Hotel • A facility in which guest rooms
         tial hazard to human health and safety or   or suites are offered to the general public
         to the environment if released into the     for lodging with or without meals and for
         workplace or the environment.The term       compensation, and where no provision is
         includes, but is not limited to, hazardous  made for cooking in any individual guest
         substances and hazardous wastes.            room or suite. (See “Motel.”)
         High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) •              Household • All those persons–related
         Any vehicle other than a driver-only        or unrelated–who occupy a single
         automobile (e.g., a vanpool, a bus, or two  housing unit. (See “Family.”)
         or more persons to a car).                  Households, Number of • The count
         Highway • High-speed, high-capacity,        of all year-round housing units occupied
         limited-access transportation facility      by one or more persons.The concept of
         serving regional and county-wide travel.    household is important because the
         Highways may cross at a different grade     formation of new households generates
         level.                                      the demand for housing. Each new
         Hillsides • Land that has an average        household formed creates the need for
         percent of slope equal to or exceeding      one additional housing unit or requires
         fifteen percent.                            that one existing housing unit be shared
                                                     by two households.Thus, household
         Historic; Historical • An historic          formation can continue to take place
         building or site is one that is noteworthy  even without an increase in population,
         for its significance in local, state, or    thereby increasing the demand for
         national history or culture, its architec-  housing.
         ture or design, or its works of art, memo-
         rabilia, or artifacts.                      Housing, Inclusionary • Regulations
                                                     that increase housing choice by provid-
         Historic Preservation • The preserva-       ing the opportunity to construct more
         tion of historically significant structures diverse and economical housing to meet
         and neighborhoods until such time as,       the needs of low- and moderate-income
         and in order to facilitate, restoration and
194                                                               City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                               Habitat / Industrial
                                                                                               Subhead
               families. Often such regulations require a  Identity • A consistent quality that
               minimum percentage of housing for low-      makes a city, place, area, or building
               and moderate-income households in new       unique and gives it a distinguishing
               housing developments and in conver-         character.
               sions of apartments to condominiums.        Image • The mental picture or impres-
               Housing and Community Develop-              sion of a city or place taken from
               ment Department of the State of             memory and held in common by mem-
               California (HCD) • The State agency         bers of the community.
               that has principal responsibility for       Impact • The effect of any direct man-
               assessing, planning for, and assisting      made actions or indirect repercussions of
               communities to meet the needs of low-       man-made actions on existing physical,
               and moderate-income households.             social, or economic conditions.
               Housing Element • One of the seven          Impact Fee • A fee, also called a
               State-mandated elements of a local          development fee, levied on the developer
               general plan, it assesses the existing and  of a project by a city, county, or other
               projected housing needs of all economic     public agency as compensation for
               segments of the community, identifies       otherwise-unmitigated impacts the
               potential sites adequate to provide the     project will produce. California Govern-
               amount and kind of housing needed, and      ment Code §66000, et seq., specifies that
               contains adopted goals, policies, and       development fees shall not exceed the
               implementation programs for the preser-     estimated reasonable cost of providing
               vation, improvement, and development of     the service for which the fee is charged.
               housing. Under State law, Housing Ele-      To lawfully impose a development fee,
               ments must be updated every five years.     the public agency must verify its method
               Housing and Urban Development, US           of calculation and document proper
               Department of (HUD) • A cabinet-level       restrictions on use of the fund.
               department of the federal government        Implementation • Actions, proce-
               that administers housing and community      dures, programs, or techniques that carry
               development programs.                       out policies.
               Housing Unit • The place of perma-          Improvement • The addition of one or
               nent or customary abode of a person or      more structures or utilities on a parcel of
               family.A housing unit may be a single-      land.
               family dwelling, a multi-family dwelling, a
               condominium, a modular home, a mobile       Incorporation • Creation of a new
               home, a cooperative, or any other residen-  city.
               tial unit considered real property under    Industrial • The manufacture, produc-
               State law.A housing unit has, at least,     tion, and processing of consumer goods.
               cooking facilities, a bathroom, and a place Industrial is often divided into “heavy
               to sleep. It also is a dwelling that cannot industrial” uses, such as construction
               be moved without substantial damage or      yards, quarrying, and factories; and “light
               unreasonable cost. (See “Dwelling Unit,”    industrial” uses, such as research and
               “Family,” and “Household.”)                 development and less intensive ware-
                                                           housing and manufacturing.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                        195

Glossary
         Industrial Park; Business Park • A           Joint Powers Authority (JPA) • A legal
         planned assemblage of buildings de-          arrangement that enables two or more
         signed for “Workplace Use.”                  units of government to share authority in
         Infrastructure • Public services and         order to plan and carry out a specific
         facilities, such as sewage-disposal systems, program or set of programs that serves
         water-supply systems, other utility          both units.
         systems, and roads.                          Landmark • (1) A building, site, object,
         Integrity • As used in historic preserva-    structure, or significant tree, having
         tion, the degree to which authenticity of    historical, architectural, social, or cultural
         a property’s historic identity has been      significance and marked for preservation
         maintained, evidenced by the survival of     by the local, state, or federal government.
         substantial physical characteristics that    (2) A visually prominent or outstanding
         existed during the property’s historic       structure or natural feature that functions
         period.                                      as a point of orientation or identification.
         Intensity, Building • For residential        Landscaping • Planting–including
         uses, the actual number or the allowable     trees, shrubs, and ground covers–suitably
         range of dwelling units per net or gross     designed, selected, installed, and main-
         acre. For non-residential uses, the actual   tained as to enhance a site or roadway
         or the maximum permitted floor area          permanently.
         ratios (FARs).                               Landslide • Downslope movement of
         Inter-agency • Indicates cooperation         soil and/or rock, which typically occurs
         between or among two or more discrete        during an earthquake or following heavy
         agencies in regard to a specific program.    rainfall.
         Intermittent Stream • A stream that          Land Use • The occupation or utiliza-
         normally flows for at least thirty (30) days tion of land or water area for any human
         after the last major rain of the season and  activity or any purpose defined in the
         is dry a large part of the year.             General Plan.
         Issues • Important unsettled commu-          Land Use Classification • A system for
         nity matters or problems that are identi-    classifying and designating the appropri-
         fied in a community’s general plan and       ate use of properties.
         dealt with by the plan’s goals, objectives,  Land Use Element • A required
         policies, plan proposals, and implementa-    element of the General Plan that uses
         tion programs.                               text and maps to designate the future use
         Jobs/Housing Balance; Jobs/Housing           or reuse of land within a given
         Ratio • The jobs/housing ratio divides       jurisdiction’s planning area.The land use
         the number of jobs in an area by the         element serves as a guide to the structur-
         number of employed residents.A ratio of      ing of zoning and subdivision controls,
         1.0 indicates a balance.A ratio greater      urban renewal and capital improvements
         than 1.0 indicates a net in-commute; less    programs, and to official decisions
         than 1.0 indicates a net out-commute.        regarding the distribution and intensity of
                                                      development and the location of public
                                                      facilities and open space. (See “Mandatory
                                                      Element.”)
196                                                                City of Benicia General Plan

                                                    Industrial Park; Business Park/ Liquefaction   Subhead
               Land Use Regulation • A term encom-            municipal service, such as police, fire, or
               passing the regulation of land in general      library, or the performance of a facility,
               and often used to mean those regulations       such as a street or highway.
               incorporated in the General Plan, as           Level of Service (LOS) Traffic • A scale
               distinct from zoning regulations (which        that measures the amount of traffic that a
               are more specific).                            roadway or intersection can accommo-
               Lateral Spreading • Lateral movement           date, based on such factors as maneuver-
               of soil, often as a result of liquefaction     ability, driver dissatisfaction, and delay.
               during an earthquake.                          LOS A • Indicates a relatively free flow of
               Ldn • Day-Night Average Sound Level.           traffic, with little or no limitation on
               The A-weighted average sound level for a       vehicle movement or speed.
                                                              LOS B • Describes a steady flow of traffic,
               given area (measured in decibels) during
               a 24-hour period with a 10 dB weighting        with only slight delays in vehicle move-
               applied to night-time sound levels.The Ldn     ment and speed.All queues clear in a
               is approximately numerically equal to the      single signal cycle.
                                                              LOS C • Denotes a reasonably steady,
               CNEL for most environmental settings.
                                                              high-volume flow of traffic, with some
               Lease • A contractual agreement by             limitations on movement and speed, and
               which an owner of real property (the           occasional backups on critical ap-
               lessor) gives the right of possession to       proaches.
               another (a lessee) for a specified period      LOS D • Designates the level where
               of time (term) and for a specified consid-     traffic nears an unstable flow. Intersec-
               eration (rent).                                tions still function, but short queues
               Leq • Equivalent Sound Level. The sound        develop and cars may have to wait
               level containing the same total energy as      through one cycle during short peaks.
               a time varying signal over a given sample      LOS E • Represents traffic characterized
               period. Leq is typically computed over 1,      by slow movement and frequent (al-
               8, and 24-hour sample periods. Ldn             though momentary) stoppages.This type
               represents the daily level of noise expo-      of congestion is considered severe, but is
               sure averaged on an annual basis, while        not uncommon at peak traffic hours,
               Leq represents the average noise exposure      with frequent stopping, long-standing
               for a shorter time period, typically one       queues, and blocked intersections.
               hour.                                          LOS F • Describes unsatisfactory stop-
               Lmax • The maximum sound level                 and-go traffic characterized by “traffic
               recorded during a noise event.                 jams” and stoppages of long duration.
                                                              Vehicles at signalized intersections
               Ln • The sound level exceeded “n”              usually have to wait through one or more
               percent of the time during a sample            signal changes, and “upstream” intersec-
               interval. L10 equals the level exceeded 10     tions may be blocked by the long queues.
               percent of the time (L90, L50, etc.)
                                                              Liquefaction • The transformation of
               Level of Service (LOS) Standard • A            loose, wet soil from a solid to a liquid
               standard used by government agencies to        state, often as a result of ground shaking
               measure the quality or effectiveness of a      during an earthquake.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                            197

Glossary
         Live/work Quarters • Buildings or            Port of Benicia (water related industrial
         spaces within buildings that are used        lands).
         jointly for commercial and residential       Maintain, v • To keep in an existing
         purposes where the residential use of the    state. (See “Preserve, v.”)
         space is secondary or accessory to the
         primary use as a place of work.              Mandatory Element • A component
                                                      of the General Plan mandated by State
         Local Agency Formation Commis-               law. California State law requires that a
         sion (LAFCO) • A five- or seven-member       General Plan include elements dealing
         commission within each county that           with seven subjects–circulation, conser-
         reviews and evaluates all proposals for      vation, housing, land use, noise, open
         formation of special districts, incorpora-   space, and safety–and specifies to various
         tion of cities, annexation to special        degrees the information to be incorpo-
         districts or cities, consolidation of dis-   rated in each element. (See “Land Use
         tricts, and merger of districts with cities. Element.”)
         Each county’s LAFCO is empowered to
         approve, disapprove, or conditionally        Manufactured Housing •
         approve such proposals.The LAFCO             Residential structures that are con-
         members generally include two county         structed entirely in the factory, and which
         supervisors, two city council members,       since June 15, 1976, have been regulated
         and one member representing the              by the federal Manufactured Home
         general public. Some LAFCOs include two      Construction and Safety Standards Act of
         representatives of special districts.        1974 under the administration of the US
                                                      Department of Housing and Urban
         Local Streets • (See “Streets, local.”)      Development (HUD). (See “Mobile Home.”)
         Lot • (See “Site.”)                          Marsh • Any area designated as marsh
         Low-income Household •                       or swamp on the largest scale United
         A household with an annual income            States Geologic Survey topographic map
         usually no greater than 80 percent of the    most recently published.A marsh usually
         area median family income adjusted by        is an area periodically or permanently
         household size, as determined by a           covered with shallow water, either fresh
         survey of incomes conducted by a city or     or saline.
         a county, or in the absence of such a        Master Plan • A plan prepared in
         survey, based on the latest available        accordance with Chapter 17.68 of the
         eligibility limits established by the US     Benicia Zoning Ordinance to ensure
         Department of Housing and Urban              orderly planning for the development of
         Development (HUD) for the Section 8          large, unsubdivided areas of the city,
         housing program. (See “Area.”)               consistent with the General Plan.
         Low-income Housing Tax Credits •             May • That which is permissible.
         Tax reductions provided by the federal
         and State governments for investors in       Mineral Resource • Land on which
         housing for low-income households.           known deposits of commercially viable
                                                      mineral or aggregate deposits exist.This
         Lower Arsenal • Land south of I-780,         designation is applied to sites determined
         generally between the freeway and the
198                                                                City of Benicia General Plan

                                   Live/work Quarters / National Register of HistoricSubhead        Places
               by the State Division of Mines and            Department of Housing and Urban
               Geology as being a resource of regional       Development (HUD) for the Section 8
               significance, and is intended to help         housing program. (See “Area” and “Low-
               maintain the quarrying operations and         income Household.”)
               protect them from encroachment of             Motel • (1) A hotel for motorists. (2) A
               incompatible land uses.                       facility in which guest rooms or suites are
               Minimize, v. • To reduce or lessen, but       offered to the general public for lodging
               not necessarily to eliminate.                 with or without meals and for compensa-
               Mining • The act or process of extract-       tion, and where guest parking is provided
               ing resources, such as coal, oil, or miner-   in proximity to guest rooms. Quite often,
               als, from the earth.                          provision is made for cooking in indi-
                                                             vidual guest rooms or suites. (See “Ho-
               Mitigate, v. • To ameliorate, alleviate, or   tel.”)
               avoid to the extent reasonably feasible.
                                                             Multiple Family Building • A de-
               Mixed-use • Properties on which               tached building designed and used
               various uses, such as office, commercial,     exclusively as a dwelling by three or
               institutional, and residential, are com-      more families occupying separate suites.
               bined in a single building or on a single
               site in an integrated development project     Municipal Services • Services tradi-
               with significant functional interrelation-    tionally provided by local government,
               ships and a coherent physical design.A        including water and sewer, roads, parks,
               “single site” may include contiguous          schools, and police and fire protection.
               properties.                                   Must • That which is mandatory.
               Mobile Home • A structure, transport-         National Environmental Policy Act
               able in one or more sections, built on a      (NEPA) • An act passed in 1974 establish-
               permanent chassis and designed for use        ing federal legislation for national envi-
               as a single-family dwelling unit and which    ronmental policy, a council on environ-
               (1) has a minimum of 400 square feet of       mental quality, and the requirements for
               living space; (2) has a minimum width in      environmental impact statements.
               excess of 102 inches; (3) is connected to     National Flood Insurance
               all available permanent utilities; and (4) is Program • A federal program that
               tied down (a) to a permanent foundation       authorizes the sale of federally subsidized
               on a lot either owned or leased by the        flood insurance in communities where
               homeowner or (b) is set on piers, with        such flood insurance is not available
               wheels removed and skirted, in a mobile       privately.
               home park. (See “Manufactured Hous-
               ing.”)                                        National Register of Historic
                                                             Places • The official list, established by
               Moderate-income Household •                   the National Historic Preservation Act, of
               A household with an annual income             sites, districts, buildings, structures, and
               between the lower income eligibility          objects significant in the nation’s history
               limits and 120 percent of the area median     or whose artistic or architectural value is
               family income adjusted by household           unique.
               size, usually as established by the US
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                            199

Glossary
         Natural State • The condition existing        central public gathering place, intercon-
         prior to development..                        necting streets and alleys, and edges
         Necessary • Essential or required.            defined by greenbelts or boulevards.The
                                                       basic goal is integration of the activities
         Need • A condition requiring supply or        of potential residents with work, shop-
         relief.The City or County may act upon        ping, recreation, and transit all within
         findings of need within or on behalf of       walking distance.
         the community.
                                                       Noise • Any sound that is undesirable
         Neighborhood • A planning area                because it interferes with speech and
         commonly identified as such in a              hearing, or is intense enough to damage
         community’s planning documents, and           hearing, or is otherwise annoying. Noise,
         by the individuals residing and working       simply, is “unwanted sound.”
         within the neighborhood. Documenta-
         tion may include a map prepared for           Noise Attenuation • Reduction of the
         planning purposes, on which the names         level of a noise source using a substance,
         and boundaries of the neighborhood are        material, or surface, such as earth berms
         shown.                                        and/or solid concrete walls.
         Neighborhood Park • City- or county-          Noise Contour • A line connecting
         owned land intended to serve the              points of equal noise level as measured
         recreation needs of people living or          on the same scale. Noise levels greater
         working within one-half mile radius of        than the 60 Ldn contour (measured in
         the park.                                     dBA) require noise attenuation in residen-
                                                       tial development.
         Neighborhood Unit • According to
         one widely-accepted concept of plan-          Noise Element • One of the seven
         ning, the neighborhood unit should be         State-mandated elements of a local
         the basic building block of the city. It is   general plan, it assesses noise levels of
         based on the elementary school, with          highways and freeways, local arterials,
         other community facilities located at its     railroads, airports, local industrial plants,
         center and arterial streets at its perimeter. and other ground stationary sources, and
         The distance from the school to the           adopts goals, policies, and implementa-
         perimeter should be a comfortable             tion programs to reduce the community’s
         walking distance for a school-age child;      exposure to noise.
         there would be no through traffic uses.       Noise Sensitive Land Use •
         Limited industrial or commercial would        Hospitals, nursing homes, schools,
         occur on the perimeter where arterials        churches, residential uses, libraries,
         intersect.This was the model for Ameri-       theaters, auditoriums, and transient
         can suburban development after World          lodging.
         War II.                                       Non-conforming Use • A use that was
         Neotraditional Development •                  valid when brought into existence, but by
         An approach to land use planning and          subsequent regulation becomes no
         urban design that promotes the building       longer conforming.“Non-conforming use”
         of neighborhoods with a mix of uses and       is a generic term and includes (1) non-
         housing types, architectural variety, a       conforming structures (by virtue of size,
200                                                                 City of Benicia General Plan

                                                             Natural State / Park Land, Parkland   Subhead
               type of construction, location on land, or      Open Space Element • One of the
               proximity to other structures), (2) non-        seven State-mandated elements of a local
               conforming use of a conforming building,        general plan, it contains an inventory of
               (3) non-conforming use of a non-con-            privately and publicly owned open-space
               forming building, and (4) non-conforming        lands, and adopted goals, policies, and
               use of land.Thus, any use lawfully existing     implementation programs for the preser-
               on any piece of property that is inconsis-      vation, protection, and management of
               tent with a new or amended General              open space lands.
               Plan, and that in turn is a violation of a      Open Space Land • Any parcel or area
               zoning ordinance amendment subse-               of land or water that is essentially unim-
               quently adopted in conformance with the         proved and devoted to an open space use
               General Plan, will be a non-conforming          for the purposes of (1) the preservation
               use.                                            of natural resources, (2) the managed
               Non-urban Land Use • Land use that              production of resources, (3) outdoor
               is not urban. (See “Urban” and “Urban           recreation, or (4) public health and safety.
               Land Use.”)                                     Refer to Policy 2.1.5 and page 209 –
               Northern Area • Everything north of             Urban Growth Boundary for further
               the Urban Growth Boundary which is              discussion of uses.
               within the Benicia Planning Area.               Ordinance • A law or regulation set
               Notice (of Hearing) • A legal docu-             forth and adopted by a governmental
               ment announcing the opportunity for the         authority, usually a city or county.
               public to present their views to an official    Outdoor Activity Area • An area
               representative or board of a public             primarily utilized for the congregation of
               agency concerning an official action            people; examples include patios of
               pending before the agency.                      residences, pool areas, central recreation
               Objective • A specific statement of             areas, and outdoor instructional areas of
               desired future condition toward which           schools.
               the City or County will expend effort in        Outdoor Recreation Area • A pri-
               the context of striving to achieve a            vately or publicly owned or operated use
               broader goal.An objective should be             providing facilities for outdoor recreation
               achievable and, where possible, should be       activities.
               measurable and time-specific.The State          Para-transit • Refers to transportation
               Government Code (ß65302) requires that          services that operate vehicles, such as
               general plans spell out the “objectives,”       buses, jitneys, taxis, and vans for senior
               principles, standards, and proposals of the     citizens, and/or mobility-impaired.
               general plan.“The addition of 100 units of
               affordable housing by 1995” is an ex-           Parcel • A lot, or contiguous group of
               ample of an objective.                          lots, in single ownership or under single
                                                               control, usually considered a unit for
               Office Use • The use of land by general         purposes of development.
               business offices, medical and professional
               offices, administrative or headquarters         Park Land, Parkland • Land that is
               offices for large wholesaling or manufac-       publicly owned or controlled for the
               turing operations, and research and             purpose of providing parks, recreation, or
               development.                                    open space for public use.
City of Benicia General Plan                              revised 6.17.03 (ord. 03-88)                  201

Glossary
         Parks • Open space lands whose              Planned Development (PD) • A
         primary purpose is recreation. (See         description of a proposed unified devel-
         “Open Space Land,”“Community Park,”         opment, consisting at a minimum of a
         and “Neighborhood Park.”)                   map and adopted ordinance setting forth
         Peak Hour/Peak Period • For any             the regulations governing, and the
         given roadway, a daily period during        location and phasing of all proposed uses
         which traffic volume is highest, usually    and improvements to be included in the
         occurring in the morning and evening        development.
         commute periods.Where “F” Levels of         Planning Area • The area directly
         Service are encountered, the “peak hour”    addressed by the general plan.A city’s
         may stretch into a “peak period” of         planning area typically encompasses the
         several hours’ duration.                    city limits and potentially annexable land
         Performance Standards •                     within its sphere of influence.
         Regulations that permit uses based on a     Planning Commission • A seven
         particular set of standards of operation    member body created by the City of
         rather than on particular type of use.      Benicia in compliance with California law
         Performance standards provide specific      (ß65100).This law requires the assign-
         criteria limiting noise, air pollution,     ment of the planning functions of a city
         emissions, odors, vibration, dust, dirt,    or county to a planning department,
         glare, heat, fire hazards, wastes, traffic  planning commission, hearing officers,
         impacts, and visual impact of a use.        and/or the legislative body itself, as
         Personal Services • Services of a           deemed appropriate by the legislative
         personal convenience nature, as opposed     body.
         to products that are sold to individual     Policy • A specific statement of prin-
         consumers, as contrasted with compa-        ciple or of guiding actions that implies
         nies. Personal services include barber and  clear commitment but is not mandatory.
         beauty shops, shoe and luggage repair,      A general direction that a governmental
         fortune tellers, photographers, laundry     agency sets to follow, in order to meet its
         and cleaning services and pick-up sta-      goals and objectives before undertaking
         tions, copying, repair and fitting of       an action program. (See “Program.”)
         clothes, and similar services.              Pollutant • Any introduced gas, liquid,
         Planned Community • A large-scale           or solid that makes a resource unfit for its
         development whose essential features are    normal or usual purpose.
         a definable boundary; a consistent, but     Pollution • The presence of matter or
         not necessarily uniform, character; overall energy whose nature, location, or quan-
         control during the development process      tity produces undesired environmental
         by a single development entity; private     effects.
         ownership of recreation amenities; and
         enforcement of covenants, conditions,       Pollution, Non-Point • Sources for
         and restrictions by a master community      pollution that are less definable and
         association.                                usually cover broad areas of land, such as
                                                     agricultural land with fertilizers that are
                                                     carried from the land by runoff, or
                                                     automobiles.
202                                                              City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                   Parks / Pure      Tone
                                                                                                 Subhead
               Poverty Level • As used by the US             in some fashion. For density calculation
               Census, families and unrelated individuals    purposes, some jurisdictions exclude
               are classified as being above or below the    private roads when establishing the total
               poverty level based on a poverty index        acreage of the site; however, aisles within
               that provides a range of income cutoffs or    and driveways serving private parking
               “poverty thresholds” varying by size of       lots are not considered private roads.
               family, number of children, and age of        Professional Offices • A use providing
               householder.The income cutoffs are            professional or consulting services in the
               updated each year to reflect the change       fields of law, medicine, architecture,
               in the Consumer Price Index.                  design, engineering, accounting, and
               Preservation • As used in historic            similar professions, but not including
               preservation, the process of sustaining       financial institutions or real estate or
               the form and extent of a structure essen-     insurance offices.
               tially as it exists. Preservation aims at     Program • An action, activity, or
               halting further deterioration and provid-     strategy carried out in response to
               ing structural stability but does not         adopted policy to achieve a specific goal
               contemplate significant rebuilding. (See      or objective. Policies and programs
               “Historic Preservation.”)                     establish the “who,”“how” and “when” for
               Preserve, n. • An area in which benefi-       carrying out the “what” and “where” of
               cial uses in their present condition are      goals and objectives.
               protected; for example, a nature preserve     Protect, v. • To maintain and preserve
               or an agricultural preserve. (See “Agricul-   beneficial uses in their present condition
               tural Preserve” and “Protect.”)               as nearly as possible. (See “Enhance.”)
               Preserve, v. • To keep safe from              Public and Quasi-public
               destruction or decay; to maintain or keep     Facilities • Institutional, academic,
               intact. (See “Maintain.”)                     governmental and community service
               Principle • An assumption, fundamen-          uses, either owned publicly or operated
               tal rule, or doctrine that will guide         by non-profit organizations, including
               general plan policies, proposals, standards,  private hospitals and cemeteries.
               and implementation measures.The State         Public Services • (See “Municipal
               Government Code (ß65302) requires that        Services.”)
               general plans spell out the objectives,
               “principles,” standards, and proposals of     Pure Tone • Any sound which can be
               the general plan.“Adjacent land uses          judged as audible as a single pitch or a set
               should be compatible with one another”        of single pitches by the Noise Control
               is an example of a principle.                 Officer. For the purposes of this ordi-
                                                             nance, a pure tone shall exist if the one-
               Private Road/Private Street •                 third octave band sound pressure level in
               Privately owned (and usually privately        the band with the tone exceeds the
               maintained) motor vehicle access that is      arithmetric average of the sound pressure
               not dedicated as a public street.Typically    levels of the two contiguous one-third
               the owner posts a sign indicating that the    octave bands by 5 dB for center frequen-
               street is private property and limits traffic cies of 500 Hz and above and by 8 dB for
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                          203

Glossary
         center frequencies between 160 and 400       Regulation • A rule or order pre-
         Hz and by 15 dB for center frequencies       scribed for managing government.
         less than or equal to 125 Hz.                Rehabilitation • The repair, preserva-
         Ranchette • A single dwelling unit           tion, and/or improvement of substandard
         occupied by a non-farming household on       housing.
         a parcel of 2.5 to 20 acres that has been    Remodeling • As used in historic
         subdivided from agricultural land.           preservation, making over or rebuilding
         Rare or Endangered Species • A               all or part of an historic structure in a
         species of animal or plant listed in: §670.2 way that does not necessarily preserve its
         or §670.5,Title 14, California Administra-   historical, architectural, and cultural
         tive Code; or Title 50, Code of Federal      features and character.
         Regulations, §17.11 or §17.2, pursuant to    Research and Development (R&D)
         the Federal Endangered Species Act           Use • A use engaged in study, testing,
         designating species as rare, threatened, or  design, analysis, and experimental devel-
         endangered.                                  opment of products, processes, or
         Reclamation • The reuse of resources,        services.
         usually those present in solid wastes or     Residential • Land designated in the
         sewage.                                      City or County General Plan and zoning
         Recognize, v. • To officially (or by         ordinance for buildings consisting only of
         official action) identify or perceive a      dwelling units. May be improved, vacant,
         given situation.                             or unimproved. (See “Dwelling Unit.”)
         Recreation, Passive • Type of recre-         Residential, Multiple Family •
         ation or activity that does not require the  Usually three or more dwelling units on a
         use of organized play areas.                 single site, which may be in the same or
         Recycle, v. • The process of extraction      separate buildings.
         and reuse of materials from waste prod-      Residential, Single-Family • A single
         ucts.                                        dwelling unit on a building site.
         Redevelop, v. • To demolish existing         Restore, v. • To renew, rebuild, or
         buildings; or to increase the overall floor  reconstruct to a former state.
         area existing on a property; or both;        Restrict, v. • To check, bound, or
         irrespective of whether a change occurs      decrease the range, scope, or incidence of
         in land use.                                 a particular condition.
         Regional • Pertaining to activities or       Retention Basin/Retention Pond •
         economies at a scale greater than that of    (See “Detention Basin/Detention Pond.”)
         a single jurisdiction, and affecting a broad
         geographic area.                             Retrofit, v. • To add materials and/or
                                                      devices to an existing building or system
         Regional Park • A 250–1,000 acre park        to improve its operation, safety, or effi-
         that focuses on activities and natural       ciency. Buildings have been retrofitted to
         features not included in most other types    use solar energy and to strengthen their
         of parks and often based on a specific       ability to withstand earthquakes, for
         scenic or recreational opportunity.          example.
204                                                                City of Benicia General Plan

                                              Ranchette / Section 8 Rental Assistance Program Subhead
               Rezoning • An amendment to the map          Scenic Highway Corridor • The area
               and/or text of a zoning ordinance to        outside a highway right-of-way that is
               effect a change in the nature, density, or  generally visible to persons traveling on
               intensity of uses allowed in a zoning       the highway.
               district and/or on a designated parcel or   Scenic Highway/Scenic Route •
               land area.                                  A highway, road, drive, or street that, in
               Rideshare • A travel mode other than        addition to its transportation function,
               driving alone, such as buses, rail transit, provides opportunities for the enjoyment
               carpools, and vanpools.                     of natural and man-made scenic re-
               Ridgeline • A line connecting the           sources and access or direct views to
               highest points along a ridge and separat-   areas or scenes of exceptional beauty or
               ing drainage basins or small-scale drain-   historic or cultural interest.The aesthetic
               age systems from one another.               values of scenic routes often are pro-
                                                           tected and enhanced by regulations
               Right-of-way • A strip of land occupied     governing the development of property
               or intended to be occupied by certain       or the placement of outdoor advertising.
               transportation and public use facilities,   Until the mid-1980s, general plans in
               such as roadways, railroads, and utility    California were required to include a
               lines.                                      Scenic Highways element.
               Riparian Lands • Riparian lands are         Second Unit • A Self-contained living
               comprised of the vegetative and wildlife    unit, either attached to or detached from,
               areas adjacent to perennial and intermit-   and in addition to, the primary residential
               tent streams. Riparian areas are delineated unit on a single lot. Sometimes called
               by the existence of plant species nor-      “Granny Flat”.
               mally found near freshwater.
                                                           Section 8 Rental Assistance
               Risk • The danger or degree of hazard       Program • A federal (HUD) rent-subsidy
               or potential loss.                          program that is one of the main sources
               Runoff • That portion of rain or snow       of federal housing assistance for low-
               that does not percolate into the ground     income households.The program oper-
               and is discharged into streams instead.     ates by providing “housing assistance
               Safety Element • One of the seven           payments” to owners, developers, and
               State-mandated elements of a local          public housing agencies to make up the
               general plan, it contains adopted goals,    difference between the “Fair Market Rent”
               policies, and implementation programs       of a unit (set by HUD) and the household’s
               for the protection of the community from    contribution toward the rent, which is
               any unreasonable risks associated with      calculated at 30 percent of the
               seismic and geologic hazards, flooding,     household’s adjusted gross monthly
               and wildland and urban fires. Many safety   income (GMI).“Section 8” includes pro-
               elements also incorporate a review of       grams for new construction, existing
               police needs, objectives, facilities, and   housing, and substantial or moderate
               services.                                   housing rehabilitation.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                        205

Glossary
         Seismic • Caused by or subject to            feature of the natural or manmade
         earthquakes or earth vibrations.             landscape.
         SEL (or SENEL) • Sound Exposure              Significance • As used in historic
         Level or Single Event Noise Exposure         preservation, a term ascribed to buildings,
         Level. The level of noise accumulated        sites, objects, or districts that possess
         during a single noise event, such as an      exceptional value or quality for illustrat-
         aircraft overflight, with reference to a     ing or interpreting the cultural heritage
         duration of one second. More specifically,   of the community when evaluated in
         it is the time-integrated A-weighted         relation to other properties and property
         squared sound pressure level for a stated    types within a specific historic theme,
         time interval or event, based on a refer-    period, and geographical setting.A
         ence pressure of 20 micropascals and a       principal test of significance for historic
         reference duration of one second.            property is “integrity.”
         Seniors • Persons age 62 and older.          Single-family Dwelling, Attached •
         (See “Elderly.”)                             A dwelling unit occupied or intended for
         Sensitive Receptors • Uses that are          occupancy by only one household that is
         greatly affected by noise.These include      structurally connected with at least one
         schools, nursing homes, and childcare        other such dwelling unit. (See
         facilities.                                  “Townhouse.”)
         Setback • The horizontal distance            Single-family Dwelling, Detached •
         between the property line and any            A dwelling unit occupied or intended for
         structure.                                   occupancy by only one household that is
                                                      structurally independent from any other
         Shall • That which is obligatory; an         such dwelling unit or structure intended
         unequivocal direction.                       for residential or other use. (See “Family.”)
         Shopping Center • A group of com-            Site • A parcel of land used or intended
         mercial establishments, planned, devel-      for one use or a group of uses and having
         oped, owned, or managed as a unit, with      access to a public or an approved private
         common off-street parking provided on        street.A lot. (See “Lot.”)
         the site.
                                                      Slope • Land gradient described as the
         Should • Signifies a directive to be         vertical rise divided by the horizontal run,
         honored if at all possible; a less rigid     and expressed in percent.
         directive than “shall,” to be honored in the
         absence of compelling or contravening        Soil • The unconsolidated material on
         considerations.                              the immediate surface of the earth
                                                      created by natural forces that serves as
         Sign • Any representation (written or        natural medium for growing land plants.
         pictorial) used to convey information, or
         to identify, announce, or otherwise direct   Solid Waste • Any unwanted or dis-
         attention to a business, profession,         carded material that is not a liquid or gas.
         commodity, service, or entertainment, and    Includes organic wastes, paper products,
         placed on, suspended from, or in any way     metals, glass, plastics, cloth, brick, rock,
         attached to, any structure, vehicle, or      soil, leather, rubber, yard wastes, and
                                                      wood, but does not include sewage and
206                                                                City of Benicia General Plan

                                                            Seismic / Substandard Housing/Units  Subhead
               hazardous materials. Organic wastes and        Streets, Local • Streets that primarily
               paper products comprise about 75               provide access to properties.They also
               percent of typical urban solid waste.          have a secondary role as locations for
               Specific Plan • A legal tool authorized        utilities, locations for easements, open
               by Article 8 of the Government Code            space for light and air, and firebreaks
               (§65450 et seq.) for the systematic            between buildings.Through-traffic from
               implementation of the general plan for a       one part of the community to another is
               defined portion of a community’s plan-         not intended to be carried on local
               ning area.A specific plan must specify in      streets.
               detail the land uses, public and private       Streets, Major • The transportation
               facilities needed to support the land uses,    network that includes a hierarchy of
               phasing of development, standards for the      freeways, arterials, and collectors to
               conservation, development, and use of          service through traffic.
               natural resources, and a program of            Structure • Anything constructed or
               implementation measures, including             erected that requires location on the
               financing measures.                            ground (excluding swimming pools,
               Sphere of Influence (SOI) • The                fences, and walls used as fences, access
               probable physical boundaries and service       drives, and walks).
               area of a local agency, as determined by       Subdivision • The division of a tract of
               the Local Agency Formation Commission          land into defined lots, either improved or
               (LAFCO) of the County.                         unimproved, which can be separately
               Standards • (1) A rule or measure              conveyed by sale or lease, and which can
               establishing a level of quality or quantity    be altered or developed.“Subdivision”
               that must be complied with or satisfied.       includes a condominium project as
               The State Government Code (ß65302)             defined in §1350 of the California Civil
               requires that general plans spell out the      Code and a community apartment
               objectives, principles,“standards,” and        project as defined in §11004 of the
               proposals of the general plan. Examples        Business and Professions Code.
               of standards might include the number of       Subsidize • To assist by payment of a
               acres of park land per 1,000 population        sum of money or by the granting of
               that the community will attempt to             terms or favors that reduce the need for
               acquire and improve, or the “traffic Level     monetary expenditures. Housing subsi-
               of Service” (LOS) that the plan hopes to       dies may take the forms of mortgage
               attain. (2) Requirements in a zoning           interest deductions or tax credits from
               ordinance that govern building and             federal and/or state income taxes, sale or
               development as distinguished from use          lease at less than market value of land to
               restrictions–for example, site-design          be used for the construction of housing,
               regulations such as lot area, height limit,    payments to supplement a minimum
               frontage, landscaping, and floor area ratio.   affordable rent, and the like.
               Storm Runoff • Surplus surface water           Substandard Housing/Units •
               generated by rainfall that does not seep       Residential dwellings that, because of
               into the earth but flows overland to           their physical condition, do not provide
               flowing or stagnant bodies of water.           safe and sanitary housing.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                          207

Glossary
         Substantial • Considerable in impor-         resistant walls.Townhouses usually have
         tance, value, degree, or amount.             separate utilities; however, in some
         Sustainability • Community use of            condominium situations, common areas
         natural resources in a way that does not     are serviced by utilities purchased by a
         jeopardize the ability of future genera-     homeowners association on behalf of all
         tions to live and prosper.                   townhouse members of the association.
                                                      (See “Condominium.”)
         Sustainable Development •
         Development that maintains or enhances       Transit • The conveyance of persons or
         economic opportunity and community           goods from one place to another by
         well-being while protecting and restoring    means of a local, public transportation
         the natural environment upon which           system.
         people and economies depend. Sustain-        Transit, Public • A system of regularly-
         able development meets the needs of the      scheduled buses and/or trains available to
         present without compromising the             the public on a fee-per-ride basis.Also
         ability of future generations to meet their  called “Mass Transit.”
         own needs. (Source: Minnesota State          Transitional Housing • Shelter
         Legislature.)                                provided to the homeless for an ex-
         Telecommuting • An arrangement in            tended period, often as long as 18
         which a worker is at home or in a loca-      months, and generally integrated with
         tion other than the primary place of         other social services and counseling
         work, and communicates with the              programs to assist in the transition to self-
         workplace and conducts work via              sufficiency through the acquisition of a
         wireless or telephone lines, using mo-       stable income and permanent housing.
         dems, fax machines, or other electronic      (See “Homeless” and “Emergency Shel-
         devices in conjunction with computers.       ter.”)
         Topography • Configuration of a              Transportation Demand Manage-
         surface, including its relief and the        ment (TDM) • A strategy for reducing
         position of natural and man-made fea-        demand on the road system by reducing
         tures.                                       the number of vehicles using the road-
         Tourism • The business of providing          ways and/or increasing the number of
         services for persons traveling for plea-     persons per vehicle. TDM attempts to
         sure, tourism contributes to the vitality of reduce the number of persons who drive
         the community by providing revenue to        alone on the roadway during the com-
         local business.Tourism can be measured       mute period and to increase the number
         through changes in the transient occu-       in carpools, vanpools, buses and trains,
         pancy tax, or restaurant sales.              walking, and biking. TDM can be an
                                                      element of Transportation Systems
         Townhouse; Townhome • A one-                 Managment (TSM). (See “Transportation
         family dwelling in a row of at least three   Systems Managment.”)
         such units in which each unit has its own
         front and rear access to the outside, no     Transportation Noise Sources •
         unit is located over another unit, and       Noise from traffic on public roadways,
         each unit is separated from any other unit   railroad line operations, and aircraft in
         by one or more common and fire-              flight.
208                                                               City of Benicia General Plan

                                                             Substantial / Urban Growth Boundary   Subhead
               (Non-) Transportation Noise                       future occupants and a liability to the
               Sources • Noise from industrial opera-            City or County are designated as “unde-
               tions, outdoor recreation facilities, HVAC        velopable” by the City or County.
               units, loading docks, etc.                        Undue • Improper, or more than
               Transportation Systems Management                 necessary.
               (TSM) • A comprehensive strategy                  Uniform Building Code (UBC) • A
               developed to address the problems                 national, standard building code that sets
               caused by additional development,                 forth minimum standards for construc-
               increasing trips, and a shortfall in trans-       tion.
               portation capacity.Transportation Systems
               Management focuses on more efficiently            Urban • Of, relating to, characteristic of,
               utilizing existing highway and transit            or constituting a city. Urban areas are
               systems rather than expanding them. TSM           generally characterized by moderate and
               measures are characterized by their low           higher density residential development
               cost and quick implementation time                (i.e., three or more dwelling units per
               frame, such as computerized traffic               acre), commercial development, and
               signals, metered freeway ramps, and one-          industrial development, and the availabil-
               way streets.                                      ity of public services required for that
                                                                 development, specifically central water
               Trees, Street • Trees strategically               and sewer, an extensive road network,
               planted–usually in parkway strips, medi-          public transit, and other such services
               ans, or along streets–to enhance the              (e.g., safety and emergency response).
               visual quality of a street.                       Development not providing such ser-
               Trip • A one-way journey that proceeds            vices may be “non-urban” or “rural.” (See
               from an origin to a destination via a single      “Urban Land Use.”)
               mode of transportation; the smallest unit         Urban Design • The attempt to give
               of movement considered in transporta-             form, in terms of both beauty and func-
               tion studies. Each trip has one “produc-          tion, to selected urban areas or to whole
               tion end,” (or origin–often from home, but        cities. Urban design is concerned with
               not always), and one “attraction end,”            the location, mass, and design of various
               (destination).                                    urban components and combines
               Truck Route • A path of circulation               elements of urban planning, architecture,
               required for all vehicles exceeding set           and landscape architecture.
               weight or axle limits, a truck route              Urban Growth Boundary • A line
               follows major arterials through commer-           shown on the General Plan Land Use
               cial or industrial areas and avoids sensi-        Diagram in order to separate the City’s
               tive areas.                                       urban area from its surrounding
               Underutilized Parcel/Land • A parcel              greenbelt of open lands. The UGB is
               or piece of land that is not developed to         intended to discourage urban sprawl,
               its full zoning potential.                        promote efficiency in providing govern-
               Undevelopable • Specific areas where              ment services in the City and region,
               topographic, geologic, and/or surficial soil      preserve open space and agricultural
               conditions indicate a significant danger to       lands, preserve scenic views, protect land
City of Benicia General Plan                               revised 11.4.03 (Measure K)                   209

Glossary
         for watershed management, protect            from uncontrolled or poorly managed
         natural resources, and provide for passive   development.
         recreation. No urban development is          Use • The purpose for which a lot or
         allowed beyond the UGB. “Urban devel-        structure is or may be leased, occupied,
         opment” shall mean development requir-       maintained, arranged, designed, intended,
         ing one or more basic municipal services     constructed, erected, moved, altered, and/
         including, but not limited to, water         or enlarged in accordance with the City‘s
         service, sewer, improved storm drain         Zoning Ordinance and General Plan land
         facilities, fire hydrants and other physical use designations.
         public facilities and services.
                                                      Use Permit • The discretionary and
         Urban Land Use • Residential, com-           conditional review of an activity or
         mercial, or industrial land use in areas     function or operation on a site or in a
         where urban services are available.          building or facility.
         Urban Open Space • The absence of            Utility Corridors • Rights-of-way or
         buildings or development, usually in well-   easements for utility lines on either
         defined volumes, within an urban envi-       publicly or privately owned property.
         ronment.                                     (See “Right-of-way” or “Easement.”)
         Urban Service Area • (1) An area in          Vacant • Lands or buildings that are not
         which urban services will be provided        actively used for any purpose.
         and outside of which such services will
         not be extended. (2) Developed, undevel-     Variance • A departure from any
         oped, or agricultural land, either incorpo-  provision of the zoning requirements for
         rated or unincorporated, within the          a specific parcel, except use, without
         sphere of influence of a city, which is      changing the zoning ordinance or the
         served or will be served during the first    underlying zoning of the parcel.A vari-
         five years of an adopted capital improve-    ance usually is granted only upon demon-
         ment program by urban facilities, utilities, stration of hardship based on the pecu-
         and services.The boundary around an          liarity of the property in relation to other
         urban service area is called the “urban      properties in the same zone district.
         service area boundary” and is to be          Very Low-income Household •
         developed in cooperation with a city and     A household with an annual income
         adopted by a Local Agency Formation          usually no greater than 50 percent of the
         Commission (LAFCO). (California Govern-      area median family income adjusted by
         ment Code §56080.)                           household size, as determined by a
         Urban Services • Utilities (such as          survey of incomes conducted by a city or
         water, gas, electricity, and sewer) and      a county, or in the absence of such a
         public services (such as police, fire,       survey, based on the latest available
         schools, parks, and recreation) provided     eligibility limits established by the US
         to an urbanized or urbanizing area.          Department of Housing and Urban
                                                      Development (HUD) for the Section 8
         Urban Sprawl • Haphazard growth or           housing program. (See “Area.”)
         outward extension of a city resulting
210          revised 11.4.03 (Measure K)                            City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                  Urban Land Use / Zoning Ordinance  Subhead
               View Corridor • The line of sight–                 now used by all federal agencies, wet-
               identified as to height, width, and dis-           lands are defined as “those areas meeting
               tance–of an observer looking toward an             certain criteria for hydrology, vegetation,
               object of significance to the community            and soils.”
               (e.g., ridgeline, river, historic building, etc.); Wildlife • Animals or plants existing in
               the route that directs the viewers atten-          their natural habitat.
               tion.
                                                                  Will • That which is expected or may
               Viewshed • The area within view from               be expected. Expresses intent or purpose.
               a defined observation point.                       (See “Shall” and “Should.”)
               Volume-to-Capacity Ratio • A mea-                  Williamson Act • Known formally as
               sure of the operating capacity of a                the California Land Conservation Act of
               roadway or intersection, in terms of the           1965, it was designed as an incentive to
               number of vehicles passing through,                retain prime agricultural land and open
               divided by the number of vehicles that             space in agricultural use, thereby slowing
               theoretically could pass through when              its conversion to urban and suburban
               the roadway or intersection is operating           development.The program entails a ten-
               at its designed capacity.Abbreviated as            year contract between the City or County
               “V/C.”At a V/C ratio of 1.0, the roadway or        and an owner of land whereby the land is
               intersection is operating at capacity. If the      taxed on the basis of its agricultural use
               ratio is less than 1.0, the traffic facility has   rather than its market value.The land
               additional capacity.Although ratios                becomes subject to certain enforceable
               slightly greater than 1.0 are possible, it is      restrictions, and certain conditions need
               more likely that the peak hour will                to be met prior to approval of an agree-
               elongate into a “peak period.” (See “Peak          ment.
               Hour” and “Level of Service.”)
                                                                  Woodlands • Lands covered with
               Warehousing Use • A use engaged in                 woods or trees.
               storage, wholesale, and distribution of
               manufactured products, supplies, and               Zoning • The division of a city or
               equipment, excluding bulk storage of               county by legislative regulations into
               materials that are flammable or explosive          areas, or zones, that specify allowable
               or that present hazards or conditions              uses for real property and size restric-
               commonly recognized as offensive.                  tions for buildings within these areas; a
                                                                  program that implements policies of the
               Watershed • The total area above a                 General Plan.
               given point on a watercourse that con-
               tributes water to its flow; the entire             Zoning District • A designated section
               region drained by a waterway or water-             of a city or county for which prescribed
               course that drains into a lake, or reservoir.      land use requirements and building and
                                                                  development standards are uniform.
               Wetlands • Transitional areas between
               terrestrial and aquatic systems where the          Zoning Ordinance • Title 17 of the
               water table is usually at or near the              Benicia Municipal Code delineates
               surface, or the land is covered by shallow         zoning districts and establishes regula-
               water. Under a “unified” methodology               tions governing the use, placement, and
                                                                  size of land and buildings.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                               211

Glossary
Photo Credits
              PHOTO CREDITS
              Joe Jacobson
              Pages 3, 13, 17, 21, 22, 25, 28, 33, 34, 37, 110, 141
              Kitty Griffin
              Pages 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 31, 48, 49, 67, 74, 77, 79, 85, 88, 90, 100, 102, 106, 119, 151
              Marilyn Bardet
              Pages 46, 101, 108
              Larry Cannon
              Pages 87, 97, 97
              Ann Van Winkle
              Pages 109, 122, 124
              Ed Swenson
              Page 135
              Peter Bray
              cover
212                                                                      City of Benicia General Plan
                                      Contents
               From 1847
               Benicia General Plan
               Into the 21st Century
               Adopted: June 15, 1999
City of Benicia General Plan                 i
Contents
         ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
         Benicia City Council     Committee                 Consultants
          Jerry Hayes, Mayor      Liaison Members             Naphtali Knox & Associates -
          Steven Messina,             City Council              Planning Manager
            Vice Mayor                     Pepe Arteaga       Michael Fornalski - Report
          Carey Corbaley                   Carey Corbaley       Format, Graphics, Maps
          Stephen Gizzi                    Jan Cox-Golovich   Design, Community &
          Jan Cox-Golovich                 John Silva           Environment -
                                                                Environmental Impact
         Benicia Planning             School Board              Report, Public Safety
         Commission                        Diane Dooley       Joyce Associates -
          Joe Burek, Chair                 Lisa Hirsh           Geotechnical
          Gary Kalian, Vice Chair          Sheli Ryan         Environmental Collaborative -
          Tom Campbell                                          Biological Resources
          Geoffrey Hannafin       City Manager
                                                              Clearwater Hydrology -
          Gregg Renfrow             Otto Giuliani
                                                                Hydrology and
          Nancy Steele                                          Water Quality
                                  Planning Staff
          Kathy Turner                                        Orion Environmental
                                    John Bunch,
                                      Planning Director         Associates -
         General Plan                                           Hazardous Materials
         Oversight Committee        Brenda Gillarde,
                                      Principal Planner       Donald Ballanti - Air Quality
          Elizabeth Patterson,                                Fehr & Peers Associates -
            Chair                   Del Lacey,
                                      Graphics Illustrator      Transportation
          Joe Jacobson,                                       Brown-Buntin Associates -
            Vice Chair                                          Noise
                                  Technical Advisory
          Ron Arrants                                         Mogavero Notestine
                                  Committee
          Ron Askham                                            Associates - Cultural
                                    Mike Alvarez,
          Marilyn Bardet                                        Resources and
                                      Parks and Community
          Bob Berman                                            Urban Design
                                      Services Director
          Joe Burek                                           Economic & Planning Systems
                                    Rob Braulik,
          Ron Glas                                              - Economic and Fiscal
                                      Economic
          Kitty Griffin                                       Community Design and
                                      Development Director
          Clint Holzwarth                                       Planning Services, UC Davis
                                    Ken Hanley,
          Gary Kalian                                           - Public Outreach
                                      Fire Chief
          Laksmi Lagares                                      Jeffery Baird - Work Program
                                    Heather McLaughlin,
          Annie Lloyd                                         Daniel Iacofano -
                                      City Attorney
          John Metzler                                          Meeting Facilitation
                                    Alan Nadritch,
          Reg Page                                            Russ Clifton - Meeting Videos
                                      Finance Director
          Lindy Purdy
                                    Dan Schiada,
          Mike Roetzer                                      Volunteers
                                      Assistant Director of
          Gary Salvadori                                        Thanks to the many volun-
                                      Public Works
          Bonnie Silveria                                       teers who supported the
          Bob Sotelo                                            work of GPOC and the
          Nancy Steele                                          formation of the New
          Ed Swenson                                            General Plan.
ii                                                          City of Benicia General Plan
                                                                                                                        Contents
               CONTENTS
               1. INTRODUCTION ................................................................................... 1
                  A. WHAT IS THE BENICIA GENERAL PLAN? ........................................... 1
                      1. Role of the General Plan ........................................................................ 1
                      2. Legal Requirements ................................................................................ 2
                      3. The General Plan Process ...................................................................... 2
                           Public Outreach Program .................................................................... 2
                      4. Organization of The Plan ........................................................................ 6
                           Goals, Policies, and Programs .............................................................. 6
                           Four Chapters ..................................................................................... 6
                           Maps and Diagrams ............................................................................. 7
                           Appendix ............................................................................................ 8
                           Technical Appendix ............................................................................ 8
                      5. Implementing, Updating, and Amending the General Plan .................. 10
                           Administering the General Plan ........................................................ 10
                           Annual Review by Planning Commission ......................................... 11
                           Amending the Plan ............................................................................ 11
                      6. Relation to Other Plans ........................................................................ 12
                  B. REGIONAL SETTING ............................................................................. 13
                      1. Location in the Region ......................................................................... 13
                      2. Physical Setting .................................................................................... 14
                           Gateways ........................................................................................... 16
                  C. THE PLANNING AREA .......................................................................... 17
                      1. Planning Area Boundary ....................................................................... 17
                      2. City Limits ............................................................................................ 19
                      3. Areas of Interest ................................................................................... 19
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                                       iii
Contents
           2. COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND
               SUSTAINABILITY....................................................................................................................................21
                         What is Sustainable Development? ......................................................... 22
               A. LAND USE AND GROWTH MANAGEMENT ............................................. 23
                   LAND USE ...................................................................................................................... 23
                   1. Residential Land ............................................................................................ 24
                         Low Density Residential ........................................................................... 25
                         Medium Density Residential .................................................................... 25
                         High Density Residential .......................................................................... 26
                   2. Commercial Land .......................................................................................... 26
                         Downtown Commercial ........................................................................... 26
                         General Commercial ................................................................................. 27
                         Community Commercial .......................................................................... 27
                         Business and Professional Offices .......................................................... 27
                         Waterfront Commercial ............................................................................ 27
                   3. Mixed Use....................................................................................................... 27
                         Downtown Mixed Use .............................................................................. 27
                         Lower Arsenal Mixed Use ........................................................................ 28
                   4. Industrial Land .............................................................................................. 28
                         General Industrial ...................................................................................... 28
                         Limited Industrial ...................................................................................... 28
                         Water-related Industrial ............................................................................ 29
                   5. Public and Quasi-public Land ..................................................................... 29
                   6. Open Space .................................................................................................... 29
                         Marsh ........................................................................................................... 31
                         General Open Space ................................................................................. 31
                         Parks ............................................................................................................ 31
                   AIRPORT LAND USE COMPATIBILITY…………………………..32
                   GROWTH MANAGEMENT ...................................................................................... 33
               B. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ........................................................................... 37
                   1. Economic Opportunities and Challenges ................................................. 37
                         Benicia’s Competitive Strengths .............................................................. 38
                         Benicia’s Competitive Challenges ........................................................... 39
                         Benicia’s Fiscal Status ................................................................................ 39
                   2. Economic Development Goals, Policies, and Programs ......................... 41
                         Citywide Economic Development .......................................................... 41
iv       revised 03.07.16 (ALUCP)                                                            City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                                                       Contents
                           Industrial Development .................................................................... 43
                           Port Development ............................................................................. 45
                           Historic Arsenal ................................................................................. 46
                           Downtown ........................................................................................ 47
                           Other Commercial Development ..................................................... 50
                  C. CIRCULATION ........................................................................................ 52
                      1. County and Regional Transportation Framework ................................ 52
                           Congestion Management Agency ...................................................... 52
                           Metropolitan Transportation Commission ........................................ 52
                      2. The Movement of People ..................................................................... 53
                           Pedestrian and Bicycle Movement .................................................... 53
                           Public Transit ..................................................................................... 53
                           Automobile Movement ..................................................................... 55
                      3. Circulation System ............................................................................... 55
                           Freeways ........................................................................................... 57
                           Arterial Streets................................................................................... 57
                           Collector Streets ................................................................................ 58
                           Local Streets ...................................................................................... 58
                      4. Existing and Future Traffic Conditions ................................................. 58
                           Freeways ........................................................................................... 58
                           City Street Network .......................................................................... 59
                      5. Parking Conditions ............................................................................... 65
                      6. Freight and Goods Movement .............................................................. 66
                           Truck Facilities .................................................................................. 66
                           Freight Rail Facilities ......................................................................... 66
                           Port Facilities ..................................................................................... 66
                      7. Circulation Goals, Policies, and Programs ............................................ 66
                  D. COMMUNITY SERVICES ....................................................................... 77
                      1. Public and Quasi-public ....................................................................... 77
                      Public and Quasi-public Goals, Policies, and Programs ............................. 77
                      2. Parks and Recreation ............................................................................ 79
                           Standards ........................................................................................... 79
                           Existing Parks .................................................................................... 79
                           Future Park Development ................................................................. 83
                      Parks and Recreation Goals, Policies, and Programs ................................. 84
                           Benicia State Parks ............................................................................ 87
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                                      v
Contents
               3. Schools ................................................................................................. 88
                     Existing Facilities .............................................................................. 88
                     Future Facilities ................................................................................. 88
               Schools Goals, Policies, and Programs ...................................................... 89
               4. Water .................................................................................................... 90
                     Water Supply ..................................................................................... 90
                     Water Quality .................................................................................... 90
                     Waste Water Treatment ...................................................................... 91
               Water Goals, Policies, and Programs ......................................................... 91
               5. Recycling Goals, Policies, and Programs .............................................. 94
               6. Utilities ................................................................................................. 94
                     Power and Energy Use ...................................................................... 94
                     Telecommunications ......................................................................... 94
               Utilities Goals, Policies, and Programs ...................................................... 95
         3. COMMUNITY IDENTITY ................................................................ 97
            A. HISTORIC RESOURCES ......................................................................... 97
               1. Native American Period ........................................................................ 98
               2. Hispanic Period .................................................................................... 98
               3. American Period ................................................................................... 98
               4. Archaeological Sites ........................................................................... 100
               5. Historic Buildings, Sites, and Areas ..................................................... 100
                     Waterfront ....................................................................................... 100
                     Arsenal ............................................................................................ 101
                     Downtown ...................................................................................... 102
               6. Historic Preservation .......................................................................... 102
               7. Historic and Archaeological Resources Goals, Policies,
                  and Programs .................................................................................... 105
            B. CULTURAL RESOURCES ..................................................................... 106
               1. Community Cultural Facilities and Activities ..................................... 106
               2. Cultural Goals, Policies and Programs ................................................ 107
               3. The Art Community ............................................................................ 108
               4. Art Goals, Policies, and Programs ....................................................... 109
            C. VISUAL CHARACTER ........................................................................... 110
               1. What is Visual Character? ................................................................... 110
vi                                                                                 City of Benicia General Plan
                                                                                                                           Contents
                      2. The Look and Feel of Benicia ............................................................. 110
                           Natural Features .............................................................................. 110
                           The Human Landscape ................................................................... 110
                      3. Scenic Views, Streets, and Gateways .................................................. 111
                           Scenic Views .................................................................................... 111
                           Waterfront ....................................................................................... 111
                           Scenic Streets and Gateways ........................................................... 113
                           Planning in Scenic Corridors .......................................................... 115
                      4. Architectural and Landscape Features ............................................... 115
                           Southampton ................................................................................... 115
                           Industrial Areas ................................................................................ 115
                           Downtown ...................................................................................... 116
                           Arsenal District ............................................................................... 117
                      Visual Character Goals, Policies, and Programs ...................................... 117
                  D. OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION OF RESOURCES .................... 122
                      1. Regional and Subregional Open Space and Trails .............................. 123
                           Open Space ..................................................................................... 123
                           Regional and Subregional Trails and Paths ...................................... 124
                      2. Regional and Subregional Open Space and Trails Goals,
                         Policies, and Programs ........................................................................ 125
                      3. Biotic Resources ................................................................................. 127
                           Plant Life ......................................................................................... 127
                           Wildlife ............................................................................................ 131
                           Special Status Species and Sensitive Natural Communities ............ 132
                      4. Biotic Resources Goals, Policies, and Programs ................................. 133
                      5. Water Resources ................................................................................. 135
                      6. Water Resources Goals, Policies, and Programs ................................. 136
                      7. Mineral Resources .............................................................................. 137
                           Soils ................................................................................................. 137
                      8. Mineral Resource Goals, Policies, and Programs ................................ 138
                      9. Energy Conservation Goals, Policies, and Programs .......................... 138
               4. COMMUNITY HEALTH AND SAFETY .................................... 141
                  A. HEALTHY COMMUNITY .................................................................... 141
                      1. Dimensions of Optimal Health .......................................................... 141
                      2. Healthy Community Goals, Policies, and Programs ............................ 142
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                                        vii
Contents
         B. HAZARDS TO THE COMMUNITY ...................................................... 145
            1. Geologic ............................................................................................. 145
                 Seismic Hazards ............................................................................... 145
                 Slope Stability Hazards .................................................................... 146
            2. Flood Hazards ..................................................................................... 148
                 FEMA Flood Maps ........................................................................... 148
                 Stormwater Master Plan/Flood Control Improvements .................. 148
                 Sea Level Rise .................................................................................. 151
            3. Fire Hazards ........................................................................................ 151
            4. Hazardous Materials and Waste .......................................................... 151
                 Hazardous Sites ............................................................................... 151
                 Hazardous Material and Waste Handlers ......................................... 153
                 Toxic Air Contaminant Sources ....................................................... 153
                 Hazardous Building Materials .......................................................... 153
            5. Utility Hazards .................................................................................... 154
                 Electric Power ................................................................................. 154
                 Natural Gas ...................................................................................... 154
                 Water Supply ................................................................................... 156
                 Waste Water ..................................................................................... 156
            6. Air Quality/Contamination ................................................................. 156
         C. RESPONSES TO HAZARDS .................................................................. 158
            1. Community Right-to-know ................................................................. 158
            2. Emergency Response Plans and Procedures ...................................... 158
                 Emergency Operations Plan ............................................................ 158
                 Evacuation Routes ........................................................................... 159
            3. Public Safety Services ......................................................................... 159
                 Crime .............................................................................................. 159
                 Police Services ................................................................................ 159
                 Fire Services .................................................................................... 159
            4. Medical Services ................................................................................. 160
            5. Community Hazards Goals, Policies, and Programs ........................... 160
         D. NOISE .................................................................................................... 170
            1. Human Reaction to Noise .................................................................. 170
                 Communication Interference .......................................................... 171
                 Sleep Interference ........................................................................... 171
viii                                                                          City of Benicia General Plan
                                                                                                                       Contents
                           Physiological responses .................................................................. 171
                           Annoyance ...................................................................................... 171
                      2. Noise in the Community .................................................................... 172
                           Existing Noise Levels ...................................................................... 172
                           Projected Noise Levels .................................................................... 172
                      3. Performance Standards for Noise-Sensitive Uses ............................... 176
                           Transportation Noise Sources ......................................................... 176
                           Stationary Noise Sources................................................................. 177
                      4. Community Noise Goals, Policies, and Programs ............................... 179
               GLOSSARY .................................................................................................... 181
                  ABBREVIATIONS ........................................................................................ 181
                  GLOSSARY ................................................................................................... 183
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                                     ix
Contents
         LIST OF FIGURES
         Figure 1-1. Regional Setting ................................................................................ 14
         Figure 1-2. Generalized Topography ................................................................... 15
         Figure 1-3. Gateways ........................................................................................... 18
         Figure 1-4. Benicia Planning Area ........................................................................ 20
         Figure 2-1. General Plan Land Use Catagories Within City Limits ...................... 23
         Figure 2-2. Industrial Properties to which Policy 2.3.1 (Master Plan) Applies ... 36
         Figure 2-3. City of Benicia General Fund Revenues ............................................ 40
         Figure 2-4. Bicycle and Multi-Use Circulation Diagram ...................................... 54
         Figure 2-5. Circulation Diagram .......................................................................... 56
         Figure 2-6. Intersection Mitigations .................................................................... 62
         Figure 2-7. Public/Quasi-public Facilities ............................................................ 78
         Figure 2-8. Parks and Open Space....................................................................... 80
         Figure 3-1. Historic Sites ..................................................................................... 99
         Figure 3-2. Vistas and Views .............................................................................. 112
         Figure 3-3. Biological Resources ....................................................................... 128
         Figure 3-4. Hydrology and Mineral Resources .................................................. 139
         Figure 4-1. Ground Shaking Amplification ........................................................ 147
         Figure 4-2. Areas with Potential Landslide and Liquefaction Hazards .............. 149
         Figure 4-3. Flood Hazards .................................................................................. 150
         Figure 4-4. Fire Hazards ..................................................................................... 152
         Figure 4-5. Transmission Lines and Critical Facilities ....................................... 155
         Figure 4-6. Existing Noise Contours ................................................................. 173
         Figure 4-7. Future Noise Contours .................................................................... 175
x                                                                              City of Benicia General Plan
                                                                                                                    Contents
               LIST OF TABLES
               Table 1-1.  Background Reports in the Technical Appendix ................................. 8
               Table 1-2.  Relation of General Plan Chapters to State-mandated Elements ........ 9
               Table 1-3.  List of Other Plans and Documents Examined ................................. 12
               Table 2-1.  Zoning District Equivalents for General Plan Residential
                           Land Use Categories .......................................................................... 24
               Table 2-2.  Residential Land Within City Limits in Gross Acres, as of 1995 ........ 25
               Table 2-3.  Commercial Land (in gross acres) Within City Limits, as of 1995 ..... 26
               Table 2-4.  Industrial Land (in acres) within City Limits, as of 1995 .................. 28
               Table 2-5.  Existing Public and Quasi-public Facilities Within
                           City Limits, 1995 ................................................................................ 30
               Table 2-6.  Park Standards ................................................................................... 31
               Table 2-7.  Classification of Bicycle Facilities ..................................................... 53
               Table 2-8.  Level of Service Criteria for Signalized Intersections ....................... 60
               Table 2-9.  Level of Service Criteria for Stop-controlled Intersections .............. 60
               Table 2-10. Existing (1995) and Future Intersection Levels of Service (LOS) ...... 61
               Table 2-11. Intersection LOS: Future Conditions with and without
                           Intersection Improvements .............................................................. 63
               Table 2-12. Streets That May Exceed Existing (1997) Capacity with Future
                           Growth Under this General Plan ...................................................... 65
               Table 2-13. Existing and Future Parks and Recreation Facilities within
                           City Limits, 1995 ................................................................................ 81
               Table 2-14. Amount of Park Land per Capita ....................................................... 82
               Table 2-15. School Enrollment and Capacity, 1997–1998 .................................... 88
               Table 2-16. School Enrollment, 1997 and Projected ............................................ 89
               Table 4-1.  Decibel Levels of Common Noises ................................................. 170
               Table 4-2.  Summary of Measured Exterior Noise Levels and Estimated
                           Day-Night Average Levels (Ldn) in Areas Containing Noise
                           Sensitive Land Uses ......................................................................... 174
               Table 4-3.  Maximum Allowable Noise Exposure for New Noise-Sensitive
                           Uses From Transportation Noise Sources........................................ 176
               Table 4-4.  Noise Level Performance Standards for Noise-sensitive
                           Land Uses which may be affected by Stationary Noise Sources ..... 178
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                                   xi

Contents
xii      City of Benicia General Plan
      1. INTRODUCTION
               Benicia has a long history of big ideas. Originally the city was to be a major port; then
               it was the state capital; later it was a transportation hub.An increase in population and
               jobs that started in the 1970s is expected to continue, though at a slower pace,
               through 2015. During this period of expansion, it is vital that Benicia’s future be
               managed wisely to preserve and enhance its many attractive qualities.
               This chapter details the planning, legal, and physical framework for the Benicia
               General Plan. Specifically it describes the role of the plan, its legal footing, its organiza-
               tion, Benicia’s relationship to the region, and a description of the planning area.
               A. WHAT IS THE BENICIA GENERAL PLAN?
               1. ROLE OF THE GENERAL PLAN
               The Benicia General Plan is the principal policy document for guiding future
               conservation and development in the city. It reflects the community’s shared
               values and determination of what Benicia is and should continue to be—an
               uncommonly special place.
               The Plan has a long-term horizon, addressing an approximately 15– to 20–year
               time frame. At the same time, it brings overall direction to the day-to-day decisions
               of the City Council, its commissions, and City staff.
               The General Plan determines what kind of urban development should take place
               and where and when, and who in the City will be charged with getting it done.
               The Plan—
               • Expresses the desires of Benicia residents in regard to the physical, social,
                  economic, cultural, and environmental character of the city;
               • Serves as a comprehensive guide for making decisions about land use, economic
                  development, road improvements, and protecting natural resources and the
                  public health and safety;
               • Provides the legal foundation for all zoning, subdivision, and public facilities
                  ordinances, decisions, and projects—all of which must be consistent with the
                  General Plan.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                               1

Chapter 1. Introduction
               The general plan is to be considered and used as a whole. One section is not to
               be stressed while ignoring others; rather all of the sections should be used to-
               gether, with flexibility. Used in this way, the Plan will become a powerful tool for
               ensuring consistency of City actions, while remaining responsive to changing
               needs and times.
               2. LEGAL REQUIREMENTS
               The general plan is a State-mandated blueprint for physical development. The
               general plan derives its authority as the summit of land use regulations from the
               California Government Code. The City Council adopts the general plan by resolu-
               tion as a legal document.
               Seven general plan “elements” are required by law: Land Use, Circulation, Housing,
               Conservation, Open Space, Safety, and Noise. How these elements are incorpo-
               rated into the organization of this General Plan is explained in Section 4, below,
               and in Table 1-2. When optional subjects are added to a general plan (for example,
               “economic development” and “health”), they have the same status as a mandated
               element. All general plan elements carry equal weight (Sierra Club v. Board of
               Supervisors [1981] 126 Cal.App.3d 698). No single section, chapter, or subject
               supersedes any other.
               3. THE GENERAL PLAN PROCESS
               In late 1992, the Benicia City Council formed a citizens’ task force to review the
               General Plan and report its findings. As a result, in late 1993, a General Plan Task
               Force Report was issued. The report stated that many of the policies and programs
               in the General Plan had not been revised since 1979, had already been imple-
               mented, or were no longer relevant to current or future conditions.
               In June 1994, the City Council adopted a resolution directing that preparations begin
               for a comprehensive update of the General Plan.Accordingly, the Council formed a 17-
               member citizens’ General Plan Oversight Committee (GPOC) to work with City staff to
               design the update process. GPOC was charged with facilitating public outreach, moni-
               toring the update process to be sure it is on time and within budget, providing
               volunteer assistance, and assisting in community workshops and forums.
               Consultants were engaged to develop a work program for a General Plan Update.
               The work program was presented to and accepted by the City Council in Novem-
               ber 1994. The City Council adopted a budget for the work and directed staff and
               the GPOC to retain consultants to assist GPOC in undertaking the actual update.
               PUBLIC OUTREACH PROGRAM
               This General Plan is built on issues defined by the community—issues that fo-
               cused on what should be preserved and what should change. Some of those
2                                                                       City of Benicia General Plan

                                                             A. What is the Benicia General Plan?
               issues came from discussion by the General Plan Oversight Committee (GPOC) of a
               number of Background Reports produced by the City’s consultants in late 1995
               and early 1996. Many other issues, however, were identified during the course of
               two communitywide surveys and six public workshops in 1995 and 1996.
               At the outset of the process to involve the public, GPOC mailed an open-response
               questionnaire to gauge, in a general way, public opinion concerning issues to be
               addressed in the General Plan update. In response to ideas generated through the
               questionnaire, the Community Design and Planning Services (CDPS) of the Univer-
               sity of California (Davis) conducted a series of workshops in neighborhoods
               throughout the city. To involve the city’s youth, CDPS oversaw workshops and
               discussion sessions in all Benicia schools. The issues brought out in the first
               questionnaire and the workshops were tested with a longer survey mailed to the
               entire community.
               Survey 1
               A two-page questionnaire mailed by the GPOC to Benicians in June 1995 was
               answered by nearly 500 people. The results pinpointed what people deeply care
               about in Benicia:
               Benicia’s small-town atmosphere
               Economic health of First Street
               Objectivity in business development
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                    3

Chapter 1. Introduction
               Workshops
               In the summer of 1995, the General Plan Oversight Committee hosted six public
               workshops on the General Plan update. More than a hundred Benicians from all
               areas of town attended the workshops. Major concerns were:
               • cultural resources
               • quality of life
               • small town character; and
               • the waterfront.
               Workshop participants generally supported:
               • First Street and tourism;
               • a diversified economy;
               • opportunities to live and work in town; and
               • infill development, rather than expansion.
               Youth Outreach
               Students of all ages were involved in the process of identifying what is important
               to people living in Benicia. Different methods for garnering responses, ideas, and
               concerns were used for each age group.
               Elementary school students were asked to draw pictures of the things they
               considered “important.” The drawings centered on themes of environmental
               quality and recreational facilities. Middle school students were organized into
               small groups; each group was given a 24-exposure disposable camera to photo-
               graph representations of their ideas. The resulting collage of photos expressed
               concerns about pollution, increased housing construction, traffic congestion,
               parking, and historic preservation. They desired more green space and recre-
               ational facilities for their age group. High school students responded to a two-
               page survey; results of the survey yielded that almost half of the high school
               students would live in Benicia as an adult; 65 percent wanted to raise a family
               here; and 89 percent felt safe in the city.
4                                                                      City of Benicia General Plan

                                                              A. What is the Benicia General Plan?
               Survey 2
               A second survey was mailed to 11,000 households and businesses in Benicia in
               January 1996. Nearly 3,000 completed surveys were returned, which gave the
               survey results a high level of confidence. The following 10 issues received the
               highest level of support (69% or greater) as being important to the community:
               1.  Feeling safe in residential areas at night
               2.  Feeling safe Downtown at night
               3.  Good public schools
               4.  Balance growth to ensure maintaining Benicia’s quality of life
               5.  Small town atmosphere
               6.  Growth should maintain small-town character
               7.  Citizens need a voice in growth decisions
               8.  Attract businesses that sustain environmental quality
               9.  Pedestrian-friendly streets in the Downtown and other commercial areas
               10. Library facilities
               A number of issues raised by the survey were opposed, although with the excep-
               tion of Sky Valley (two-thirds of Benicians do not want residential development in
               Sky Valley) the levels of opposition were not as great (generally only 20 to 30
               percent), in contrast to the very high levels of support (70 to 90 percent) for the
               10 issues listed above. Refer to Appendix A for more detailed survey results.
               The City’s consultants and citizen groups prepared 11 background reports at the
               end of 1995. GPOC began in February 1996 to use that information, the results of a
               communitywide survey taken in January 1996, and a series of community work-
               shops held during the summer to identify the issues to be faced in updating the
               Benicia General Plan. An Issues, Goals, and Policies (IGPs) report was prepared
               January 21, 1997 and reviewed by the GPOC, Planning Commission, and City
               Council. These reviews ensured that the IGPs document contained goals and
               policies for what are the most significant issues for the community.
               The City’s consultants then prepared a Goals, Policies, and Programs report (June 6)
               and a Preferred Alternatives Report (June 30) which incorporated additions and
               changes made by the GPOC, the consultants, City staff, Planning Commission, and City
               Council since the IGPs report of January 21, 1997. The Preferred Alternatives Report
               was reviewed by the City Council on August 6, and with their comments in hand, the
               consultants began drafting the General Plan and an environmental impact report.
               This Draft General Plan is the outcome of a process which began with the Task
               Force (1992–93) and the Work Program (1994). It is a process in which the
               General Plan Oversight Committee (GPOC) held more than one hundred meetings
               and, with public participation, identified the Goals, Policies, and Programs (GPPs)
               which are the heart of this General Plan.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                        5

Chapter 1. Introduction
               4. ORGANIZATION OF THE PLAN
               GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
               “Goals” are “end-state”; they are the long-range answers to what the City wants to
               accomplish to resolve a particular issue. Policies are medium- or short-range
               statements that guide day-to-day decision-making so there is continuing progress
               toward the attainment of goals. Programs are the actions taken to implement a
               specific policy or group of policies. The hierarchy of goal, policy, and program is
               outlined below.
               GOAL:                 A general, overall, and ultimate purpose, aim, or
                                     end toward which the City will direct effort.
               POLICY:               A specific statement of principle which implies clear com-
                                     mitment but is not mandatory. A general direction that the
                                     City elects to follow, in order to meet its goals.
               Program:              An action, activity, or strategy carried out in response to
                                     adopted policy or group of policies.
               Explanatory text appears before and after some of the goals, policies, and pro-
               grams but is not part of the goal, policy or program.
               FOUR CHAPTERS
               The Benicia General Plan is organized into four chapters, a glossary, an Appendix,
               and a Technical Appendix. The chapters are 1: Introduction; 2: Community Devel-
               opment and Sustainability; 3: Community Identity; and 4: Community Health and
               Safety.
               Chapter 2 includes four sections:
               • Land Use defines the ultimate building envelope” for the City, and establishes
                 the overarching goals for the community’s development. Land Use also defines
                 the seventeen land use categories used in the General Plan and identifies those
                 properties where changes occurred to the prior (1993) General Plan land uses.
               • Economic Development addresses land development in all the business and
                 commercial sectors of the City.
               • Circulation looks at how freeways affect Benicia, in-town traffic, and mass
                 transit.
               • Community Services discusses public facilities and provision of public services.
               Chapter 3 covers three topics:
               • Historic and Cultural Resources addresses preservation of historic areas and
                 building community spirit.
               • Visual Character deals with maintaining Benicia’s small town atmosphere,
                 preserving scenic views, and enhancing the City’s appearance.
6                                                                      City of Benicia General Plan

                                                              A. What is the Benicia General Plan?
               • Open Space and Conservation of Resources focuses on protection and enhance-
                  ment of the natural environment including open space, water and air, and plants
                  and animals.
               Chapter 4 contains four sections:
               • Healthy Communities promotes ways to live more healthfully.
               • Hazards to the Community identifies dangers to the community per the State-
                  mandated safety element.
               • Responses to Hazards contains the community’s emergency response plans and
                  the safety goals, policies and programs.
               • Noise focuses on the sources and effects of sounds in the community, per the
                  State-mandated noise element.
               The Benicia Housing Element (1993) is a stand-alone document, but is part of this
               General Plan and should be consulted accordingly. The Housing Element contains
               the City’s goals, policies and programs related to the maintenance and develop-
               ment of housing in Benicia.
               DIAGRAMS
               The City’s land use diagram, which is attached separately at the back of this
               document, is an integral part of the General Plan. The diagram graphically ex-
               presses the Plan’s development policies by showing the desired arrangement and
               location of land uses. The diagram is required to be consistent with the General
               Plan text (and its goals, policies, and programs).
               In keeping with past practice, the City of Benicia has again prepared a site-
               specific land use diagram to avoid confusion about designations for individual
               parcels. While the boundaries between land use districts usually follow property
               lines or streets, the land use diagram should not be used to calculate parcel
               acreages or lot size dimensions.The Assessors’ Parcel Books can be used for that
               purpose.
               The land use diagram and the general plan text together specify the “population
               density” (number of people and dwelling units per net acre) of residentially-
               designated land and the “building intensity” for all other designations. Building
               intensity is expressed in terms of floor area ratio (FAR), which is the ratio of gross
               floor area to the total site area.The land use diagram also shows the location of
               existing and proposed parks, public schools, and other municipal services.
               The circulation diagram diagram shows current and proposed arterials, collectors,
               and local streets, as well as bikeways and rail lines. The roadway system has been
               tested against the planned level of development and has been found to be ad-
               equate. More discussion about the relationship between land use and circulation
               is found in Chapter 2C of this General Plan.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                          7

Chapter 1. Introduction
               Together, the land use and circulation diagrams illustrate the managed growth of
               the City for the next 15 to 20 years. The General Plan also contains other
               diagrams to illustrate the policies and programs in the Plan.
               APPENDIX
               The Appendix contains information on Growth Management, Airport Land Use
               Compatibility and Hazardous Substances. While important to a thorough
               understanding of the General Plan, the Appendix is not adopted as policy by the
               City.
               TECHNICAL APPENDIX
               A separate document, the Technical Appendix, contains background material used
               in preparing the General Plan. This material provided an essential foundation for
               formulating issues, goals, policies, and programs. While important to a thorough
               understanding of the General Plan process, the Technical Appendix is not adopted
               as policy by the City. Anyone wishing to review the Technical Appendix may do
               so at the Planning Department in City Hall or at the public library. A list of the
               Background Reports contained in the Technical Appendix:
               Table 1-1.    Background Reports in the Technical Appendix
               1.  Audit of 1993 General Plan                  November 13, 1995
               2.  Community Survey Report                     May 1996
               3.  Cultural Resources                          August 23, 1996
               4.  Economic and Fiscal                         February 26, 1996
               5.  Healthy Communities                         February 26, 1996
               6.  Historical and Archaeological               March 5, 1996
               7.  Housing and Demographics                    January 11, 1996
               8.  Land Use                                    April 1, 1996
               9.  Natural Resources                           January 17, 1996
               10. Noise                                       February 14, 1996
               11. Public Safety                               February 28, 1996
               12. Transportation                              May 3, 1996
               13. Urban Design                                April 4, 1996
8            revised 04.05.16 (ALUCP)                                 City of Benicia General Plan
                                                             A. What is the Benicia General Plan?
               Table 1-2. Relation of General Plan Chapters to State-mandated Elements
                                                                          GENERAL PLAN
               MANDATED ELEMENTS                                         Chapter*      Pages
               LAND USE ELEMENT           Population Density &              2          23–31
                                          Building Intensity
                                          Land Use Diagram                  2       Rear Pocket
                                          Distribution of Housing,          2       Rear Pocket
                                          Business, Industry,
                                          and Open Space
                                          Distribution of Recreation        2       Rear Pocket
                                          Facilities, Educational Fac-
                                          ilities, and Public Buildings
                                          Flood Areas                       4         148–150
                                          Mineral Resources                 3         137–139
                                          Implementation                    2      32–35, 41–51,
                                                                                   67–77, 84–87
                                                                                   89–90, 92–95
               CIRCULATION ELEMENT        Description of Existing           2          52–66
                                          System
                                          Diagram of Existing System        2          54, 56
                                          Description of Proposed           2          58–65
                                          System
                                          Diagram of Proposed System        2          54, 56
                                          Utilities                        2, 4  90–91, 154–156
                                          Implementation                    2        67–76, 168
               CONSERVATION ELEMENT       Water, Rivers, Harbors           2, 3  90, 122–124, 129
                                          Forests                           3            130
                                          Soils                             4      137, 145–148
                                          Mineral Resources                 3            137
                                          Implementation                   2, 3  92–94, 133–134
                                                                                      136, 138
               OPEN SPACE ELEMENT         Description                       3         122–125
                                          Trails System                    2, 3     80, 124–125
                                          Management of Resources          2, 3   90–91, 135, 137
                                          Areas for Outdoor Recreation     2, 3        79–83
                                          Preservation for Public           3         147, 149
                                          Health, Safety                              150, 152
                                          Implementation                   2, 3  84–86, 125–127
                                                                                   133–134, 136
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                      9

Chapter 1. Introduction
               Table 1-2. Relation of General Plan Chapters to State-mandated Elements
               (continued)
                                                                                 GENERAL PLAN
               MANDATED ELEMENTS                                               Chapter*     Pages
               SAFETY ELEMENT                    Seismic Risk                     4       145–146
                                                 Slope Instability/Geologic       4       146–148
                                                 Hazards
                                                 Flooding                         4       148–151
                                                 Fire Hazard                      4          151
                                                 Emergency Response/              4       158 –159
                                                 Evacuation Routes
                                                 Hazardous Materials             4, G 151–153, G1–G18
                                                 Implementation                   4       160–169
               NOISE ELEMENT                     Noise Sources and Problems       4       170–172
                                                 Noise Contours                   4        173, 175
                                                 Noise Attenuation                4        176, 178
                                                 Implementation                   4       179 –180
               * Letters refer to the Appendices
               5. IMPLEMENTING, UPDATING, AND AMENDING THE GENERAL PLAN
               ADMINISTERING THE GENERAL PLAN
               Once adopted, a general plan does not remain static. State law permits up to four
               general plan amendments per mandatory element per year (Government Code
               §65358[b]). Most amendments propose a change in the land use designation of a
               particular property which equates to a change to the land use element.As time passes,
               the City may decide that it also is necessary to revise portions of the text to reflect
               land use diagram changes or other changing circumstances or philosophy.
               While some degree of flexibility is desirable in the planning process, basic to its
               very existence is that it possess some degree of stability. Without the expectation
               of stability, it cannot serve as a comprehensive and long-term guide to local
               development. Therefore, although the City may decide to amend this plan, the
               primary position of the City will be to implement it as adopted. This will honor
               both the principle of stability and the extraordinary degree of community partici-
               pation that went into the formation of the plan.
               Generally it is recommended that the City comprehensively review the Plan every
               five years to determine whether it is still in step with community values and
               conditions.
10                                                                         City of Benicia General Plan

                                                            A. What is the Benicia General Plan?
               ANNUAL REVIEW BY PLANNING COMMISSION
               State law provides direction on how cities can maintain the plan as a contempo-
               rary policy guide: Government Code §65400[b] requires each planning agency to
               report annually to the Office of Planning and Research and the California Depart-
               ment of Housing and Community Development (HCD) on “the status of the plan
               and progress in its implementation, including the progress in meeting its share of
               regional housing needs determined pursuant to Section 65584…”. In addition, the
               planning agency is required annually to review the City’s Capital Improvements
               Program for consistency with the General Plan (Government Code §65103[c]).
               AMENDING THE PLAN
               Anyone wishing to amend the General Plan would follow the procedure generally
               outlined below. (More detailed information on processing and timing is available
               from the Planning Department.)
               1. Prior to filing an application, the prospective applicant should discuss the
                   proposed amendment with City staff. This will clarify the process and identify
                   any concerns the City may have about the proposed changes.
               2. The next step in the process is to file an official application with the Planning
                   Department and pay any necessary processing fees. An application must
                   include a development plan of sufficient detail that potential environmental
                   effects could be ascertained.
               3. City staff reviews the application for completeness and then schedules it for a
                   public hearing before the Planning Commission. A public notice is sent to all
                   property owners within 300 feet of the subject property and a legal notice is
                   also placed in the official newspaper.
               4. The Planning Department staff will prepare a report for the Planning Commis-
                   sion which discusses the proposed amendment, any environmental effects
                   that may result from the amendment, and any comments received from City
                   departments or outside agencies. The report advises the Planning Commis-
                   sion whether it should recommend the amendment to the City Council for
                   approval or denial.
               5. The amendment is then set for public hearing before the City Council, accom-
                   panied by another staff report and the Planning Commission recommendation.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                     11

Chapter 1. Introduction
               6. RELATION TO OTHER PLANS
               As part of the General Plan update, a number of plans and studies were examined
               and reviewed. The General Plan Task Force Report (item 1), the two Conservation
               Plans (items 2 and 3), and the Economic Development Strategy (item 4) were
               among the more influential documents in setting the scope and tone of the
               general plan update process.
               Table 1-3. List of Other Plans and Documents Examined
                   Plan or Document                                                    Date
                1. General Plan Task Force Report                                      December 1993
                2. Downtown Historic Conservation Plan                                 November 1990
                3. Arsenal Historic Conservation Plan                                  November 1993
                4. Economic Development Strategy, Benicia Economic                     January 17, 1995
                   Development Board
                5. Benicia Industrial Design Guidelines                                March 10, 1989
                6. Preliminary Master Circulation Study                                August 1990
                7. Citywide Traffic Improvement Funding Report (Omni Means)            January 1992
                8. Water System Master Plan                                            November 1990
                9. SkyValley Benicia Specific Plan                                     April 10, 1992
               10. Benicia Zoning Ordinance (as amended):                              May 1994
               11. Benicia Subdivision Ordinance                                       November 1993
               12. Parks, Trails, and Open Space Master Plan                           June 1994
               13. Benicia State Park Recreation Area                                  June 1991
               14. Benicia Capitol State Historic Park                                 June 1991
               15. Benicia/Solano County Economic/Community Profile                    August 1995
               16. Tri-City and County Open Space Plan                                 March 1994
               17. Gateway to the Inland Coast: The Story of the Carquinez Strait      1996
               18. Carquinez Strait Resource Plan                                      September 1997
               19. Delta Estuary, California’s Inland Coast                            May 1991
               20. Solano County Land Use and Circulation Element                      July 1994
               21. Solano Congestion Management Program                                November 1993
               22. Bay Area Ridge Trail Plan                                           1992
               23. Bay Trail: Planning for a Recreational Ring Around San Francisco    1989
               24. Special Area Plan – Tri-City and County Regional Park               1994
                   and Open Space Preservation Plan
               25. Waterfront Plan                                                     1975
               26. Special Area Plan for Waterfront Area                               1977
               27. Urban Waterfront Restoration Plan                                   1980
12                                                                       City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                B. Regional Setting
               B. REGIONAL SETTING
               1. LOCATION IN THE REGION
               Benicia is approximately 35 miles northeast of San Francisco and 57 miles south-
               west of Sacramento. It lies on the north shore of the Carquinez Strait, where the
               combined flow of the Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers have cut a deep gorge
               through the coast range. The Strait is a crucial link in Northern California’s inland
               waterway, connecting San Pablo Bay and San Francisco Bay to the west with the
               Sacramento and San Joaquin river delta to the east.Through the Strait, ocean-going
               ships can reach the Port of Benicia, or can continue on to the Central Valley ports
               of Sacramento and Stockton.
               The city is built on a peninsula of land that reaches south from the main body of
               Solano County and creates a prominent bend in the Carquinez Strait. From this
               peninsula, highway and railroad bridges span the Strait to connect Benicia with
               the Contra Costa County cities of Martinez and Concord.This is the one place
               where both trucks and railroad cars can cross the San Francisco Bay/Sacramento
               River waterway.The rail line and I-680 provide easy access to Benicia from the
               north and south; I-780 (which the city straddles) provides access from the west.
               Although part of Solano County, Benicia is closely linked to Contra Costa County
               across the Strait. Views from Benicia encompass the Strait, the foothills of north-
               ern Contra Costa County, and Mt. Diablo in the distance. Many Benicia residents
               work and shop in Contra Costa County.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                       13

Chapter 1. Introduction
                                                                         Vacaville
                           Sonoma
                                            Napa
                                                                   Fairfield
                                                             Benicia
                                                             Planning
                                                             Area
                                            Vallejo
                                                    Martinez
                 San                                                Concord
                 Rafael            Richmond
                                                                  Walnut
                                          Berkeley                Creek
                                                                              0      5     10
                                                                                    Miles
                                              Oakland
                            San
                         Francisco
                                                                Hayward
                Figure 1-1.      Regional Setting
                Solano County lies within the Airport Influence Area for the Travis Air Force Base
                Land Use Compatibility Plan. Travis Air Force Base is located in Fairfield, approxi-
                mately 15 miles from the Benicia city limits. Home to the largest air mobility
                organization in the Air Force, the 60th Air Mobility Wing, Travis AFB is the West
                Coast terminal for aircraft returning sick or injured patients from the Pacific region.
                Travis is the largest employer in Solano County: in 2013, the base employed over
                13,000 military and civilian personnel and had an economic impact of $1.6 billion.
                2. PHYSICAL SETTING
                The Planning Area is made up primarily of rolling hills, rising to an elevation of
                1,160 feet. On the west boundary, Sulphur Springs Mountain reaches approxi-
                mately 950 feet. Two major drainages—Sulphur Springs Creek in the west, and
                Paddy Creek in the east—run approximately north-south through the Planning
                Area. The flow from Sulphur Springs Creek is contained by Lake Herman before
                being joined by Paddy Creek and continuing into the Benicia Industrial Park.
                The rolling hills reach almost to the shoreline; very little of Benicia is flat. (See
                Figure 1-2.) On the southern margins of the city, the land slopes gently down to
                the Carquinez Strait. Most of the older residential areas and the Downtown are
                here. The eastern city limits are bordered by the marshlands of Suisun Bay. Rela-
                tively flat areas adjacent to the marshes provide sites for industry. At the south-
                western boundary of the Planning Area, another flat, marshy area has been pre-
                served as the Benicia State Recreation Area.
14            revised 04.05.16 (ALUCP)                                    City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 B. Regional Setting
   GENERALIZED                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LEGEND
   TOPOGRAPHY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Elevation Ranges:
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0–100 ft.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            100–200 ft.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            200–300 ft.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            300–400 ft.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            400–500 ft.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                INTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            500–600 ft.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RSTA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            600–700 ft.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            700–800 ft.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            800–900 ft.
                                                                                                                                                     H ERMA N
                                                                                                                                                                RO A D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            900–1000 ft.
                                                                                                                                                KE                                                                                                                                         WAY
                                                                                                                                           LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IA L
                                                                                                                                                                 R ES
                                                                                                                                                                   ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   STR                                      >1000 ft.
                                                                                                                                                                        VO                                                                                                     IN D U
                                                                                                                                                                         IR
                                                                                                                                                                                R                                                             ET
                                                                                                                                                                                    O
                                                                                                                                                                                        A                                            RE
                                                                                                                                                                                            D                                   ST
                                                                           L a ke
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            D
                                                                           Herman                                                                                                                                      2N
                                                                                                                                                                                                              E A ST                                 ROAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PARK
                                                                                           RO
                                                                                                                               E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Bay
                                                                                                SE               DR IV
                                                                                                                                   DRIVE
                                                                                                                 AM
                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Suisun
                                                                                                        N   OR
                                                                                                     PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   YS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BA
                                                    HAS                                                                                                                                                                                               R                                              HO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      K                                                  RE
                                                  T IN G                                                                                                                                                                         AVENUE
                                                                                                                                                                                                              HILLCREST                                     RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                     STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     STREET
                                                  S                                                                                                                                                                                                          AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AD
                   IN                                      DRIVE
                        TE                                                          P TO N ROAD
                             RS                                                AM
                                                                          TH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     5TH
                                  TA
                                    TE                             SO U
                                         78                                                                               ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                     E. 2ND
                                              0                                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                          W. 7TH                                                                                                                                                           ADAMS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MILITARY        EAST                                                                     ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GRANT ST
                                                                                                                                                      MILITARY                WEST
                                    Southampton
                                                                                                                                                                                            STREET
                                    Bay
                                                                                                                                                                                            1ST
                                                          Q U I N E Z                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Y
                                                    C A R                                       S T R                                                                                                                                                                                                               T
                                                                                                      A I                                                                                                                                                                                                 U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N
                                                                                                          T                                                                                                                                                                        Y                 O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           T                     C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A                                      SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N O                              C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L A           A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   S O          T R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N                                                                                               800   0        800 1600
              Figure 1-2. Generalized Topography
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     15

Chapter 1. Introduction
               Several key natural features have influenced the pattern of existing development:
               • The Carquinez Strait and Suisun Bay, which provide an extensive, accessible
                 shoreline that is bracketed on both east and west by marsh preserves.The
                 shoreline is divided between residential, recreational, and industrial uses.
               • Low hills above the Downtown that interrupt lines of sight to the newer devel-
                 opment in the hill areas north of I-780.This interruption creates separate “visual
                 basins”—contributing to the small town feel and scale of Benicia. The topogra-
                 phy frames a “water-oriented” area containing the Downtown, central Benicia,
                 and portions of Southampton which lie below the main ridgeline.
               • Steep hillsides, high promontories, and canyons north of the main ridgeline
                 facing the Carquinez Strait that define three distinct areas: (1) an “upland” area
                 directly behind the main ridgeline, which is largely developed; (2) the “lake” area
                 where the hills slope inward towards Lake Herman; and (3) a “northern” area
                 comprised of the watershed of Sulphur Springs Creek, which until the early
                 1990s was considered for residential development.
               • A pronounced terrace, directly in line with the Benicia-Martinez Bridge, that
                 separates the northbound and westbound freeways. This terrace defines two
                 distinct industrial areas: community uses and import-export activities to the
                 southwest, and major industrial uses to the northeast. The northeast industrial
                 area is also contained by the hills below Lake Herman Road to the north, the
                 slopes above East Second Street to the west, and Suisun Bay to the east.
               GATEWAYS
               Benicia’s identity is strengthened by the experience of entering the city through
               distinct gateways: four by land and one by water. Each of these gateways provides
               a different view of the city:
               Lake Herman Road:             Provides the visitor with views of the lake and rolling
                                             hills. Arriving from this direction the newcomer might
                                             see Benicia as largely undeveloped.
               Northern Gateway:             On I-680 at Lake Herman Road. Presents Benicia as an
                                             industrial city to visitors passing through the heart of the
                                             industrial park.
               Southern Gateway:             Crossing the bridge from Martinez on I-680, shows
                                             Benicia as a Bay Area crossroads, where major rail and
                                             highway crossings link the two shores of the Carquinez
                                             Strait.
               Western Gateway:              On I-780, introduces the traveler to the green marsh-
                                             lands in the Benicia State Recreation Area and water-
                                             oriented housing.
16                                                                         City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                             C. The Planning Area
               Marina/Port Gateway:         Welcomes those coming by small boat or by ship and
                                            provides a waterfront view of Benicia revealing its
                                            small town “human scale” and historic character.
               The view from each of these gateways is influenced both by topography and land
               use. Whether Benicia is seen as a city of industry, open space, or residential
               neighborhoods can depend on the vantage point of the observer. Future develop-
               ment near each of these gateways will have important effects on the image of
               Benicia. (See Figure 1-3.)
               C. THE PLANNING AREA
               1. PLANNING AREA BOUNDARY
               Benicia’s Planning Area—established for this General Plan—covers an area of over
               15,000 acres—about 24 square miles. (See Figure 1-4.) This Planning Area gener-
               ally corresponds to Benicia’s Sphere of Influence (SOI), the area designated by the
               Solano County Local Agency Formation Commission (LAFCO) as the probable
               ultimate physical boundary and service area of the city. Along the northern border
               of the SOI, however, the planning area extends only to the southern boundary of
               the Tri-City and County Open Space Area.
               North of the city limits, the Planning Area encompasses 6,392 acres of generally
               undeveloped rolling hills. The Planning Area boundary deviates from the Sphere
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                     17

Chapter 1. Introduction
 GATEWAYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                o       dy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             gh
                                                                                                                                                                                                            D
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                 MAN
                                                                                                                                                                             LAKE
                                                                                                                                                                                              HER                  Northern
                                                                                                                                                                   RE
                                                                                                                                                                     SE
                                                                                                                                                                        RV
                                                                                                                                                                          OI                                                                       T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 INDUSTRIAL WAY
                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                                                                                                RO                                               R
                                                                                                                                                                                     AD                                       ST
                                                                                                             Lake                                                                                                     2  nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E.
                                                Lake                                                         Herman
                                               Herman
                                                Road
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               INTERSTATE 680
                                                                                                                                                                                                         IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                              DU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              W         AY                                                                                                       y
                                                                   VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ba
                                                             DRI
                                                      O   SE
                                                  R
                                                                                                                                VE                                                                                                                                                                                                      Suisun
                                                                                                                                RI
                                                                                                                                D                                                                                                                                                 BA
       CO                                                                                                                   A                                                                                                                                                       Y
            LU                                                                                                         AM            CH                                             dS                                                                                                            SH
                 MB                                                                                               OR                                                              2n
                                                                                                                                                                               E.
                      US                                                                                   PA N                           ELS                                                                                                                                                      ORE
                           PA                                                        E                                                                                                    TR
                                                                                                                                     E A H IL L S DR IV E
                              R   KW
                                                                                     IV
                                                                                                                                                                                                 T                                                                                                         RO
                                       AY
                                                                                 DR                                                                                                           EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AD
                                                                            GS
     Western
                                                                        H A S T IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HILLCREST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Southern
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E. 5th STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RO
                                                            INT
                                                      ER                                               P TO N ROA D
                                       BENICIA          STA                                       AM
                                                           TE                             SOUTH
                                                                                                                                                      T
                                                                                                                                                 STREE
                                             S TAT E          78
                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                          W. 7th
                                                  PA R K
                                                                                                                                                                                                     MILITARY EAST                            GRANT ST.
                                                                                                                                                            MILITARY WEST                                                                                                        ADAMS ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                 1st STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ay
 LEGEND                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     w
                                                                             Southampton
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a   te
                                                                                 Bay
 Planning Area
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 r   tG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Po
 Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          d
 City Limits                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a             an
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               rin
                                                                                CARQ
                                                                                     UINEZ                STRA
                                                                                                               IT                                                                                                         Ma                                                       U              NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CO                              TY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NO                                          UN
       Gateway                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LA                                          CO                                    SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SO                             TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CON                                                                                     800    0       800 1600
                                            Figure 1-3. Gateways
18                                                                                                                                                                                                                            City of Benicia General Plan
                                                                              C. The Planning Area
               of Influence boundary to include a small area east of I-680 and to follow the
               boundary of the Tri-City and County Open Space on the north, rather than the
               straight line drawn by LAFCO. Much of this land is used for cattle grazing or open
               space.The eastern portion of the Planning Area includes a 242-acre Class I hazard-
               ous waste disposal site which is being prepared for permanent closure.
               The Planning Area also includes a portion of Sulphur Springs Mountain, which has
               been designated as a Mineral Resource Area. However, Syar Quarry is outside of
               the Benicia Sphere of Influence, and the Planning Area.
               2. CITY LIMITS
               Benicia’s 1995 City limits covers a total of 14 square miles, including about 1.2
               square miles of open water and 12.8 square miles of land. The land area also
               includes some areas of seasonal or permanent wetlands. Nearly all of the existing
               residential, commercial, and industrial development in the Planning Area is located
               within the City limits. Approximately 53 percent of the land within the City was
               developed as of 1995.
               3. AREAS OF INTEREST
               The City has identified several Areas of Interest outside the SOI that have a direct
               physical and social influence on the City’s planning but are not considered for
               annexation: (1) the Benicia-Vallejo buffer area adjoining Benicia’s west City Limits,
               between I-780 and Lake Herman Road; (2) an area adjacent to and west of the
               Benicia State Recreation Area; (3) an area between the railroad line and I-680 and
               north of Lake Herman Road; and (4) the Carquinez-Strait region. The City has
               included these areas in its Planning Area and will request that it be notified of all
               planning decisions affecting these “Areas of Interest.”
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                      19

Chapter 1. Introduction
 PLANNING AREA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          o       dy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    gh
                                                                                                                                                                                                            D
                                                                                                                                                                                                        ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                 MAN
                                                                                                                                                                                              HER
                                                                                                                                                                             LAKE
                                                                                                                                                                   RE
                                                                                                                                                                     SE
                                                                                                                                                                        RV
                                                                                                                                                                          OI                                                            ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           INDUSTRIAL WAY
                                                                                                                                                                            R
                                                                                                                                                                                RO                                                    RE
                                                                                                                                                                                     AD                                      ST
                                                                                                             Lake                                                                                                    2  nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E.
                                                                                                             Herman
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         INTERSTATE 680
                                                                                                                                                                                                        IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                             DU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             W         AY                                                                                               y
                                                                   VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ba
                                                             DRI
                                                      O   SE
                                                  R
                                                                                                                                VE                                                                                                                                                                                             Suisun
                                                                                                                                RI
                                                                                                                                D                                                                                                                                           BA
       CO                                                                                                                   A                                                     2                                                                                           Y
            LU                                                                                                         AM            CH                                        E.                                                                                                           SH
                 MB                                                                                               OR                                                                S
                      US                                                                                   PA N                           ELS                                    nd                                                                                                          ORE
                           PA                                                         E                                                                                                   TR
                                                                                                                                     E A H IL L S DR IV E
                              R   KW
                                                                                     IV
                                                                                                                                                                                                T                                                                                                    RO
                                       AY
                                                                                 DR                                                                                                           EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AD
                                                                            GS
                                                                        H A S T IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HILLCREST                PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E. 5th STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RO
                                                            INT
                                                      ER                                               P TO N ROA D
                                       BENICIA           STA                                      AM
                                                            TE                            SOUTH
                                                                                                                                                      T
                                                                                                                                                 STREE
                                             S TAT E           78
                                                                 0
                                                                                                                                          W. 7th
                                                  PA R K
                                                                                                                                                                                                    MILITARY EAST                            GRANT ST.
                                                                                                                                                            MILITARY WEST                                                                                                  ADAMS ST.
 LEGEND                                                                                                                                                                          1st STREET
 Planning Area                                                                       Southampton
 Boundary                                                                                Bay
 Urban Growth
 Boundary
                                                                                     UINEZ                STRA
                                                                                CARQ                           IT                                                                                                                                                                           NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Y
 Sphere of Influence                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NO                                        UN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LA                                        CO                                 SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SO                           TA
 City Limits                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CON                                                                             800    0       800 1600
                                            Figure 1-4. Benicia Planning Area
20                                                                                                                                                                                                                           City of Benicia General Plan
       2. COMMUNITY
                DEVELOPMENT AND
                SUSTAINABILITY
                Community development and sustainability are at the heart of the goals devel-
                oped in this General Plan. Community development refers to all aspects of
                development including: (1) new residential and commercial development, such as
                new housing or an office building; (2) economic development such as jobs,
                income, fiscal health, and expansion and attraction of businesses; and (3) relation-
                ships between different areas of the city and how those areas serve the needs of
                the community. Sustainable development has become a popular planning expres-
                sion used abundantly but often not understood. Sustainable development repre-
                sents an approach to community development that Benicia residents and busi-
                nesses want to achieve with this General Plan. A brief definition of sustainable
                development is provided below.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                      21
Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              WHAT IS SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT?1
              One of the first governing bodies in the United States to develop a definition for
              sustainable development that fits the vision of this Plan was the Minnesota State
              legislature.They define sustainable development as that which “maintains or enhances
              economic opportunity and community well-being while protecting and restoring the
              natural environment upon which people and economies depend. Sustainable develop-
              ment meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future
              generations to meet their own needs.”
              “Sustainability” in this General Plan conveys long-term interdependent economic and
              environmental goals that promote efficient land use. It is a way of thinking and acting
              responsibly with respect to environmental, social, and economic issues at ever-
              widening levels of awareness or “integration.”That is, what is done at the project or
              local level can affect all levels of the environment, including the local community,
              neighboring regions, the country, and the world.
              Sustainable development implies urban areas that reflect a long-term economic
              horizon; result in efficient land use patterns that are not overly energy-intensive; have
              sufficient linkages to the local and regional economy to assure long-term job creation
              and economic vitality; support ecologically sensitive design features; and value the
              public realm.
              The concept of creating a sustainable community in Benicia is a primary goal and
              objective of the General Plan. The concept affects all chapters of the Plan and all
              aspects of the community.While it is assumed that this Plan cannot radically change
              the nature of Benicia, the goal and intent is to create a more livable and sustainable
              community over time.
              1
                This definition is taken in part from “Sustainable Development: Concept Definition, Urban Development
                 Principles, and Stapleton Opportunities and Constraints” prepared for the Stapleton Redevelopment
                 Foundation by Economic & Planning Systems, Inc. (January 1994).
22                                                                                  City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                            A. Land Use and Growth Management
                            A. LAND USE AND GROWTH MANAGEMENT
                            The primary function of this section is to designate land for specific types and
                            amounts of development and to set the overall development framework for the City.
                            Areas of the City are generally categorized according to their suitability for residential,
                            commercial, industrial, or public/quasi-public use. In addition, the City has designated
                            land for open space that should not be developed because of its importance for
                            health, safety, agriculture, or recreation.
                            The land use section provides background information on the location and extent of
                            existing land uses in Benicia, defines each land use category used in the plan, and
                            describes the changes that this plan makes to the 1993 General Plan. A land use plan
                            map covering the entire planning area is provided in the back pocket of this docu-
                            ment and is adopted as City policy as part of this General Plan.
                            The Growth Management section establishes the overarching goals for development
                            in Benicia. It defines and seeks to preserve those characteristics that make Benicia a
                            truly unique and special place.
                            LAND USE
                            The pattern of general plan land uses is reflected in the pocket diagram at the
                            back of the document. The largest category is industrial (31%), followed closely
                            by parks/open space (25%) and residential (21%). Non-industrial/commercial uses
                            represent a relatively small portion (3%). This pattern indicates the community’s
                            priorities in terms of types of land uses within the city limits. The new general
                            plan slightly shifts the existing pattern of land use in the northern area toward
  LAND USE CATEGORIES
                                Residential                                            Transportation (e.g., freeways)
                     1,733 Acres (21%)                                                 1,195 Acres (15%)
                              Commercial                                               Public/Quasi-public
                           381 Acres (5%)                                              230 Acres (3%)
                                  Industrial                                           Parks/Open Space
                     2,578 Acres (31%)                                                 2,046 Acres (25%)
                                                   Total Land Area = 8,163 Acres
 Sources: City of Benicia; Knox and Associates
                            Figure 2-1. General Plan Land Use Catagories Within City Limits
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                         23

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              more open space (refer to Appendix B - Land Use Changes). This reflects the
              community’s desire to contain development and grow at a slower rate.
              It is the intent of this General Plan that land be used efficiently to reduce traffic,
              preserve land at urban fringes, reduce infrastructure costs, and minimize the loss of
              farmland, wetlands, and open space. By doing these things, it is hoped that Benicia can
              avoid the costs of sprawl and erosion of the quality of life.
              For each category of land, the General Plan must establish standards of population
              density and building intensity. For residential land, the Plan will stipulate densities in
              housing units per gross acre. Potential population density will be obtained by multi-
              plying the number of units per acre by the number of persons per unit (three per-
              sons/unit for low density, two persons/unit for medium and high density. In the event
              of a discrepancy between residential units per acre and persons per acre, the unit
              density—and not the population density—will govern.)
              For nonresidential uses, the Plan specifies a maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR), calcu-
              lated as the ratio of gross floor area to site area.
              The specific uses mentioned in each definition of the land use categories are intended
              to be general and illustrative (as opposed to specific and all-inclusive).
              1. RESIDENTIAL LAND
              The General Plan has three residential land use categories. Each of the General Plan
              residential land use designations is intended to correspond to a specific zoning
              described in the Benicia Zoning Ordinance.
              Table 2-1. Zoning District Equivalents for General Plan Residential Land Use
              Categories
              GENERAL                                           DENSITY RANGE          DENSITY RANGE
              PLAN                           ZONING                 (UNITS/              (PERSONS/
              CATEGORY                      DISTRICT              GROSS ACRE)           GROSS ACRE)
              Low Density                       RS                   0.1–7                  0.3–21
              Medium Density                    RM                    8–14                  16–28
              High Density                      RH                   15–21                  30–42
              Source: City of Benicia
              The City may apply a lower density in certain cases (for example, if environmental
              constraints make it physically impossible to construct the minimum density in a given
              land use category). Densities higher than the upper limit can be achieved through the
              use of density bonuses for lower-income housing.This applies to any development
              with a residential component.
24                                                                         City of Benicia General Plan

                                                               A. Land Use and Growth Management
                Table 2-2. Residential Land Within City Limits in Gross Acres, as of 1995
                DENSITY                         DEVELOPED LAND              VACANT LAND
                Low Density                            1,156                      145
                Medium Density                          275                         8
                High Density                            144                         5
                Residential Total                      1,575                      158
                Source: City of Benicia; Knox & Associates
                LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
                This category provides for single-family detached residences in residential neighbor-
                hoods.The density range permitted in the Low Density category is 0.1 to 7 units per
                gross acre.
                MEDIUM DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
                This category includes multifamily housing where lot coverage remains relatively low.
                It includes large older homes that have been converted to duplexes as well as new
                apartments, townhouses, condominiums, clustered housing developments, and mobile
                home parks. Compared to Low Density, the Medium Density land use category per-
                mits more people to be housed on a given land area and also provides more flexibility
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                         25
Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              in the location and arrangement of buildings than is possible in most single-family
              detached developments.The density range permitted in the Medium Density category
              is 8 to 14 units per gross acre.
              HIGH DENSITY RESIDENTIAL
              This category permits a density range of 15 to 21 units per acre. High Density Residen-
              tial is intended to increase housing opportunities by permitting more housing to be
              built on a parcel(s).
              2. COMMERCIAL LAND
              The Benicia General Plan separates commercial land into five categories:
              (1) Community Commercial (previously called Neighborhood Commercial),
              (2) General Commercial, (3) Downtown Commercial, (4) Waterfront Commercial, and
              (5) Business and Professional Office. Each of these categories is intended to accommo-
              date a particular scale and intensity of commercial use and corresponds to a particular
              zoning category. Each category has a permissible floor area ratio (FAR) and restrictions
              on uses.Table 2-3 shows the breakdown of commercial land into these five categories.
              Table 2-3. Commercial Land (in gross acres) Within City Limits, as of 1995
              CATEGORY                          FAR                DEVELOPED               VACANT
                                                                      LAND                   LAND
              Downtown                        2.0 –2.4                   19                      5
              General                           1.2                      51                   102
              Community (formerly               1.2                       6                      0
              “Neighborhood”)
              Office                          0.8–1.2                    16                      6
              Waterfront                      0.8–1.2                     8                      8
              Commercial Total                                         101                    280
              Source: City of Benicia; Knox & Associates
              DOWNTOWN COMMERCIAL
              This category encourages a wide variety of retail businesses, restaurants, and lodging is
              encouraged. Offices and residences are encouraged above the first floor in order to
              establish a greater variety, intensity, and efficiency of use.2 A higher intensity of
              development Downtown is envisioned by permitting a maximum FAR of 2.4—higher
              than in the other commercial districts.The 2.4 FAR, however, is permitted only if
              housing is included; the maximum non-residential FAR is 2.0.
              2
                Resolution No. 87-31, 2/17/87
26                                                                           City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                  A. Land Use and Growth Management
                GENERAL COMMERCIAL
                This category is intended to provide shopping and services for the community as
                a whole and for visitors coming from the freeways. Solano Square, Southampton
                Center, and Parkway Plaza are designated General Commercial. A small commer-
                cial center at East Fifth Street and Military East is also designated General Com-
                mercial to provide for auto service and parts, retail sales, and similar uses. General
                Commercial is intended to allow a wide range of commercial development, with
                the intensity of development limited by a maximum FAR of 1.2.
                COMMUNITY COMMERCIAL
                This category (previously called Neighborhood Commercial) is intended to apply to
                convenience commercial centers which are limited in size. Uses include retail and
                quasi-public uses. Community Commercial is the most restrictive of the commercial
                categories and has a maximum FAR of 1.2.
                BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICES
                This designation is intended to allow small-scale offices to serve as a buffer between
                residential uses and more intensive commercial areas. Offices in this category typically
                generate lower traffic volumes than offices in other commercial or industrial districts.
                A maximum FAR of 0.8 is allowed (increased to 1.2 if housing is included).
                WATERFRONT COMMERCIAL
                This category is intended to accommodate development with both a water orienta-
                tion and historic character to create a pedestrian-scale commercial and residential
                area. Multifamily residences and live/work spaces are permitted in Waterfront Com-
                mercial.The commercial component is restricted to retail shops and services that
                directly support marina and boating activities or restaurants overlooking the water. A
                maximum FAR of 1.2 is permitted for projects that include housing above the ground
                floor; otherwise the FAR is limited to 0.8.
                3. MIXED USE
                DOWNTOWN MIXED USE
                This category includes residential, retail, office, public and quasi-public uses. Its
                purpose is to encourage a mix of compatible uses adjacent to the Downtown, upgrad-
                ing of existing buildings, preservation and adaptive reuse of historic buildings, and
                introduction of new, compatible mixed use buildings. “Mixed use” includes the
                mixing of permitted activities within the same building or within separate buildings
                on the same site or on contiguous sites. Design standards will be developed to ensure
                that mixed use development is compatible with and contributes to the character of
                the street, the Downtown, and adjoining neighborhoods. The Downtown Mixed Use
                category permits a maximum FAR of 2.0.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                          27

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              LOWER ARSENAL MIXED USE
              This category includes residential, live/work, office, retail, public and quasi-public, and
              limited industrial uses. The purpose of this category is to continue to encourage a mix
              of compatible uses in areas of the Lower Arsenal; to promote the upgrading of existing
              buildings, and the preservation and adaptive reuse of historic buildings; and to allow
              new, compatible buildings to house mixed use. The Lower Arsenal Mixed Use cat-
              egory permits a maximum FAR of 2.0.
              4. INDUSTRIAL LAND
              Before 1987, industrial land was designated either Heavy Industrial or Light Industrial.
              Since 1987, Benicia’s industrial land has been divided into three General Plan Land
              Use categories: (1) General Industrial; (2) Limited Industrial; and (3) Water-related
              Industrial. Table 2-4 shows how the industrial land is divided among these categories.
              Table 2-4. Industrial Land (in acres) within City Limits, as of 1995
              CATEGORY                          FAR              DEVELOPED                VACANT
                                                                     LAND                   LAND
              General Industrial                 0.7                 1,006                     714
              Limited Industrial                 0.7                     29                    559
              Water-related                      0.7                    178                     92
              INDUSTRIAL TOTAL                                       1,213                  1,365
              Source: City of Benicia; Knox & Associates
              GENERAL INDUSTRIAL
              The General Industrial land use category is the least restrictive of the three categories
              and is intended to allow a great deal of flexibility for industrial development. Over half
              of the Benicia Industrial Park is designated General Industrial.This includes nearly all
              of the Industrial Park north of I-780 and east of East Second Street. This category
              includes manufacturing, assembly, and packaging of goods and products from ex-
              tracted, raw, and previously prepared materials and related industrial and commercial
              services.The maximum FAR permitted in this category is 0.7.
              LIMITED INDUSTRIAL
              This category includes manufacturing, assembly, and packaging of goods primarily
              from previously prepared (not raw) materials; wholesale, distribution, and storage
              facilities (including auto import, export, and storage); research and development
              facilities; and related industrial and commercial services. As it pertains to refining-
              related activities, this category also includes such uses as: fabrication areas, packaging
28                                                                          City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                    A. Land Use and Growth Management
                facilities (dry and liquid), quality control laboratories, and refining accessory uses such
                as maintenance shops, storage areas, shipping/distribution facilities and offices.
                Several areas of the Benicia Industrial Park which border other types of land use are
                designated Limited Industrial to provide a buffer between the General Industrial areas
                and the rest of the City. Lower levels of traffic—particularly from heavy trucks—are
                expected in the Limited Industrial areas than in the General Industrial category.The
                Limited Industrial category permits a maximum FAR of 0.7.
                WATER-RELATED INDUSTRIAL
                This category includes port terminals and water-dependent, related industrial uses
                such as warehousing and storage; support transportation services; and ship mainte-
                nance and repair.The Water-related Industrial category is intended to protect the Port
                of Benicia from intrusion by non-water-dependent uses, to promote its long-term
                development, and to provide back-up land for port-related activities.The Water-related
                Industrial category permits a maximum FAR of 0.7.
                5. PUBLIC AND QUASI-PUBLIC LAND
                This category is intended to provide for a variety of uses serving the public including
                education, police, fire, water, and sewer. (Park and recreation facilities are included as a
                separate category under Open Space.) The Public/Quasi-public land use category
                allows facilities for City administration, safety, and health services; public and private
                schools; public utilities; and other public/quasi-public facilities. Facilities serving the
                public are scattered throughout the city. (Refer to Table 2-5 on the following page).
                The maximum FAR for public/quasi-public facilities is established on a case-by-case
                basis through the use permit process of the Benicia Zoning Ordinance. If a use permit
                does not set a maximum FAR, then the maximum FAR of the abutting zoning district
                applies.
                6. OPEN SPACE
                State planning law requires cities to plan for “open space for the preservation of
                natural resources, the managed production of resources, outdoor recreation, and
                public health and safety.”The General Plan Land Use Diagram (found in the back
                pocket of this Plan) recognizes three categories of open space to meet these require-
                ments:
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                               29

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              Table 2-5. Existing Public and Quasi-public Facilities Within City Limits, 1995
              FACILITY                                               ACREAGE
              Administration
              City Hall                                                   3.0
              Post Office                                                 1.9
              School District Offices                                     6.0
              Cultural/Recreational Facilities
              Library                                                     0.8
              Senior Center                                               0.3
              Girl Scout House                                            0.5
              Boy Scout House                                             0.5
              Swim Club (Private)                                         1.6
              Clocktower, Commandant’s House                              7.0
              B.D.E.S. Meeting Hall                                       0.5
              Public Access Trails                                        6.9
              Tennis Court                                                0.3
              Veteran’s Hall                                              0.5
              Municipal Utilities
              Water Treatment Plant                                      30.0
              Sewage Treatment Plant                                      7.0
              Corporation Yard                                            7.0
              Building Maintenance Yard                                   0.2
              Public Safety
              Police Station (part of City Hall complex)
              Fire Station #1                                             0.5
              Fire Station #2                                             0.6
              Public Schools
              Elementary                                                 44.4
              Benicia Middle School                                      18.7
              Benicia High School                                        35.0
              Private School                                              2.0
              Child Care Centers                                          2.4
              Churches                                                   25.4
              Cemeteries                                                 32.7
              Other Facilities                                           10.5
              Total Public/Quasi-Public                                246.2
              Source: City of Benicia; Knox & Associates
30                                                                 City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                         A. Land Use and Growth Management
                MARSH
                “Marsh” permits only educational and scientific research, low impact hiking, fishing,
                bird-watching, and similar activities offering public access to the shoreline.
                GENERAL OPEN SPACE
                General Open Space includes urban open space, such as publicly-owned open space,
                land dedicated for permanent open space in residential subdivisions, and open space
                for public health and safety, such as hillsides with slopes over 30 percent; and rural
                open space, such as open space for managed production of resources (such as mineral
                resources), and open space for conservation of natural resources (such as the Lake
                Herman watershed).Allowable open space uses include agriculture, horticulture,
                passive recreation, and mineral extraction in State-designated mineral resource areas
                only. General Open Space may lie inside or outside the Urban Growth Boundary.
                PARKS
                Parks provide land for the more intensive recreational uses. There are four park types
                in Benicia.
                     Regional Park: A Regional Park generally serves one or more communities and
                     accommodates a variety of activities designed to enhance the use and experience
                     of the natural environment. Uses may include trails, nature centers, picnic areas,
                     and camping, if appropriate.
                     Community Park: A community park is designed to serve several neighborhoods.
                     Community parks should accommodate a wide variety of activities and meet the
                     needs of diverse users.
                     Neighborhood Park: A neighborhood park is designed to serve a residential
                     population in close proximity to the park. Neighborhood parks should accommo-
                     date a variety of activities including playground activities, picnicking, and lawn
                     games.3
                     Waterfront Park: A waterfront park serves the entire community and accommo-
                     dates activities appropriate to the characteristics of the site such as low impact
                     recreational activities, community events and festivals, and enjoyment of the
                     surrounding natural environment. The waterfront park south of B Street may not
                     include any permanent sports fields, courts, or equipment. Nor may it include any
                     permanent buildings, except for a public restroom and similar amenties. Walk-
                     ways, benches, drinking fountains, and trash receptacles are permitted. The
                     waterfront park south of B Street will preserve the marshlands within its bound-
                     aries, thereby protecting the wildlife that rely on this ecologically sensitive habitat.
                3
                  Parks,Trails, and Open Space Master Plan, pp. 3-1 through 3-3.
City of Benicia General Plan                                    revised 11.16.04 (Measure C)              31

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
               Table 2-6. Park Standards
               PARK TYPE                   ACRES/1,000                    SERVICE AREA                   SIZE (ACRES)
                                               PEOPLE
               Regional Park                     10.0                      One hour travel                 250–1,000
               Community Park                     2.5            Within 3 miles of all residences             30–100
               Neighborhood Park                  3.5            Within 1/2 mile of all residences              2–15
               Waterfront Park*                N/A                                N/A                            N/A
               Source: Benicia General Plan, 1993; Parks, Trails and Open Space Master Plan, Revised
               1994; 2004 Benicia Waterfront Park Initiative
               * Waterfront Park: A waterfront park is designed to incorporate the unique aspects of the specific
               location and provide a distinctive waterfront experience for all residents and visitors. Because each
               waterfront park will integrate the special features of the particular site, no uniform set of standards will
               be applied.
               AIRPORT LAND USE COMPATIBILITY
              The Solano County Airport Land Use Commission adopted the updated Travis Air Force Base
              Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUCP) on October 8, 2015. The purpose of the plan is
              to ensure that future land uses in the area surrounding Travis Air Force Base (AFB) will
              remain compatible with the base. The plan establishes policies applicable to land use,
              including compatibility criteria and maps for the Airport Influence Area (AIA), which
              encompasses all of Solano County.
              In accordance with Section 21670 et seq. of the California State Public Utilities Code, the
              Airport Land Use Commission (ALUC) is vested with the authority to implement the
              ALUCP. Benicia’s General Plan and specific plans must conform to the ALUCP unless the
              City Council makes specific findings to overrule the ALUCP. Furthermore, amendments to
              the General Plan, Zoning Ordinance, and Building Code, as well as certain non-exempt
              development activity such as structures over 200 feet in height and commercial scale solar
              facilities, must be referred to the ALUC for a determination that the proposal is consistent
              with the ALUCP.
               GOAL 2.0: Comply with the Travis Air Force Base Airport Land
               Use Compatibility Plan
               POLICY 2.0.1:               Review all proposed land uses for consistency with the
                                           compatibility policies of the Travis Air Force Base Airport
                                           Land Use Compatibility Plan (ALUCP).
               Program 2.0.A:              Refer land use development actions identified within the
                                           ALUCP to the Solano County Airport Land Use
                                           Commission
              Refer to the Appendix for a synopsis of currently applicable policies of the Travis ALUCP.
32                  revised 11.16.04 (Measure C)                                         City of Benicia General Plan
                            04.05.16 (ALUCP)

                                                                  A. Land Use and Growth Management
                GROWTH MANAGEMENT
                The preceding pages describing the different land use categories and changes set the
                stage for how Benicia is to develop over the next 15-20 years. The Growth Manage-
                ment section creates the connection between land uses and growth by establishing
                the overarching goals, policies and programs for development in Benicia.
                To reinforce these policy statements the plan defines an urban growth boundary
                (refer to Glossary).
                Urban Growth Boundary (UGB) is coterminous with the city limit line around the
                property at the end of Bantry Way (Zocchi property) to Lake Herman Road; it follows
                Lake Herman Road east to the western side of the 20-acre property owned by
                Northgate Christian Fellowship, then turns northwest and traces that property’s
                boundary back to Lake Herman Road, then follows Lake Herman Road east to Inter-
                state 680. At Interstate 680, the boundary turns north along the freeway, then west
                around the area identified as Area 9 on the Land Use Changes diagram. It then contin-
                ues north on Interstate 680, then turns east to the north end of the 1999 City Limit on
                Goodyear Road.
                The Urban Growth Boundary is an officially adopted and mapped line that separates
                the City’s urban area from its surrounding greenbelt of open lands. It is a growth
                management tool that seeks to contain, control, direct, or phase growth in order to
                promote more compact, contiguous urban development. No urban development is
                allowed beyond the UGB except for public parks and public or private recreation uses
                that do not require urban facilities or services as defined in Policy 2.1.5.
                Benicia’s UGB reflects the City’s commit-
                ment to focus growth and prevent urban
                sprawl. It recognizes the City’s limited
                ability to extend services (i.e., sewer, water,
                police, etc.) and its desire to protect agricul-
                tural and ecologically sensitive land.
                In addition, the UGB will help preserve
                keyland forms which separate Benicia
                physically and visually from adjacent
                communities; protect and maintain the
                rural quality of Lake Herman Road and
                areas adjacent to it; concentrate future
                development in areas where services and
                infrastructure can be provided more cost
                effectively; strengthen First Street as the
                City’s central commercial zone; guard
                against community health risksby avoiding
                encroachment into lands affected by the IT
                Panoche Hazardous Waste Disposal
                Facility; and prevent encroachment into and avoid land use conflicts with areas
                designated as a mineral resource area of regional significance (Syar Quarry).
City of Benicia General Plan                                revised 11.16.04 (Measure C)             33
                                                                    04.05.16 (ALUCP)

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              GOAL 2.1: Preserve Benicia as a small-sized city.
              “Small-sized city” refers to Benicia’s open and uncluttered space, safe neighborhoods
              and streets, pedestrian-friendly streets, the “Main Street” character of First Street, open
              vistas of hills and water, historic sites and buildings, strong sense of community and
              civic pride, good schools, well developed community facilities including parks and a
              library, low-crime, small town atmosphere, and numerous community-wide
              celebrations, cultural events, and family-oriented activities.
              POLICY 2.1.1:              Ensure that new development is compatible with adjacent
                                         existing development and does not detract from Benicia’s small
                                         town qualities and historic heritage, (and to the extent possible,
                                         contributes to the applicable quality of life factors noted
                                         above).
              “Compatible” means “capable of existing together without detrimental effects.” This
              policy applies broadly and citywide to residential and nonresidential uses. Its purpose
              is to ensure harmonious development in terms of intensity, and architectural character.
              It is not intended to restrict new buildings or additions to exact duplications of styles
              or heights; nor is it intended to limit new uses or densities to those found in adjacent
              existing development. This policy also is not intended to restrict the conversion of
              single-family dwellings to apartments if the parcel is zoned for multifamily use and if
              there are other multifamily uses nearby.
              Program 2.1.A:             Adopt development guidelines that retain the scale and charac-
                                         ter of the city,preserve public view corridors, and reflect the
                                         subdivision and development patterns within existing neigh-
                                         borhoods.
              POLICY 2.1.2:              Make efficient use of land in new development areas consistent
                                         with the surrounding neighborhood.
              POLICY 2.1.3:              Maintain a visual and physical separation from the cities of
                                         Fairfield and Vallejo.
              POLICY 2.1.4:              Strive to preserve significant areas of vegetation and open
                                         space when approving development projects.
              “Significant” can mean, for example, a single specimen tree, vegetation serving as
              habitat, or a grove of several native trees which enhance the canopy and scenic
              beauty of a neighborhood.
              POLICY 2.1.5:              An Urban Growth Boundary is established as shown on the
                                         General Plan Land Use Diagram in order to separate the City’s
                                         urban area from its surrounding greenbelt of open lands and to
                                         maintain lands near Lake Herman and north of Lake Herman
                                         Road in permanent agriculture/open space use. No urban
                                         development is allowed beyond the Urban Growth Boundary.
               “Urban development” shall mean development requiring one or more basic municipal
               services including, but not limited to, water service, sewer, improved storm drainage
               facilities, fire hydrants and other physical public facilities and services.
33A                revised 11.4.03 (Measure K)                                City of Benicia General Plan
                             05.05.16 (ALUCP)

                                                                  A. Land Use and Growth Management
                POLICY 2.1.6:            No urban development beyond the Urban Growth
                                         Boundary shall be served by City water and/or sewer
                                         services.
                POLICY 2.1.7:            The City shall promote compact urban development within
                                         the UGB and shall encourage development of public, semi-
                                         public, active recreational, and all other uses deemed desirable
                                         for the community inside the UGB.
                POLICY 2.1.8:            Prior to December 31, 2023, the Urban Growth Boundary
                                         designated on the Land Use Diagram, this policy, Policies
                                         2.1.5, 2.1.6, and 2.1.7 and the definition of Urban Growth
                                         Boundary in the Glossary, may be amended only by a vote of
                                         the people or pursuant to the procedures set forth below:
                Exception I - Takings. the City Council may amend the Urban Growth Boundary if it
                   finds, by at least a four-fifths vote and based on substantial evidence in the record,
                   that:
                   (1) The application of the Urban Growth Boundary policies would constitute an
                   unconstitutional taking of a landowner’s property, and
                   (2) The amendment and associated land use designation will allow additional
                   land uses only as necessary to avoid said unconstitutional taking of the
                   landowner’s property.
                Exception II - Housing Supply. The City may grant an exception from the require-
                   ments of the Initiative where it determines that doing so is necessary to comply
                   with State law governing the provision of housing. The City may do so only if it
                   first makes each of the following findings based on substantial evidence in the
                   record:
                   (1) A specific provision of State law requires the City to accommodate the
                   proposed housing, and
                    (2) No feasible alternative exists that would allow for the required units to be
                     built without siting some or all of them outside the Urban Growth Boundary.
                Exception III - Reorganization. The General Plan may be reorganized, readopted in
                   different text and/or format, and individual provisions may be renumbered or
                   reordered, in the course of ongoing updates of the General Plan in accordance
                   with the requirements of State law, but Land Use Element policies relating to the
                   Urban Growth Boundary shall continue to be included in the General Plan until
                   December 31, 2023, unless earlier repealed or amended pursuant to the proce-
                   dures set forth above or by the voters of the City.
City of Benicia General Plan                               revised 11.16.04 (Measure C)            33B
                                                                   04.05.16 (ALUCP)

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              GOAL 2.2:         Maintain lands near Lake Herman and north of
                                Lake Herman Road in permanent agriculture/
                                open space use.
              POLICY 2.2.1:     Protect and maintain agricultural and rural land uses, hillsides,
                                two-lane curving roads, watershed, riparian corridors and
                                upland grasslands.
              POLICY 2.2.2:     Avoid health risks associated with the inactive IT Panoche
                                Hazardous Waste Facility and land use conflicts with the Syar
                                Quarry.
              Program 2.2.A:    Initiate a variety of planning, regulatory, and financial measures
                                to ensure permanent protection of agricultural and open space
                                uses near Lake Herman and north of Lake Herman Road.
              Program 2.2.B:    Acquire property, development rights, or easements to preserve
                                open space.
              Program 2.2.C:    Evaluate incorporating the Northern Area into the Tri-City and
                                County Open Space Area.
              GOAL 2.3:         Ensure orderly and sensitive site planning and
                                design for large undeveloped areas of the City,
                                consistent with the land use designations and
                                other policies in this General Plan.
              POLICY 2.3.1:     Require a Master Plan for new industrial and business park
                                developments on properties under common or single owner-
                                ship which aggregate to more than 40 acres.
34                                                                   City of Benicia General Plan
                                                                 A. Land Use and Growth Management
                Master plans will encourage the best and most effective use of the properties and will
                give the City an idea of how and when the various parcels or parts of parcels will be
                developed and when public facilities will be needed.The industrial properties to
                which this policy is most likely to apply are listed below and are shown on Figure 2-2.
                The five industrial properties as of 1995 are:The Seeno properties; the Exxon undevel-
                oped area; Pine Lake north of I-780; the Port south of the bridge; and the Port north of
                the bridge.
                The master plan requirement also applies to other large properties, which are not
                listed or mapped below but which may in the future be purchased or assembled for
                development or private redevelopment. Such master planning may be initiated by the
                Planning Commission, the City Council, or private property owners.
                Program 2.3.A:          Ensure adequate funding is available for the long-term mainte-
                                        nance of undeveloped areas preserved when approving land
                                        divisions.
                POLICY 2.3.2:           Support land divisions where existing buildings with historic
                                        or architectural significance are retained and/or improved
                                        rather than demolished.
                GOAL 2.4:               Ensure that development pays its own way.
                State law allows cities to assess fees to ensure that development pays for itself; how-
                ever the law also requires a nexus between fees imposed on developers and the
                public improvements funded by those fees.
                POLICY 2.4.1:           Ensure any new development to be fiscally and financially
                                        sound and pay its own way with respect to City and School
                                        District capital improvements.
                The objective is that neither the City nor the School District will be expected or
                required to use general funds to provide capital improvements for private develop-
                ment unless a project produces substantial public benefits and amenities in which the
                City or School District may want to participate.
                Program 2.4.A:          Monitor development to ensure it does not overburden the
                                        City’s infrastructure.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                            35

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
 INDUSTRIAL LAND —
 OVER 40 ACRES
  LEGEND
  Planning Area Boundary
  City Limits
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         o         dy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              gh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ER         M A N RO A D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   E H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LAK
                                                                                                                                                                                            RE
                                                                                                                                                                                             SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                 RV
                                                                                                                                                                                                  OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                                                                                                       R   O                                                                             T
                                                                                                                                                                                                               AD                                                        E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          INDUSTRIAL WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E.
                                                                                                                                      Lake
                                                                                                                                      Herman
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        INTERSTATE 680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AY                                                                                                                  y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ba
                                                                               IV E                                                                                                               E. 2nd
                                                                          DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Suisun
                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                                                                      STREET
                                                             R   OS
                                                                                                                                                      IVE                                                                                                                                                                   BA
                                                                                                                                                   DR     C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              YS
         CO                                                                                                                                    A
                                                                                                                                             AM                                                                                                                                                                                            HO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PA RK
                                                                                                                                                         H E L S E A HI LL S D R IVE
              LU
                   M                                                                                                                      OR                                                                                                                                                                                                RE
                       BU                                                                                                          PA N
                            S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ROA
                                PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RO AD
                                   R   KW                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           D
                                            AY                                                           VE
                                                                                                    DRI
                                                                                                 GS
                                                                                             HA ST I N                                                                                                                             HIL LC RE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E. 5th STREET
                                                                          INT                                               T O N ROA D
                                                 BENICIA        ER
                                                                   STA                                                 MP
                                                                      TE                                      SOUTHA
                                                                                                                                                                      h ST RE
                                                                                      78
                                                       S TAT E                           0
                                                                                                                                                                W. 7t
                                                            PA R K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ADAMS
                                                                                                                                                                                  ET                                          MILITARY EAST
                                                                                                                                                                                       MILITARY WEST                                                                                GRANT ST.
                                                                                                    Southampton
                                                                                                        Bay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1st ST
                                                                                                              UINEZ              STRA
                                                                                                         CARQ                         IT                                                                                                                                                                                                        Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            U              NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          O                                         TY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L      AN                                   UN                           SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SO                                      CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CON                                                                       800    0       800 1600
                                                     Figure 2-2. Industrial Properties to which Policy 2.3.1 (Master Plan) Applies,
                                                                 as of 1999
36                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                             B. Economic Development
                B. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
                This section of the plan contains five subsections that direct the more urban aspects
                of how the community should develop. Each subsection focuses on a particular type
                or area of economic development within the community: industrial development,
                port development, the Historic Arsenal area, the Downtown area, and other commer-
                cial development.
                The Economic Development section begins with a discussion of the City’s economic
                strengths and challenges, followed by goals, policies and programs for each of the five
                types or areas of economic development. Background information about each
                economic development area or type precedes the goals, policies and programs for
                that subsection.
                1. ECONOMIC OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
                Benicia is a unique community that offers a “small town” residential and commercial
                environment in the foreground of a large industrial concentration.While Benicia is
                part of the Solano County market, its location along the Carquinez Strait, views of the
                water, and its active Port give the City more economic development opportunities
                than some of its landlocked competitors.The City also has a strong historic and
                cultural base, and the historic buildings in the Downtown and Arsenal area add to
                Benicia’s charm and distinction.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                          37

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              The City of Benicia enjoys many economic advantages over similarly-sized cities in the
              greater Bay Area. It has a significant concentration of economic activity in the Port and
              the Benicia Industrial Park (BIP), which includes the Exxon Refinery.These are consid-
              ered “heavy industrial” uses and provide a strong economic base for the City. In
              addition, businesses that support the refinery industry need to be located nearby, and
              many choose Benicia given its location and large concentration of like businesses.
              The tax revenues that the BIP and other heavy industrial uses generate allow the City
              to provide a relatively high level of public services, including its own library system.As
              a result, the Economic Development Goals, Policies, and Programs emphasize the
              importance of protecting existing heavy industrial uses.
              Many also believe, however, that Benicia can capitalize on its central location by
              diversifying its economy and attracting more high-technology firms and tourists.
              Although a radical shift in the types of businesses that locate in the city over the next
              20 years is not expected, more non-industrial activities are desired in the future.
              Measures to increase the diversity of industries and land uses therefore can also be
              found in the Economic Development Goals, Policies, and Programs.
              BENICIA’S COMPETITIVE STRENGTHS
              From an economic standpoint, Benicia has many competitive strengths.The fact that
              the City’s industrial vacancy rate is about 6 percent validates this position; other
              surrounding communities have industrial vacancies from 10 to 17 percent.The City
              has a well-developed industrial park (BIP), which is geographically compact and
              topographically separated from the rest of the City.The Port, leased, owned, and
              operated by Benicia Industries, is over 200 acres and complements many of the
              activities found in the BIP.The Exxon refinery has drawn over the years a series of
              support and related industries to the City which together represent an important
              agglomeration of economic activity. One advantage of the BIP’s size and location is
              that businesses perceive that their industrial activities will be buffered from potential
              conflicts with other uses. Exxon owns about 400 acres of land west and south of
              their facility.
              In summary, Benicia’s assets that attract businesses include:
              • Central location (i.e., highway accessibility to markets in the Bay Area, Sacramento,
                and Northern California).
              • Presence of major manufacturing and refineries that attract similar types of busi-
                nesses.
              • Historic buildings and places.
              • View of the water and hills.
              • Some developable commercial vacant parcels (although high-priced).
              • Private redevelopment potential and mixed use projects.
              • Good transportation and access.
38                                                                         City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                             B. Economic Development
                • Supportive local government/business climate.
                • Municipal fiscal soundness.
                • Highly skilled, reliable, dependable, and productive labor force.
                • Quality of life (e.g., low crime, good public schools, warm climate, etc.)
                BENICIA’S COMPETITIVE CHALLENGES
                The City also faces a number of weaknesses in attracting businesses.These include the
                following, many of which are mentioned in the City’s 1995 Economic Development
                Strategy (Resolution 95-10):
                • No public transportation in the BIP industrial area.
                • Limited vacant industrial and commercial sites.
                • Limited very high and low income housing.
                • High rent for Downtown real estate.
                • Reliance on one type of industry for major business tax revenues.
                Although development fees in Benicia may be higher than in other regions in
                California and nearby states, they are comparable to the average fees in Solano
                County and other competitive markets. Industrial and residential fees are only
                slightly higher than the average, and retail fees are slightly lower than the average.
                While it is important to keep development costs low, it is equally important to
                provide adequate infrastructure and maintain it. A significant number of industri-
                ally-zoned parcels require investment in infrastructure in the next 20 years if
                these sites are to be competitive. This infrastructure could be provided by the City
                or by developers. Either way, Benicia will need to facilitate the creative financing
                mechanisms to provide infrastructure in a timely fashion.There is also a need to
                invest in existing infrastructure that cannot be funded through development
                impact fees or special assessments under existing law (Government Code §66000
                et seq., popularly known as AB 1600). A funding program (e.g., for a landscape and
                lighting district) should be developed to ensure annual maintenance and replace-
                ment of infrastructure to keep the city’s non-residential areas competitive.
                Although the lack of higher value or executive housing may be a perceived
                weakness to some in the community, the lack of housing available to those who
                work in Benicia will have a much greater impact on economic development in
                the long run.The greater the amount of housing for workers in the BIP, the more
                competitive the City will be.
                BENICIA’S FISCAL STATUS
                All communities have their weaknesses and strengths.While Benicia has several
                perceived economic weaknesses, it also has many economic strengths. Overall, the
                City’s economy, while focused on a few industries, is strong and competitive.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                        39

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
                           The City worked hard to reduce or hold constant expenditures over the five years
                           1990–1995 in order to respond to the loss of revenues from property tax diversions
                           to the State and from a reduction in other revenues. Once the outstanding debt from
                           the community park development is repaid and the General Plan update is complete,
                           the Finance Department projects positive fiscal balances starting in 1997–98. Future
                           increases in property taxes may be limited unless additional capacity for development
                           is created.The City will need to work hard to retain existing businesses, to attract new
                           sales-tax generating uses, and to continue its cost containment measures.
                           A review of per capita expenditures for cities of similar size shows that Benicia resi–
                           dents enjoy a high level of municipal services, which is a direct result of the amount
                           of revenues generated by industry.To continue to enjoy these services, the City will
                           need to protect and enhance business and economic activity in both the BIP and Port
                           areas. It will also need to encourage economic expansion in the Downtown and
                           Arsenal areas. Figure 2-3 shows the projected General Fund Revenues for 1999-2000.
  GENERAL FUND REVENUES
 Property Tax $7,158,360                                                 $1,315,515   Other Revenue
                                                                         $713,445     Charges for Current Services
                                                                         $1,306,950   Revenue from Other Agencies
                                                                         $185,000     Use of Money / Property
                                                                         $126,000     Fines, Forfeitures & Penalties
                                                                         $213,750     License & Permits
                                                                         $1,075,400   Other Taxes
                                                                         $2,133,800   Utility User's Tax
                                                                         $2,985,000   Sales and Use Tax
 Sources: City of Benicia Municipal Budget 1999/2000
                           Figure 2-3. City of Benicia General Fund Revenues
40                                                                                     City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                          B. Economic Development
                2. ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
                Benicia has an aggressive economic development program and has attracted several
                large companies to the Benicia Industrial Park (BIP) and elsewhere in the City.An
                Economic Development Strategy was adopted by the City in 1995.The Strategy
                focuses on (1) business retention and expansion, and (2) business attraction and
                incentives, and (3) outlines a set of policies and recommended actions. Studies have
                shown that businesses wishing to expand chose to stay in Benicia rather than move
                out of state.4 Reviews of recent expansion or new leases within the BIP confirm that
                these economic development efforts are working.
                The City’s Economic Development Department also recently created an Industrial
                Development Authority to issue tax-exempt revenue bonds.5 Bonds have been issued
                to assist major employers and space users and keep them in the City.The City also
                created a local hiring service to help connect local business with local labor.
                The goals, policies, and programs in this section address several points:They support
                continued internal growth and development of the industrial park and its port; they
                promote diversification of Benicia’s economy; and they seek to expand appropriate
                commercial activity in the Arsenal and Downtown.
                CITYWIDE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
                GOAL 2.5:                    Facilitate and encourage new uses and develop-
                                             ment which provide substantial and sustainable
                                             fiscal and economic benefits to the City and the
                                             community while maintaining health, safety, and
                                             quality of life.
                Sustainable development maintains or enhances economic opportunity and commu-
                nity well-being while protecting and restoring the natural environment upon which
                people and economies depend. Sustainable development meets the needs of the
                present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own
                needs.
                This goal is the heart of the entire General Plan. It is a citywide expression of urban
                development policy. Nearly every policy and program in the General Plan, in some
                manner, serves to implement this goal.
                4
                   “1st Quarter 1995 Industrial Market Overview, Greater East Bay Market,” Grubb & Ellis Research
                   Services Group (June 1995).
                5
                   These are private activity bonds that are sold to fund a specific project that has a dedicated private
                   revenue source with which to repay the bonds and interest.The interest on the bonds is not taxable,
                   and thus encourages the private market to purchase public bond issues.This is a typical public
                   funding mechanism.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                             41

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              POLICY 2.5.1:     Diversify the mix of economic development programs in the
                                city to include new programs that address Downtown revital-
                                ization, tourism, waterfront development, and clusters of related
                                businesses.
              Program 2.5.A:    Consider developing a labor force database as part of the
                                Business Attraction, Expansion, and Retention Program which
                                includes information on labor force costs by occupation and
                                industry sector, turnover rates, productivity, reliability, and other
                                factors. Maintain and update the database annually.
              Program 2.5.B:    Target business attraction efforts toward firms that pay high
                                wages and with jobs that relate to the skills and education
                                levels of Benicia residents.
              Program 2.5.C:    Evaluate future uses on a cost/revenue basis, taking into ac-
                                count economic diversity for the long term and environmental
                                and community costs and benefits.
              Program 2.5.D:    Continue to offer incentives for locating in Benicia to busi-
                                nesses that maximize jobs or long-term net revenues to the City
                                of Benicia, or both.
              Program 2.5.E.:   Develop business incentives that can be used to attract new
                                businesses (e.g., fee deferral program, use of public financing
                                when appropriate) and performance criteria to ensure that
                                benefits are generated in line with incentives provided.
              Program 2.5.F:    Continue to maintain and update an economic development
                                strategy which focuses on both the acquisition of new busi-
                                nesses and retention of existing businesses.
              Program 2.5.G:    Continue to implement the programs and actions proposed in
                                the City’s latest Economic Development Strategy.
              Program 2.5.H:    Develop an “economic development web page” for Benicia
                                with pertinent economic and demographic information, and
                                profiles of key development sites and vacant buildings available
                                for new businesses.
              Program 2.5.I:    Conduct a bi-annual review of fee burdens for key land uses in
                                Benicia and competing jurisdictions in the region to ensure
                                that Benicia’s fees are sufficient and competitive and do not
                                create a deterrent to beneficial development.
              Program 2.5.J:    Expand the City’s economic development strategy to address
                                the potential for eco-tourism (e.g., related to marshlands),
                                recreation, artists, cultural, and historic elements. Conduct a
                                study of the relative merits and strengths of each of these assets
                                in Benicia.
42                                                                     City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                              B. Economic Development
                INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
                As of 1995 there were 1,213 developed acres of industrial land in the city, occupying
                42 percent of all developed land.A large part of the existing industrial acreage is
                located within the Benicia Industrial Park and is categorized as General Industrial use.
                This is where the heavy industrial uses are located, as well as industrial uses that have
                a large space demand.
                There are approximately 600 companies within the BIP, with combined employment
                in excess of 6,500 workers. The top 10 employers in the BIP provided a total of 2,250
                jobs in 1997, or about 22 percent of the total estimated employment in Benicia.The
                largest employer in the Industrial Park, with 400 employees, is Exxon Company USA, a
                petroleum refinery. Other large employers include: Corey Delta Construction, Under-
                ground Construction,West Coast Beauty Supply,Alamillo Steel, Rockridge Technology,
                and the Coca-Cola Bottling Company.
                The second largest category of existing industrial land is 270 acres zoned for water-
                related industrial use.This category applies to the Benicia Port area, most of which is
                owned by Benicia Industries.
                The remaining existing industrial land (29 acres) is developed for Limited Indus-
                trial uses.These include industrial office centers and research and development
                (“R&D”) facilities.
                GOAL 2.6:               Attract and retain a balance of different kinds of
                                        industrial uses to Benicia.
                POLICY 2.6.1:           Preserve industrial land for industrial purposes and certain
                                        compatible “service commercial” and ancillary on-site retail
                                        uses.
                “Compatible,” as defined in the California General Plan Glossary, means “capable of
                existing together without conflict or detrimental effects.” Compatibility will often be
                decided on a case-by-case basis by the Planning Commission and City Council.
                “Service commercial” uses are those that accommodate citywide and regional services
                that usually are inappropriate in neighborhood or pedestrian-oriented shopping areas.
                Such services generally require automotive access for customer convenience, servic-
                ing of vehicles or equipment, loading or unloading, or parking of commercial vehicles.
                POLICY 2.6.2:           Other land uses should not adversely affect existing industrial
                                        and commercial land uses.
                Program 2.6.A:          Where General Plan amendments propose to convert industrial
                                        land to non-industrial or non-commercial uses, require the
                                        preparation of a fiscal and economic impact analysis to ensure
                                        that the conversion does not adversely affect the city’s long-
                                        term economic development, or the economic vitality of
                                        existing industrial/commercial uses.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                            43

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              Program 2.6.B:          Develop criteria for evaluating whether a proposed non-
                                      industrial/non-commercial use would impact the viability of
                                      existing industrial/commercial uses. Use the criteria to evaluate
                                      non-industrial and non-commercial projects proposed in the
                                      Industrial Park.
              POLICY 2.6.3:           Facilitate continued development of the Industrial Park. Espe-
                                      cially encourage general industrial uses to locate in the basin
                                      northeast of Downtown (around Industrial Way between East
                                      Second and the freeway).
              Program 2.6.C:          For lands designated limited industrial, reduce the length of
                                      time and number of steps required for development proposals
                                      to proceed, consistent with CEQA, community development
                                      policies and ordinances, and the design review process for
                                      general industrial lands.
              POLICY 2.6.4:           Link any expansion of Industrial land use to the provision of
                                      infrastructure and public services that are to be developed and
                                      in place prior to the expansion.
              Program 2.6.D:          Continue to update the overall capital improvements program
                                      and infrastructure financing plan for the Industrial Park and
                                      other major industrial areas.
              Program 2.6.E:          Develop Industrial Park infrastructure and public services
                                      standards, as approved by the City Council. (See also Program
                                      2.28.A.)
              POLICY 2.6.5:           Establish and maintain a land buffer between industrial/
                                      commercial uses and existing and future residential uses for
                                      reasons of health, safety, and quality of life.
              Program 2.6.F:          Use topography, landscaping, and distance as a buffer between
                                      Industrial Park uses and residential uses.
              A buffer is “adequate” to the extent that it physically and psychologically separates
              uses or properties so as to shield, reduce, or block one set of properties from noise,
              light, or other nuisances generated on or by the other set of properties. Buffers will be
              determined on a case by case basis.
              GOAL 2.7:               Attract and retain industrial facilities that provide
                                      fiscal and economic benefits to—and meet the
                                      present and future needs of—Benicia.
              POLICY 2.7.1:           Attempt to attract high-wage and high-revenue producing
                                      companies to Benicia.
44                                                                         City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                               B. Economic Development
                This policy applies to emerging occupations such as secondary materials industry,
                wine industry, alternative transportation, environmental technology, fitness, and
                tourism.The intent of this policy is to encourage Benicia’s participation in studies by
                the Solano Economic Development Corporation (SEDCORP) related to attracting high-
                tech jobs and marketing efforts targeted to Benicia.
                Program 2.7.A:           Conduct a study of the City’s competitiveness for high-wage
                                         businesses. Based on the results, determine which types of
                                         high-wage businesses could realistically be attracted to Benicia
                                         and develop an appropriate business attraction strategy.
                PORT DEVELOPMENT
                As discussed in this section the Port of Benicia has two aspects – the Port as a pri-
                vately operated business and the Port as an important geographic locale in Benicia.
                The goals, policies, programs are intended to address both aspects of the port.
                The Port of Benicia is partially owned by the City and partially owned by Benicia
                Industries, Inc., a private company. The City leases portions of the Port to Benicia
                Industries, who in turn leases facilities within the Port to industrial tenants on por-
                tions of the approximately 644 acres it controls in Benicia. In 1999, Benicia Industries
                specializes in the shipment of automobiles and petroleum products.
                GOAL 2.8:                Maintain the viability of the Port now and in the
                                         future to benefit the City of Benicia.
                POLICY 2.8.1:            Avoid encroachment by future incompatible uses, and where
                                         possible, reduce encroachment from existing incompatible
                                         uses, in concert with Policy 2.11.1.
                Program 2.8.A:           Ensure that definitions of “water-related industrial” and “water-
                                         front” land uses are consistent with “water dependent” uses as
                                         defined in the Seaport Plan.
                Refer to Appendix D for discussion of Seaport Plan and related tidelands issues.
                GOAL 2.9:                Ensure adequate land for port activity.
                Program 2.9.A:           Work with the Port to evaluate the future level of port activity
                                         and need for land in order to sustain an economically viable
                                         Port operation.
                POLICY 2.9.1:            Encourage and create opportunities and methods for coopera-
                                         tive planning of the Port,Arsenal, and Pine Lake.
                Rather than just reacting to specific development proposals, the planning should be
                “pro-active” and “master-planning” in nature. The primary criteria are that the process
                is conducted in public and that all stakeholders are represented.At a minimum,
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                             45

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              “stakeholders” should include City officials, representatives of Benicia Industries, and
              the general public. Depending on the particular planning project, stakeholders might
              also include representatives of Caltrans, the Art Community, and the Chamber of
              Commerce.
              “Master Planning” for these areas would evaluate, among other things, the historic
              preservation of buildings, public access, circulation, affordable housing, live-work
              space, infrastructure needs (train station, new bridge ramps and interchanges, and
              ferry service), potential for economic development and revenue enhancement for the
              City, reconsideration of uses in the lower Arsenal, restrictions on hazardous materials
              and waste, and improving the public process for project approval.
              GOAL 2.10:               Provide for carefully-defined visual and physical
                                       public access where security and safety consider-
                                       ations permit.
              This goal is not intended to conflict with other goals and policies encouraging port
              viability and industrial growth.
              Program 2.10.A:          Explore the feasibility of public access to and providing recre-
                                       ation use in the Port in a manner which does not compromise
                                       the economic viability or safe operation of the Port.
              For a discussion of public trust lands in relation to the Port, refer to Appendix E.
              HISTORIC ARSENAL
              The Arsenal area is characterized
              by older, historic buildings, and a
              multiplicity of uses and tenants,
              including studios, small profes-
              sional offices, and small industrial
              activities, such as cabinet making.
              The Arsenal fronts on the Port of
              Benicia and is a distinct area
              within the Benicia Industrial Park.
              Many buildings in the Arsenal area
              are not used—or are
              underutilized—and could be
              converted to various uses.A number of the buildings, however, do not meet the
              current Uniform Building and Fire Codes and would be costly to convert or upgrade.
              The area also needs infrastructure improvements (including roads and signs) to create
              a distinct sense of place.
              The artist community in the lower Arsenal is a small yet strong economic force in the
              City that should be supported and expanded while considering its context in, and the
46                                                                         City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                               B. Economic Development
                operating needs of, the Port.This part of the City is a mixed-use area.The Arsenal adds
                character and diversity to the City and allows for alternative living and working
                arrangements quite different from those available in other parts of the community.
                GOAL 2.11:               Encourage the retention and continued evolution
                                         of the lower Arsenal into a historic/cultural/
                                         commercial/industrial center of mutually compat-
                                         ible uses.
                The “lower Arsenal” is south of I-780, between the freeway and the water-related
                industrial lands.
                POLICY 2.11.1:           Retain and expand the mix of compatible and balanced uses in
                                         the lower Arsenal area.
                POLICY 2.11.2:           Continue to allow live/work uses in the lower Arsenal where it
                                         can be demonstrated that adequate buffers exist, including
                                         noise buffers, and that the presence of residents would not
                                         significantly constrain industrial operations, including the flow
                                         of goods and materials.
                POLICY 2.11.3:           Support the development of the Pine Lake area as an attractive,
                                         aesthetic gateway with a water feature.
                The Pine Lake area is located immediately north of I-780 and west of Park Road.
                Program 2.11.A:          Require protection of dramatic views of the strait and the
                                         incorporation of a gateway/water feature into any development
                                         plans for the Pine Lake area.
                A Development Agreement has been adopted for the Pine Lake area. Refer to Appen-
                dix F.
                DOWNTOWN
                The major concentration of commercial uses in the City is located in the Downtown
                area which runs along the First Street Corridor and stretches to the waterfront park
                and includes the Depot site. This area is designated Downtown Commercial and is
                enhanced by the adjoining waterfront park. This designation was created specifically
                for the First Street Corridor area and is meant to emphasize the importance of First
                Street as the Downtown.The area has a mixture of office, retail, and residential devel-
                opment.
                While the Downtown shares many of the problems faced by older downtowns
                throughout the country (e.g., vacant lots, underutilized land, and competition from
                suburban shopping centers), its natural features and historical significance greatly
                increase its potential for economic development. Major points of interest include the
                third State Capital of California and sites adjacent to the Downtown including the
                western terminus of the Transcontinental Railroad and an accessible waterfront with
City of Benicia General Plan                               revised 11.16.04 (Measure C)                  47

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
                                            striking views of the Carquinez Strait and surrounding
                                            hills.The area is a community gathering place that attracts
                                            tourists and local residents to its historic sites, shops,
                                            restaurants, farmers’ market, and special events.Adjoining
                                            the Downtown are a marina, a waterfront park, and
                                            several medium density condominium developments.
                                            The General Plan encourages development of the Down-
                                            town in a manner that preserves its small-town character-
                                            istics.The Downtown provides a human scale and mix of
                                            building types; open, scenic vistas; a relaxed and pleasant
                                            “sidewalk” atmosphere; and minimum vehicular traffic. It
                                            offers social and recreational opportunities and points of
                                            interest to residents and visitors.The historic character of
                                            Downtown is enhanced by adjacent alleys, residential
                                            streets that lead to the waterfront, specialty and antique
                                            stores, a waterfront promenade, and a fishing pier at the
                                            end of First Street.
                                            The intent of the following goals and policies is to allow a
                                            mix of uses in the Downtown , including residential;
              provide easy circulation by transit and on foot; develop smooth, functional connec-
              tions to other parts of the community; provide nighttime activities to create safer
              streets; make a commitment to public life Downtown by providing public gathering
              spaces; recognize the historical importance of the area; improve surrounding neigh-
              borhoods; cultivate a unique identity that will attract visitors; invest public funds in
              street improvements, housing, public transit, and cultural activities; actively recruit
              private investment and incentives to encourage development on First Street; and
              encourage cooperation in the management of the Downtown area.
              GOAL 2.12:              Strengthen the Downtown as the City’s central
                                      commercial zone.
              POLICY 2.12.1:          Emphasize retail sales and service businesses along First Street,
                                      preferring retail commercial on the street level and encourag-
                                      ing other commercial, office, and housing as important support-
                                      ing uses on upper floors.
              Program 2.12.A:         Consider improvements to Solano Square to make it more
                                      pedestrian friendly.
              Program 2.12.B:         Work to attract economically viable businesses that will create
                                      night-life Downtown such as restaurants, cafes, movie theaters,
                                      and other entertainment uses.
              Program 2.12.C:         Continue business recruitment and marketing efforts for
                                      Downtown. Provide promotional information on Benicia’s
48                revised 11.16.04 (Measure C)                             City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                               B. Economic Development
                                        economic and demographic profile, available sites and building
                                        space, a directory of support services, and an expedited approv-
                                        als program.
                Many of these programs are already carried out by the City based on the City’s
                adopted Economic Development Strategy (Resolution 95-10).Also, the City funds
                Benicia’s Main Street Program which provides some of the services listed above.
                Program 2.12.D:         Develop public/private partnerships to implement financing
                                        mechanisms such as a Business Improvement District to fund
                                        capital improvements and repairs to Downtown.
                Program 2.12.E:         Retain a permanent Main Street Program.
                Program 2.12.F:         Promote additional civic and compatible public and private
                                        uses in the Civic Center area.
                POLICY 2.12.2:          Permit a mix of residential and commercial uses including
                                        detached single-family homes and live/work quarters in the first
                                        row of blocks east and west of First Street.Allow small retail
                                        commercial businesses on parcels closest to First Street, and
                                        small, less intense uses (such as offices, personal services, and
                                        bed-and-breakfast establishments) anywhere within the block.
                The intent of this policy is to encourage retention of the existing small-scale, fine-grain
                development based on historic lot sizes Downtown.
                Program 2.12.G:         Review and modify
                                        the zoning ordi-
                                        nance, as needed, to
                                        accommodate a
                                        mix of uses in the
                                        blocks immediately
                                        east and west of
                                        First Street.
                POLICY 2.12.3:          Seek to make
                                        Downtown a
                                        thriving and
                                        vigorous commu-
                                        nity center offering
                                        a variety of activi-
                                        ties and attractions
                                        for residents and
                                        visitors.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                             49

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              Program 2.12.H:         Continue to promote special events in the Downtown such as
                                      a farmers’ market, street fairs, art and music festivals. Encourage
                                      events that remain open in the early evening. (See policies in
                                      Noise section.)
              Program 2.12.I:         Work with existing restaurants and cafes to provide sidewalk
                                      food service where the service will not impede pedestrian flow
                                      and where adequate sidewalk space exists.
              Program 2.12.J:         Maintain public parks, streets, and sidewalks located Down-
                                      town in a clean and safe condition.
              Program 2.12.K:         As the budget allows, provide amenities such as additional
                                      benches along First Street and in adjacent public areas; drinking
                                      fountains, public art, shade trees and arbors.
              POLICY 2.12.4:          Create a social, recreational, and economic anchor at the
                                      waterfront end of First Street by establishing a waterfront park
                                      which provides a site for community festivals, preserves open
                                      space, and allows commercial and civic uses at the Depot site.
              Program 2.12.L:         Promote commercial and civic uses at the historic Railroad
                                      Depot, such as a restaurant or art gallery that would contribute
                                      to the revitalization of the downtown area and which would be
                                      compatible with the uses of the adjoining waterfront park.
              Program 2.12.M:         Promote special events and festivals at the waterfront park.
              Program 2.12.N:         By the end of the year 2000, decide on the feasibility of restor-
                                      ing three City-owned structures: —the former Southern Pacific
                                      Railway Depot and Jurgensen’s Saloon, and the Von Pfister
                                      Adobe.
              Program 2.12.O:         Establish a permanent public green on the waterfront as
                                      created by the 2004 Benicia Waterfront Park Initiative.
              Program 2.12.P:         Investigate the possibility of developing a west side marina.
              Program 2.12.Q:         Develop a “tourist-oriented web page” that includes photos and
                                      information about Benicia as a tourist destination, such as
                                      information on lodging, historic places, restaurants, artists
                                      galleries and studios, and recreational and natural resources.
              Program 2.12.R:         Continue to support promotional maps for visitors that identify
                                      locations of restaurants, services, specialty retail, recreational,
                                      and other facilities that cater to visitors and tourists.
              OTHER COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT
              Within the City in 1995, about 86 acres were developed for commercial use. Over half
              of that acreage is designated for “general commercial”—a broad designation that
50                revised 11.16.04 (Measure C)                              City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                               B. Economic Development
                includes stores or services that are meant to serve the entire community plus the
                public traveling through the area.Areas designated for general commercial include a
                section in the lower Arsenal, an area around East Fifth Street and Military East, Solano
                Square, and Southampton Road. The other major commercially developed area is the
                19 acre Downtown, which was discussed in the previous section.
                Only three acres are developed for “neighborhood commercial” uses in the entire city.
                The remaining developed commercial acreage is used for office (nine acres) and
                waterfront commercial (four acres). In general, the city’s existing commercial uses are
                limited in size, acreage, intensity, and sales volume.
                GOAL 2.13:              Support the economic viability of existing com-
                                        mercial centers.
                POLICY 2.13.1:          Direct new commercial ventures first, towards Downtown, and
                                        second, to other existing economic centers (instead of dispers-
                                        ing resources to new areas).
                Program 2.13.A:         As part of the Business Attraction, Expansion, and Retention
                                        Program, maintain an available commercial space and site
                                        database with information on size, lease rates, tenant improve-
                                        ments, etc., and make it readily available to prospective busi-
                                        nesses.
                POLICY 2.13.2:          Preclude extension of the existing commercial development
                                        east along Military East and south along East Fifth Street.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                            51

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              C. CIRCULATION
              Government Code §65302(b) states that the general plan shall include a circulation
              element consisting of the general location and extent of existing and proposed major
              thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, and other local public utilities and
              facilities, all correlated with the land use element of the plan.The requirement for
              correlation is particularly important, since it recognizes the close connections be-
              tween the different elements of the general plan.
              The circulation element describes facilities for the movement of people and goods
              throughout the City. It includes a plan of the streets, highways, rail, and water transpor-
              tation facilities designed to serve the community. It also discusses county and regional
              transportation planning programs and the future of transportation in Benicia.The last
              section presents the circulation goals, policies, and programs.
              1. COUNTY AND REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION FRAMEWORK
              The City’s authority over the provision of transportation services in Benicia is deter-
              mined by regulations at the local, State and federal level.The City’s transportation
              decisions are coordinated on a countywide level through Solano County’s Congestion
              Management Program (CMP) and the Solano Transportation Authority (STA). Regional
              transportation decisions for the nine county Bay Area are made by the Metropolitan
              Transportation Commission (MTC), which derives its powers from State and federal
              transportation funding programs.
              CONGESTION MANAGEMENT AGENCY
              The STA is the designated congestion management agency (CMA) for Solano
              County and the cities. State law requires the Authority to adopt and implement a
              Congestion Management Program (CMP), which contains the procedures for
              managing congestion created by growth and identifies all transportation projects
              proposed for State and federal funding, for seven-year planning periods.
              METROPOLITAN TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
              MTC is the agency designated with the decision-making authority for the Bay Area for
              regional transportation issues. MTC prepares a Regional Transportation Plan which
              describes transportation investments in the Bay Area for the next 20 years.These
              transportation investments are directed at the “Metropolitan Transportation System”
              (MTS) which includes the regionally significant components of the Bay Area’s transpor-
              tation network. Components of the MTS located in Benicia include the freeways, East
              2nd Street, Lake Herman Road, Military between I-780 and East 2nd St., the Port of
              Benicia, Benicia Transit Services, and the Union Pacific rail line. State and federal
              statutes require that MTC find a project or program consistent with the Regional
              Transportation Plan before allocating certain State funds and any federal funds for that
              project or program.
52                                                                         City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                             C. Circulation
                2. THE MOVEMENT OF PEOPLE
                PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE MOVEMENT
                Certain areas of Benicia are very walkable.The Downtown, lower Arsenal, and water-
                front areas provide closely spaced land uses and relatively flat topography, as well as a
                pleasant physical environment.The northern residential and industrial areas are less
                pedestrian-friendly, with hilly terrain and longer distances between uses.
                Bikeways are classified based on the Caltrans classification system for off-road (Class I)
                and on-road (Class II and Class III) facilities, as described in Table 2-7.
                Table 2-7. Classification of Bicycle Facilities
                CLASS I                  Bicycle Path             Paved path separated from automobile
                                                                  traffic by a curb and landscaped strip,
                                                                  or routed through an open space area.
                                                                  Motorized vehicles are prohibited; may
                                                                  be combined with pedestrian trail.
                CLASS II                 Bicycle Lane             Paved extension of a roadway desig-
                                                                  nated exclusively for bicyclists.
                CLASS III                Bicycle Route            Signed routes where bicycles share
                                                                  roadways with vehicular traffic; no
                                                                  separate right-of-way is provided for
                                                                  bicyclists.
                Benicia’s Bicycle and Multi-Use Trail System is shown in Figure 2-4.This system, which
                shows both existing and planned future facilities, was developed for the Benicia Parks,
                Trails and Open Space Master Plan in 1994.The City’s existing bicycle facilities serve
                primarily the waterfront, western Downtown, and northern residential areas. Exten-
                sions and connections are planned along most of the arterial roadways and some
                collector streets, as well as off-road alignments, to provide a fully connected system.
                PUBLIC TRANSIT
                Three forms of public transit serve Benicia residents: buses, passenger rail and ferries.
                The following provides an overview of the services currently available in Benicia.
                Bus Transit
                Benicia Transit is an intercity fixed-route service which provides service to the ferry
                terminal, the Lemon/Curtola Park and Ride stop in Vallejo, and the Sun Valley Mall as
                well as the Pleasant Hill BART station in Contra Costa County.
                In addition to its fixed-route transit services, Benicia funds a local Dial-a-Ride
                program open to the general public.The service is provided under contract with a
                transportation services company. Benicia also participates in the intercity “Run
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                             53

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
  BICYCLE AND MULTI-USE TRAIL
  CIRCULATION SYSTEM
     Legend:                                    Existing                     Future
     Class III Bikeway
     Class II Bikeway
     Class I Bikeway
     Improved /                                         n/a
     Interpretive Trails
     Bay Trail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                             E                 HER
                                                                                                                                                                                                         LAK
                                                                                                                                                             IN D U
                                                                                                                                                                        STR
                                                                                                                                                                                  IAL
                                                                                                                                                                                          EX                                                                                              ET
                                                                                                                                                                                               TE                                                                                    RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                    NS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     d   ST
                                                                                                            Lake                                                        CH
                                                                                                                                                                                                         IO                                                       2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              INDUSTRIAL WAY
                                                                                                                                                                             AN                               N                                              E.
                                                                                                            Herman                                                                N
                                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                                                      L
                                                                                                                                                                                          R
                                                                                                                                                 M cA                                     OA
                                                                                                                                                        LL                                    D
                                                                                                                                                          IS
                                                                                                                                                             TE R                                                                       IN
                                                                                                     KEAR                    ARG
                                                                                                                                       UEL                                                                                                   DU
                                                                                                          NE                                         LO                                                                                           ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AL
                                                                                                            Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             y
                               IVE
                          DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ba
                      E
             R   OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Suisun
                                                                                                                                  E                                                                                                                                                                       BA
                                                                                                                              V   I                                                                                                                                                                         YS
                                                                                                                             DR                                                                                                                                                                           RO H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EE
                                                                                                                         A             C
                                                                                                                    AM                                                                                                                                                                                       AD                O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TR
                                                                            SO                                  R                                                                                                                                                                                                              RE
                                                                                                                                      H EL SE A
                                                                                 LANO                       O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   dS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GATE
                                                                                                     PA N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                              E.
  C
PA OL                                                                 VE         IN
                                                                                                                                      H IL L S
  RK UM                                                          D RI          RK                                                                                                                                                         EAST 2ND - PARK
    W BU                                        IV E
                                                                             LA
      AY S                                  R                                                                                                                                                                                              CONNECTOR
                                         ED
                                  ID G
                                                       HA ST I NG S
                               BR
                                                                                                                                         DR IV E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PA
                                                                                         TURNER
                          AM                                                                                                                                                                        SEAVIEW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E ST                                      K
                          C                                                                                                                                                                                                             HILL C R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E. 5th STREET
                                                                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                                                                  D R IV                                                                                                                               RO
                                                                                                                                                     WA R W I C K
                                                                                                                                                                       780
STATE PARK
                                                                                                  N RO A D
   ROAD                                                                                 P TO
                                                                                   AM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OAK
                                                                           SOUTH
                                                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          STR
                                                                                                                                          W. 7th
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             EET
                                                                                                                                                                             H
                                                                                                                                                                      5T                                                                                                                                                                                 680
                                                                                                                                                      T             W EST
                                                                                                                                                 TREE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MILITARY EAST                                                                                        GATE
                                                                                                                                                                            MILITARY WEST
                                                                                 WEST K STREET
                                                                                                                                                                            WEST J STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GATE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EAST H STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1st STREET
                                                            Southampton                                                                                                                                                              EAST E STREET
                                                                Bay
                                                                                 UINEZ                                       STRA
                                                                            CARQ                                                  IT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   800      0      800 1600
 Source: Benicia Parks,Trails and Open Space Master Plan
                                 Figure 2-4. Bicycle and Multi-Use Circulation Diagram
54                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City of Benicia General Plan
                                                                                          C. Circulation
                About” paratransit service running primarily between Vallejo and Benicia. Since
                1991, Caltrans has operated a daily Benicia-Martinez Bridge shuttle bus between
                the Park-and-Ride lot at the I-780/East 2nd St. interchange and the Martinez AMTRAK
                station. It is anticipated that this service will be discontinued on completion of
                the second bridge span.
                Passenger Rail Service
                There is commuter rail service operating through Solano County, and many Benicia
                residents commute to work via BART trains in Contra Costa County, using Benicia
                Transit to travel to the Pleasant Hill BART station.
                Ferry Transit
                Benicia commuters have access to ferry service via Benicia Transit to the Vallejo Ferry
                Terminal.The ferry operates between the ferry terminals in Vallejo and San Francisco.
                AUTOMOBILE MOVEMENT
                Street system
                The original settlement of Benicia was surveyed by Jasper O’Farrell (who also laid out
                the street system in San Francisco).A five-mile stretch of shoreline was selected, and a
                grid system of streets was superimposed with little relation to topography.All north-
                south streets in the original settlement have 80-foot wide rights-of-way, while the east-
                west streets have alternating 60- and 80-foot-wide rights-of-way. North-south streets
                were extended beyond the shoreline and into the water. Street names are alphabetical
                in the east-west direction and numbered in the north-south direction.
                In the mid-1960’s, an east-west freeway (I-780) was constructed generally between “O”
                and “S” Streets. New development north of the freeway subsequently abandoned the
                grid system to minimize grading and street slope.
                3. CIRCULATION SYSTEM
                Figure 2-5 shows the existing and future circulation system for Benicia. It will serve
                existing traffic as well as new traffic from development allowed under this General
                Plan.The system includes five basic roadway types: Freeways, Major Arterials, Minor
                Arterials, Collectors and Local Streets.The system includes several roadway connec-
                tions and extensions which do not exist as of 1997, including:
                1. A second Benicia-Martinez Bridge Span (not shown on Figure 2-5);
                2. Public road connections through the lower Arsenal and Port areas, to include
                     Bayshore Road (minor arterial),Adams Street (major arterial), and Oak Street
                     (minor arterial);
                3. A Bayshore Road connection between Park Road and Industrial Way (minor
                     arterial);
                4. A new east-west connector roadway between East Second Street and Park Road
                     (minor arterial); and
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                           55

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
 GENERAL PLAN CIRCULATION SYSTEM
     Legend:
                                        Freeway                                                       Future new/extended arterial alignments (illustrative only):
                                        Major Arterial                                                1. Second Benicia-Martinez Bridge span.
                                        Minor Arterial                                                2. Public Bayshore Road connection through port area.
                                        Collector                                                     3. Bayshore Road connection between Park Road and
                                                                                                         Industrial Way
                                        Local Street
                                                                                                      4. East-west connector roadway between East Second Street
                                        Railroad
                                                                                                         and Park Road
                                                                                                      5. Extension of Industrial Way north to Lake Herman Road.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                         E                 HER
                                                                                                                                                                                                     LAK
                                                                                                                                                               INDU
                                                                                                                                                                       STR
                                                                                                                                                                                IAL
                                                                                                                                                                                      EX                                                                                                   T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EE
                                                                                                                                                      5                                    TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                NS
                                                                                                                                                                                                     IO                                                          n   dS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TR
                                                                                                           Lake                                                        CH                                                                                     .2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             INDUSTRIAL WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                          N                                               E
                                                                                                                                                                           ANN
                                                                                                           Herman                                                                E
                                                                                                                                                                                 L
                                                                                                                                                  M                                  RO
                                                                                                                                                      AL
                                                                                                                                                                                      AD
                                                                                                                                                   c
                                                                                                                                                           L
                                                                                                                                                           IS T
                                                                                                                                                               ER                                                                    IN
                                                                                                                              ARGU
                                                                                                       K E AR                                ELLO                                                                                         DU
                                                                                                             NE                                                                                                                                ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AL
                                                                                                               Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               y
                                 IVE
                            DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ba
                       SE
               R   O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                               VE
                                                                                                                                   I                                                                                                                                                                     BA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           YS                                         Suisun
                                                                                                                              DR                                                                                                                                                                         RO H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EE
                                                                                                                          A
                                                                                                                      M                                                                                                                                                                                     AD                O
                                                                                                                   RA
                                                                                                                                       C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 TR
                                                                               SO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RE
                                                                                                                                         H ELSE
                                                                                    LANO                       O
                                                                                                                                                                                                               dS
                                                                                                        PA N
                                                                                                                                                                                                          E.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GATE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4
                                                                                                                                       A H ILLS
   C                                                                     VE           IN
 PA OL
                                                                      D RI
                                                                                 RK
   RK UM                                                                        LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EAST 2ND - PARK
     W BU                                          IVE                                                                                                                                                                                     CONNECTOR
       AY S                                   DR
                                       IDGE                   S
                                 BR
                                                                                                                                          D RIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                         HA ST I NG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PA
                                                                                            TURNER
                            AM                                                                                                                                                                  SEAVIEW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EST                                         K
                            C                                                                                                                                                                                                        HILL C R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E. 5th STREET
                                                                                                                                                                   DRIVE                                                                                                                              RO
                                                                                                                                                      WA R W I C K
                                                                                                                                                                      780
STATE PARK
                                                                                                     N RO A D
   ROAD                                                                                    P TO
                                                                                      AM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OAK
                                                                              SOUTH
                                                                                                                                                  S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ST.
                                                                                                                                           W. 7th
                                                                                                                                                                            H                                                                                                                                                     GATE
                                                                                                                                                                      5T                                                                                                                                                                                       680
                                                                                                                                                                    WEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ADAMS ST.
                                                                                                                                                  TREE
                                                                                                                                                   T
                                                                                                                                                                           MILITARY WEST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MILITARY EAST                                                                                         GATE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      (Second Bridge
                                                                                    WEST K STREET                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Span Not Shown)
                                                                                                                                                                           WEST J STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GATE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             EAST H STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                              1st STREET
                                                             Southampton                                                                                                                                                           EAST E STREET
                                                                 Bay
                                                                                   UINEZ                              STRA
                                                                              CARQ                                         IT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  800      0         800 1600
                                  Figure 2-5. Circulation Diagram
56                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             City of Benicia General Plan
                                                                                              C. Circulation
                5. Extension of Industrial Way north to Lake Herman Road (minor arterial).
                Following is a description of the different roadway types in the Circulation System.
                FREEWAYS
                Freeways are intended to serve regional and sub-regional travel. In Benicia, the
                location of freeways relative to the rest of the street network results in some (but not
                extensive) freeway use by residents or employees for intra-city travel.
                Interstate Highways I-680 and I-780 serve north-south and east-west travel respectively,
                through and within Benicia. Each are four-lane facilities through Benicia.
                I-680 (six travel lanes) crosses the Benicia–Martinez bridge to the south. Caltrans plans
                to add a second bridge span which would result in five travel lanes in each direction
                (northbound and southbound).
                ARTERIAL STREETS
                Arterial streets link residential, commercial, and industrial districts with the highway
                system.They serve primarily through-travel as opposed to providing direct access to
                adjacent land uses.A Major Arterial is a roadway which connects freeways to minor
                arterials, other major arterials, and collector streets.A Minor Arterial is a roadway
                which connects major arterials to collectors and local streets.Arterials generally
                provide two to four travel lanes. Major and minor arterials in the General Plan Circula-
                tion System (see Figure 2-5) include:
                    Major Arterials                          Minor Arterials
                    East Second Street                       Rose Drive
                    Industrial Way                           Park Road (except major arterial section)
                    Lake Herman Road                         Oak Street
                    Military East – Military West            Bayshore Road
                    Adams Street                             Hillcrest Ave., btwn E. 2nd and E. 5th Sts.
                    Southampton Road                         East Fifth Street
                    West Seventh Street                      New Park - East Second Connector Road
                    Columbus Parkway                         First St. between Military and East “H” St.
                    State Park Road                          Cambridge Drive
                    Park Road between Industrial Way         Panorama Drive from Southampton
                    and Bayshore Road                        Road to Rose Drive
                                                             Chelsea Hills Drive
                                                             Hastings Drive
                                                             West Seventh Street from West “K” Street
                                                             to Military West
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                              57

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              COLLECTOR STREETS
              Collector streets are generally two lanes wide and connect local streets to minor and
              major arterials. Collector streets generally do not form a continuous system; otherwise
              there would be a tendency to use them as arterials.The Benicia General Plan provides
              for collectors to serve the marina, various industrial areas, and most residential dis-
              tricts.The collectors in the General Plan Circulation System (see Figure 2-5) include:
                   Channel Road                  Larkin Drive between Turner and Panorama
                   Kearny Street                 West “K”/West J” Street (west of First Street)
                   McAllister Street             West 5th St./Sherman Dr. (north of Military)
                   Arguello Street               First Street South of East “H” Street
                   Solano Drive                  East “H” Street
                   (Hastings to Larkin)
                   Turner Drive                  East “D” Street between First Street and East Second
                   Warwick Drive                 East “E” Street between East 2nd and
                                                 East 5th Streets
                   Seaview Drive                 E. Second Street btwn East “H” and East “D” Streets
              LOCAL STREETS
              The function of local streets is to provide access directly to abutting property. Future
              local streets are not shown on the Circulation System map because they are typically
              laid out in accordance with City standards as part of the subdivision design process.
              They play an important secondary role as locations for utilities, easements, open space
              for light and air, and firebreaks between buildings. Local streets are not intended to
              carry through-traffic from one part of the community to another.
              4. EXISTING AND FUTURE TRAFFIC CONDITIONS
              FREEWAYS
              The existing Level of Service (LOS) on freeways is monitored by the Solano Transporta-
              tion Authority as part of their Congestion Management Program (CMP). LOS is ex-
              pressed using a letter from A to F, with LOS A being best and LOS F being worst. (See
              Glossary for a more complete explanation of LOS). The 1995 CMP identifies LOS F
              conditions at the Benicia-Martinez Bridge toll plaza, LOS C/D conditions on I-680, and
              LOS C conditions on I-780.
              The most recent study of future freeway traffic volumes is the I-680/I-80/I-780 Triangle
              Area Traffic Study Traffic Operations Report (1997).This report describes 1995 traffic
              volumes and projects future (2010) volumes for several scenarios which combine
              different sets of freeway improvements.The “No Build” scenario, which assumes the
              only improvement would be the scheduled Benicia - Martinez Bridge span which
58                                                                          City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                            C. Circulation
                represents the “worst case” for future conditions. For this case, the study indicates that
                peak hour freeway operations would be poor in the future (LOS D/E), although vol-
                umes would remain within the existing lane-capacity for all segments except I-780
                between Southampton Road and Columbus Parkway in the AM peak hour.
                Freeways serve both locally- and regionally-generated traffic and have a profound
                effect on communities. It is City policy to encourage Caltrans to maintain the current
                number of lanes on I-680 and I-780 through the city, except for spot widenings that
                may be necessary to smooth traffic at ramps.These policies are consistent with others
                in this General Plan which call for promoting alternative commute methods and a
                better jobs/housing balance to minimize freeway travel demand.The intent of the
                General Plan is not to create greater traffic congestion by rejecting all freeway widen-
                ing, but to address the realities of growing travel demand through site-specific im-
                provements, land use policies that minimize travel demand, and high occupancy
                vehicle (HOV) travel.
                CITY STREET NETWORK
                On the local, non-freeway road network in Benicia, traffic conditions are best repre-
                sented by the operating level of intersections, because intersections are the primary
                source of delay and “bottlenecks.”Traffic operations at intersections are described in
                terms of Level of Service (LOS). LOS D is generally accepted as the standard for inter-
                section operation and has been adopted as the standard for Benicia. (See Policy
                2.20.1.)
                Tables 2-8 and 2-9 describe the different LOS designations A to F, for signalized and
                stop-controlled intersections.
                There are 24 key intersections in Benicia. Table 2-10 shows existing and projected
                service levels.As of 1995, four intersections operated at LOS D, and another four
                operated at LOS E or F.The LOS E/F intersections are all located at I-780 ramps.The rest
                of the intersections operated at LOS C or better. Of the eight intersections operating at
                LOS D or worse, five are stop-controlled intersections.A check of the Caltrans signal
                warrant criterion for peak hour volumes at intersections shows that installation of a
                signal is warranted at two of these intersections: East Second Street/I-780 Westbound
                Ramps and East Fifth Street/I-780 Eastbound Ramps. Both of these intersections are
                scheduled to be signalized in the City’s current Capital Improvement Program. Signal-
                ization would improve the existing LOS to C or better at these intersections.
                Future traffic volumes at the study intersections were projected based on the land use
                changes in this General Plan.The traffic projection methodology is described in the
                General Plan DEIR Transportation chapter.Table 2-11 contains the future service levels
                which would result from these volumes, assuming no intersection improvements
                were made.While this General Plan involves a reduction in land use intensity in many
                areas relative to the previous general plan, the projected land uses at buildout would
                still cause unacceptable conditions (LOS D or worse) at 14 of the 24 intersections. (An
                additional eight intersections are already at LOS D or worse, as noted above).
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                            59

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              Table 2-8. Level of Service Criteria for Signalized Intersections
                        LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS)                   VOLUME-TO-CAPACITY RATIO
                                     A                                        0.00 - 0.60
                                     B                                        0.61 - 0.70
                                     C                                        0.71 - 0.80
                                     D                                        0.81 - 0.90
                                     E                                        0.91 - 1.00
                                     F                                           >1.00
              Source: Transportation Research Board, Circular 212, Interim Materials on Highway
              Capacity
              Table 2-9. Level of Service Criteria for Stop-controlled Intersections
                        LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS)                   AVERAGE STOPPED DELAY PER
                                                                      VEHICLE (IN SECONDS)
                                     A                                     0 to 5.0 seconds
                                    B                                    5.1 to 10.0 seconds
                                    C                                   10.1 to 20.0 seconds
                                    D                                   20.1 to 30.0 seconds
                                     E                                  30.1 to 45.0 seconds
                                     F                                 more than 45 seconds
              Source: Transportation Research Board, Highway Capacity Manual, 1994
              The City’s policy is to maintain intersection operation at LOS D or better, except where
              improvements would be infeasible or undesirable due to considerations of right-of-
              way, impacts of neighboring properties, aesthetics, or community character.Thus, the
              improvements included in this General Plan attempt to provide LOS D or better at the
              24 intersections, wherever possible.
              Figure 2-6 shows the intersection improvements which would be required to improve
              all intersections to at least LOS D.Table 2-11 shows the projected level of service at the
              study intersections with the improvements. Of the 22 intersections which require
              improvement, 14 would require the installation of a signal, and all 22 would require
              lane additions on some or all approaches. Some of the lane recommendations may not
              be feasible due to physical constraints; however, more detailed operational studies of
              these intersections can be performed as the need for the improvements draws near,
60                                                                        City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                                               C. Circulation
                     Table 2-10. Existing (1995) and Future Intersection Levels of Service (LOS)
                                                             EXISTING SERVICE LEVEL              FUTURE SERVICE LEVEL
INTERSECTION                                  CONTROL          V/C          DELAY       LOS        V/C         DELAY       LOS
                                                TYPE                        (SEC.)                             (SEC.)
 1. Columbus Parkway/Rose Drive                 Signal         0.82                       D        1.75                      F
 2. Southampton/Hastings                    One-way Stop                     15/3       C/A                      28/4      D/A
 3. Southampton/Military West                   Signal         0.46                       A        0.58                      A
 4. Southampton/Chelsea Hills                   Signal         0.74                       C        1.09                      F
 5. West Seventh/I-780 WB On/Off                Signal         1.01                       F        1.72                      F
 6. West Seventh/I-780 EB On/Off                Signal         0.60                       A        1.07                      F
 7. First / Military                            Signal         0.53                       A         .76                      C
 8. East Second/I-780 WB On/Off             One-way Stop                    81/22        F/D                      */*       F/F
 9. East Second/I-780 EB On/Off                 Signal         0.63                       B        1.28                      F
10. East Second/Military East                   Signal         0.63                       B        1.57                      F
11. East Fifth/I-780 WB On/Off              One-way Stop                   259/66        F/F                      */*       F/F
12. East Fifth/I-780 EB On/Off              One-way Stop                     35/4        E/A                      */*       F/F
13. East Fifth/Military East                    Signal         0.80                       D        1.23                      F
14. East Second/Rose Drive                      Signal         0.58                       A        1.91                      F
15. East Second/Industrial                  Two-way Stop                     29/7       D/B                       */*       F/F
16. Bayshore/Park                           Four-way Stop                     28          D                        *         F
17. Bayshore/I-680 SB On                     WB Left Yield                    5/1        A/A                      */*       F/F
18. Bayshore/I-680 NB Off                   One-way Stop                      6/3        B/A                      */*       F/F
19. Industrial/Park                         Four-way Stop                     14          C                        *         F
20. Industrial/I-680 SB Off                 One-way Stop                      5/1        A/A                     */28       F/D
21. Industrial/I-680 NB On                  One-way Stop                      8/4        B/A                      */*       F/F
22. Lake Herman/East Second                 Two-way Stop                      9/4        B/A                      */*       F/F
23. Lake Herman/I-680 SB On/Off             One-way Stop                      9/1        B/A                      */*       F/F
24. Lake Herman/I-680 NB On/Off             Two-way Stop                       /2        A/A                      */*       F/F
For signalized intersections, the volume/capacity ratio is given. For side street stop-controlled intersections, two delays and
service levels are given: the delay for the worst movement, and the average intersection delay. For four-way stops, the
average intersection delay is given.
* = very long delays (over two minutes)
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                                  61
Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
 INTERSECTION MITIGATIONS
     1 Columbus Pkwy &                            2 Southampton &                                  3 Southampton   &                                  4 Southampton   &
         Rose Dr.                                         Hastings                                   Military West                                      Chelsea Hills
                                                                              New Signal
                                                                               Required                        Southampton
  I-780 EB
     On/Off                                       Hastings
                                     Rose                                                                                                            Driveway                              Chelsea
                                                                    STOP                                                                                                                   Hills
                                                                                                                                        Military
              Columbus Pkwy.                                  Southampton                                                                                         Southampton
     5 W. Seventh & I-780
       WB On/Off
                                                  6 W. Seventh & I-780
                                                    EB On/Off
                                                                                                  7 First & Military                                  8 E. Second & I-780
                                                                                                                                                        WB On/Off
                                                                                                                 Driveway
                                                                                                                                                     Free                                Free
                                                                                                                                                                                STOP
  I-780 WB                          I-780 WB     I-780 EB                                                                               Military     I-780 WB                             I-780 WB
        On                          Off             On/Off                                                                                                 On                             Off
                                                                                                                                                       New Signal
                                                                                                                                                        Required
                W. Seventh                                       W. Seventh                                             First                                        E. Second
     9 E. Second & I-780                         10 E. Second & Military                          11 E. Fifth & I-780                                12 E. Fifth & I-780
         EB On/Off                                                                                       WB On/Off                                          EB On/Off
                                                                                                                                                                                       New Signal
                                                                                                                                                                                        Required
                                                                                                                              STOP
                                    I-780 EB                                       Military        I-780 WB                             I-780 WB     I-780 EB                            I-780 EB
                                                                                                                                                                        STOP
                                    Off/On                                                               On                             Off                Off                           On
                                                                                                  New Signal
                                                                                                   Required
                   E. Second             Free                                                                     E. Fifth                                             E. Fifth                 Free
                                                                 E. Second
  13 E. Fifth & Military                         14 E. Second & Rose                              15 E. Second/Industrial                            16 Bayshore & Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Free
                                                                                                          New Signal Required                               New Signal Required
                                                 Free                                            Free
                                                                                                                                                                                STOP
                                                   Rose                                                         STOP                                                STOP
                                                                                                                                                                                 STOP
                                    Military                                                                                    STOP    E. Second                                          Bayshore
                                                                                                                                                                        STOP
                                                                                                                                                                                                 Free
                     E. Fifth                                    E. Second                                       Industrial                                             Park
  17 Bayshore & I-680                            18 Bayshore & I-680                              19 Industrial & Park                               20 Industrial & I-680
         SB On                                            NB Off                                                                                            SB Off
      New Signal
       Required                                                                                                                                                     I-680 SB Off
                                                                                                                              STOP                                                     New Signal
                                                                            STOP                                 STOP
                                    Bayshore                                       Bayshore                                                                                             Required
                                                    New Signal                                                                   STOP   Industrial
                                                     Required                                                          STOP                                         STOP
              Free
                                                                                                                                                                                           Industrial
               I-680 SB On                                    I-680 NB Off                         New Signal
                                                                                                    Required           Park                  Free
  21 Industrial & I-680                          22 Lake Herman &                                 23 Lake Herman & I-680                             24 Lake Herman & I-680
         NB On                                            E. Second                                      SB On/Off                                          NB On/Off
                                                                           Lopes                                I-680 SB Off                                                    Goodyear
                                                                                                  Free                                               New Signal
               I-680 NB On
      New Signal
                                                 New Signal
                                                  Required       STOP
                                                                              *                                 STOP
                                                                                                                                                      Required
                                                                                                                                                                    STOP
       Required
                           STOP
                                                                           STOP    Lake                                                 Lake                                      STOP     Lake
                                                                                   Herman                                               Herman                                             Herman
                                    Industrial
                                                   Free          E. Second              Free
                                                                                                                 *
                                                                                                                I-680 SB On
                                                                                                                                        New Signal
                                                                                                                                         Required                  *
                                                                                                                                                                  I-680 NB On/Off
 Key:          STOP      = Stop Sign                      = Pre-Mitigation                     * Not a striped lane, but space
                         = Signal                         = Post-Mitigation                      available for a right turn queue.                                             Not to Scale
                                  Figure 2-6. Intersection Mitigations
62                                                                                                                                             City of Benicia General Plan
                                                                                                               C. Circulation
                     Table 2-11. Intersection LOS: Future Conditions with and without Intersection
                     Improvements
                                              EXISTING      WITHOUT IMPROVEMENTS                  WITH IMPROVEMENTS
INTERSECTION                                  CONTROL          V/C          DELAY       LOS        V/C         DELAY       LOS
                                                TYPE                        (SEC.)                             (SEC.)
 1. Columbus Parkway/Rose Drive                 Signal         1.75                       F        0.89                      D
 2. Southampton/Hastings                    One-way Stop                     23/4       D/A        0.71                      C
 3. Southampton/Military West                   Signal         0.58                       A        0.59                      A
 4. Southampton/Chelsea Hills                   Signal         1.09                       F        0.82                      D
 5. West Seventh/I-780 WB On/Off                Signal         1.72                       F        0.84                      D
 6. West Seventh/I-780 EB On/Off                Signal         1.07                       F        0.76                      D
 7. First/Military                              Signal         0.76                       C        0.76                      C
 8. East Second/I-780 WB On/Off             One-way Stop                      */*        F/F                                 D
 9. East Second/I-780 EB On/Off                 Signal         1.28                       F        0.87                      D
10. East Second/Military East                   Signal         1.57                       F        0.83                      D
11. East Fifth/I-780 WB On/Off              One-way Stop                      */*        F/F                                 D
12. East Fifth/I-780 EB On/Off              One-way Stop                      */*        E/F                                 D
13. East Fifth/Military East                    Signal         1.23                       F        0.88                      D
14. East Second/Rose Drive                      Signal         1.91                       F        0.89                      D
15. East Second/Industrial                  Two-way Stop                      */*        F/F                                 D
16. Bayshore/Park                           Four-way Stop                      *          F                                  D
17. Bayshore/I-680 SB On ramp                WB Left Yield                    */*        F/F                                 C
18. Bayshore/I-680 NB Off ramp              One-way Stop                      */*        F/F                                 D
19. Industrial/Park                         Four-way Stop                      *          F                                  D
20. Industrial/I-680 SB Off ramp            One-way Stop                     */28        F/D                                 D
21. Industrial/I-680 NB On ramp             One-way Stop                      */*        F/F                                 B
22. Lake Herman/East Second                 Two-way Stop                      */*        F/F                                 D
23. Lake Herman/I-680 SB On/Off             One-way Stop                      */*        F/F                                 C
24. Lake Herman/I-680 NB On/Off             Two-way Stop                      */*        F/F                                 B
For signalized intersections, the volume/capacity ratio is given. For side street stop-controlled intersections, two delays and
service levels are given: the delay for the worst movement, and the average intersection delay. For four-way stops, the
average intersection delay is given.
* = very long delays (over two minutes)
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                                  63
Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              and alternative solutions may be identified (e.g., signal cycle length or phasing
              changes, adding capacity at a different intersection approach, coordinating timing at
              adjacent signals, etc.)
              It should be emphasized that this improvement analysis is based on an estimate of
              conditions with reasonably foreseeable development allowed by this General Plan, to
              the year 2015—almost 20 years from now.As such, it constitutes long-range planning
              information, which will need to be supplemented by ongoing traffic counts and
              studies by the City to ensure that the appropriate improvements are developed and
              implemented when needed.
              Future Arterial Widths
              The definitions for arterials and collectors, noted earlier in this section, are sum-
              marized below:
              • A major arterial is two to four lanes wide and connects freeways to minor arterials,
                 other major arterials, and collectors.
              • A minor arterial is two to four lanes wide and connects major arterials to collectors
                 and local streets.
              • A collector street is generally two lanes wide and connects local streets to minor
                 and major arterials.
              Projected future volumes on Benicia’s arterials were analyzed to determine where
              widening or other changes may be needed. (The DEIR Transportation Chapter includes
              a table of arterial capacities which was used for this analysis). Table 2-12 shows the
              arterial segments which may exceed capacity with development allowed in this
              General Plan.As with the intersection improvements described above, this analysis
              provides long-range planning information, which will need to be supplemented by
              ongoing traffic counts and studies by the City.
              Although the projected traffic volumes indicate the need for some roads to be wid-
              ened, road widening may have deleterious effects, and alternatives should be studied
              before new widening projects are added to the City’s Capital improvement Program.
              Most of the improvements called for above would provide much greater capacity than
              needed. In most locations, only an additional 10 to 20 percent in traffic-carrying
              capacity is needed.A road widening from two to four lanes adds 100 percent capacity.
              The City has recognized the need to provide smooth and reasonably convenient
              traffic flow, through General Plan policies such as maintaining LOS D where feasible.At
              the same time, the community is wary of the downside of over-sizing roads and
              intersections—a less pleasant environment for pedestrians and bicyclists, a tendency
              to draw new traffic to locations where excess capacity is provided, and a disincentive
              to use alternative travel modes such as carpooling and transit.
              The General Plan promotes non-auto travel modes through policies and programs
              aimed at enhancing the pedestrian, bicycle, and transit experience.These policies
64                                                                        City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                                         C. Circulation
                would be undermined if the road network offered excess capacity.As traffic conges-
                tion grows on city roads, the City will consider alternatives to widening, such as “spot
                widening” at congestion points, aggressive Travel Demand Management programs,
                rerouting traffic, prohibiting certain turning movements during peak hours, and
                coordinating traffic signals.
                Table 2-12. Streets That May Exceed Existing (1997) Capacity with Future
                Growth Under this General Plan
                ROADWAY                                  SEGMENT                                  IN CAPITAL
                                                                                        IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM?
                Lake Herman Road East of the I-680 NB Ramps                                           No
                East Second Street Between Lake Herman Road                                           Yes
                                              and existing four-lane section               (southeast half only)
                East Second Street Between I-780 WB Ramps                                             Yes
                                              and Military East
                East Fifth Street             Between I-780 WB Ramps                                  Yes
                                              and Military East
                Industrial Way                Between Lake Herman Road                                No
                                              (along new extension)
                                              and the I-680 ramps
                Bayshore Road                 Between I-680 SB Ramp                                   No
                                              and Industrial Way6
                Military West                 Between West Fifth and                                  Yes
                                              West Second
                Military East                 Between East Second and                                 No
                                              East Fifth
                West Seventh                  Between Chelsea Hills and                               Yes
                                              Military West7
                Park Road                     Between Industrial and                                  Yes
                                              Bayshore
                5. PARKING CONDITIONS
                Benicia generally has good parking conditions, with adequate on-street and off-street
                parking provided for local uses.
                6
                  A future extension between Park Road and Industrial Way would extend through Exxon and would be
                  difficult to build to four lanes.Also, any widening of the existing Sulphur Springs Creek two-lane bridge
                  would be very costly. It is likely that a four-lane facility could extend only between the I-680 south-
                  bound ramp and Park Road.The remaining portion would remain two lanes.
                7
                  Any widening of West 7th at the I-780 interchange would require a new bridge, at significant cost.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                                            65

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              6. FREIGHT AND GOODS MOVEMENT
              Three types of transportation facilities move freight and goods in Benicia.They are
              truck, rail, and port facilities.
              TRUCK FACILITIES
              Trucks are used for freight transport primarily in Benicia’s industrial area along the
              northern I-680 corridor, and in the Port area adjacent to the Bridge. Freeway signs
              direct Benicia Industrial Park traffic to use I-680 exits.
              As development allowed in the General Plan takes place, truck traffic will increase in
              the industrial and Port areas, and to a lesser extent in other growth areas.
              FREIGHT RAIL FACILITIES
              Freight rail facilities in Benicia center on the main Union Pacific Railroad line from
              Sacramento.This line once terminated at the foot of First Street, but now crosses the
              Carquinez Strait on a bridge paralleling the Benicia-Martinez Bridge to Martinez and
              the East Bay. Rail spur lines serve Benicia’s industrial park area to the north and the
              Port area along the southern waterfront. Rail service along the waterfront terminates
              before reaching East 5th Street.
              The spur line through the Benicia Industrial Park and the Arsenal area is used most
              frequently by auto carriers and by Exxon.
              Caltrans and Union Pacific have negotiated an agreement for complete rebuilding of
              both tracks. The agreement will allow increased passenger rail service without
              interfering with freight trains.
              PORT FACILITIES
              Benicia has a natural deep water channel adjacent to the shore along the Carquinez
              Strait.This channel permits container ships, fuel tankers, and freighters with fairly
              deep draft (up to about 35 feet) to dock at Benicia’s Port.
              The Port of Benicia, which is leased and owned by Benicia Industries (a private
              company), has a 2,400-foot deep-water pier which provides berthing for three ships.
              This lease and the Bay Area Seaport Plan are discussed in Appendix D. There is also an
              existing petroleum service dock northeast of the Port of Benicia pier.
              7. CIRCULATION GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
              The goals, policies, and programs that follow deal comprehensively with the needs of
              and recommendations for pedestrian and bicycle circulation; transit, rail, and ferry
              service; reducing traffic congestion; parking; needs in special areas of the city (indus-
              trial park, Pine Lake, and Lower Arsenal); and proposals for freeway modifications.
66                                                                         City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                         C. Circulation
                GOAL 2.14:           Enhance Benicia’s
                                     small-town atmo-
                                     sphere of pedes-
                                     trian-friendly
                                     streets and neigh-
                                     borhoods.
                POLICY 2.14.1:       Give priority to pedes-
                                     trian safety, access, and
                                     transit over automobile
                                     speed and volume.
                Program 2.14.A:      Reexamine City stan-
                                     dards to allow the
                                     development of local
                                     streets with the mini-
                                     mum pavement width
                                     needed in residential areas, at the same time assuring that
                                     emergency access is maintained and that pedestrian and
                                     vehicular safety are preserved.
                Program 2.14.B:      Consider physical and operational changes to reduce speeds
                                     (e.g., narrow lane widths and signal timing), and increase traffic
                                     speed enforcement.
                Program 2.14.C:      Consider residential streets with textured pavements and
                                     parallel parking.
                Program 2.14.D:      Where feasible redesign corner radii to corners with tight radii
                                     to slow vehicles and alert drivers to pedestrians in crosswalks.
                Program 2.14.E:      Consider reducing lane widths, as one method of both slowing
                                     traffic and making room for parking, wider sidewalks, or bike
                                     lanes.
                Program 2.14.F:      Where feasible, provide pedestrian sidewalks in all residential
                                     areas along both sides of the street.
                Some exceptions may be made where alternate paths exist, such as along alley streets,
                and where undesirable environmental impacts may result.
                Program 2.14.G:      Evaluate the feasibility of finishing sidewalks along streets
                                     where they are currently lacking.
                Program 2.14.H:      Identify areas where sight distance for vehicle drivers and
                                     pedestrian safety can be improved with signs, tree placement,
                                     landscaping, parking policy, building design, and streetscape.
                                     Prepare a program and schedule for implementing these
                                     improvements.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                         67

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              Program 2.14.I:   Identify areas where crosswalk safety can be improved through
                                better lighting and striping, prohibiting right turns on red at
                                specific intersections, installing pedestrian-activated push
                                buttons for signals, installing a textured or raised paving mate-
                                rial, and employing crossing guards for school children. Pre-
                                pare a program and schedule for implementing these improve-
                                ments.
              POLICY 2.14.2:    Discourage street widenings and the removal of on-street
                                parking to ease traffic flow.
              GOAL 2.15:        Provide a comprehensive system of pedestrian
                                and bicycle routes which link the various compo-
                                nents of the community: employment centers,
                                residential areas, commercial areas, schools,
                                parks, and open space.
              POLICY 2.15.1:    Make pedestrian and bicycle circulation, and safety improve-
                                ments a high priority for transportation funding, utilizing locally
                                generated revenues and State and federal grants.
              Program 2.15.A:   Construct public improvements that accommodate and en-
                                hance pedestrian and bicycle access.
              Program 2.15.B:   Provide additional trails along the shoreline.
              Program 2.15.C:   Provide proper signing for improved trails, fire break trails, and
                                interpretive trails.
              Program 2.15.D:   Improve safety and pedestrian movement by building curb
                                extensions that narrow the overall width required by pedestri-
                                ans to cross the street at major pedestrian waiting areas at
                                street intersections, sidewalks, and landscaped areas.
              Program 2.15.E:   Identify areas where adequate lighting for pedestrians in urban
                                areas is needed. Install additional lighting as appropriate.
              Program 2.15.F:   Widen the Rose Drive/State Park Road at I-780 overpass to
                                accommodate pedestrians and bicycle traffic.
              Program 2.15.G:   Create a protected landscaped sidewalk for West 7th Street
                                between I-780 and Military West.
              POLICY 2.15.2:    Encourage the development of pedestrian paths in hill areas as
                                a way to link neighborhoods to schools, parks, employment
                                centers, and convenience commercial destinations.
              Program 2.15.H:   Continue to implement the pedestrian pathway system in the
                                City’s Parks,Trails and Open Space Master Plan especially
68                                                                    City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                     C. Circulation
                                linkages between the City’s residential neighborhood and
                                commercial districts.
                Program 2.15.I: Facilitate the connection of future Benicia-Martinez Bridge
                                pedestrian/bike lanes to the city pedestrian/bike network.
                                Connect paths from existing and proposed regional trail
                                systems to the Boundary Hills and Benicia-Martinez Bridge.
                Program 2.15.J: Improve pedestrian and bike access between Downtown and
                                Southampton.
                GOAL 2.16:      Ensure access needs of individuals with disabili-
                                ties.
                POLICY 2.16.1:  Provide for adequate public access in all forms (walks, build-
                                ings, transportation) in conformance with the Americans for
                                Disabilities Act (ADA).
                Program 2.16.A: In places that accommodate the public, remove barriers to
                                access or provide alternative services when barriers cannot be
                                removed.
                Program 2.16.B: Require that publicly sponsored programs, activities and
                                transportation facilities are accessible to individuals with
                                disabilities (including employees).
                POLICY 2.16.2:  Encourage private entities to maintain places of business that
                                are physically accessible to all.
                Program 2.16.C: Assess the cost and feasibility of Policy 2.16.2, including any
                                changes in opportunities or costs for businesses to occupy
                                historic structures.
                GOAL 2.17:      Provide an efficient, reliable, and convenient
                                transit system.
                POLICY 2.17.1:  Continue to provide transit service to all—and subsidized
                                paratransit service to all qualified—potential users, including
                                youth, the elderly and the disabled, modifying routes and
                                schedules as demand changes.
                Program 2.17.A: Preserve the personal service provided by Dial-a-Ride.
                Program 2.17.B: Subsidize transit at a level justified by a cost/benefit study.
                Program 2.17.C: Institute a continuing program to evaluate the transit system to
                                ensure it meets the public’s needs.
                Program 2.17.D: Allow preferential parking for public transit vehicles.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                     69

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              Program 2.17.E:   Set local priorities and needs for future service, taking into
                                account funding uncertainties for Benicia’s and other transit
                                systems.
              Program 2.17.F:   Improve inter-modal coordination of transit services.
              Program 2.17.G:   Provide attractive and pedestrian-friendly transit stops and
                                buses, including bike racks on buses.
              Program 2.17.H:   Provide transit shelters with good visibility and benches, thus
                                enhancing the pedestrian-transit interface.
              POLICY 2.17.2:    Consider nontraditional use of the existing transit system for
                                tours, shuttles, and special events, (e.g., First Street shuttle, First
                                Street to Community Park shuttle, First Street to Arsenal shuttle,
                                State Park shuttle).
              Program 2.17.I:   Optimize the use of existing transit equipment.
              Program 2.17.J:   Consider a shuttle service between large commercial centers.
              POLICY 2.17.3:    Coordinate transit service and trip reduction efforts with other
                                agencies.
              Program 2.17.K:   Provide intercity bus service to Vallejo and Fairfield commensu-
                                rate with available funding.
              Program 2.17.L:   Coordinate school district/city bus schedules for optimum
                                efficiency.
              Program 2.17.M:   Coordinate transit planning with the Contra Costa Transporta-
                                tion Authority (CCTA) and Solano County, and coordinate future
                                mass transit planning with all other regional efforts.
              Program 2.17.N:   Participate in Major Investment Studies (MIS) to assure that
                                transit alternatives are fully considered.
              GOAL 2.18:        Encourage the provision of convenient rail ser-
                                vice to Benicia with a station near the Benicia
                                Bridge.
              POLICY 2.18.1:    Work with BART, Caltrans, BCDC, the Solano Transportation
                                Authority, and MTC in planning a rail station near the Benicia-
                                Martinez Bridge.
              Program 2.18.A:   Consider mixed use, commercial and industrial uses that
                                complement the train station.
              Program 2.18.B:   Plan for convenient auto and transit access to and auto parking
                                at the train station to encourage its use.
70                                                                   City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                           C. Circulation
                GOAL 2.19:             Promote a regional (San Francisco, Oakland,
                                       Alameda) and local (Martinez, Port Costa, and
                                       Crockett) ferry service.
                When the waterfront park is established and the number of visitors to the foot of First
                Street increases, a weekend ferry service between Benicia and the historic town of
                Port Costa or Martinez along the northern shores of Contra Costa County may be
                feasible.
                POLICY 2.19.1:         Work with MTC to establish ferry service. Communicate
                                       regularly with them regarding plans and funding for ferry
                                       service.
                Program 2.19.A:        Identify ferry service market potential and terminal location
                                       options.
                GOAL 2.20:             Provide a balanced street system to serve automo-
                                       biles, pedestrians, bicycles, and transit, balancing
                                       vehicle-flow improvements with multi-modal
                                       considerations.
                POLICY 2.20.1:         Maintain at least Level of Service D on all city roads, street
                                       segments, and intersections.
                Exceptions may be allowed where measures required to achieve LOS D are infeasible
                because of right-of-way needs, impact on neighboring properties, aesthetics, or
                community character.
                Program 2.20.A:        Identify areas where it would be beneficial to reduce and divert
                                       through vehicular traffic from local residential streets. Imple-
                                       ment appropriate neighborhood traffic control programs in
                                       these areas.
                Program 2.20.B:        Locate new development where there is adequate existing or
                                       planned future road and highway capacity and where local
                                       residential streets will not be significantly impacted.
                Program 2.20.C:        Encourage use of alleys for commercial loading activities when
                                       it will not block driveways or mid-block access to the street.
                POLICY 2.20.2:         Seek alternatives to road widenings
                Program 2.20.D:        Continue to identify and implement acceptable alternatives to
                                       in-town roadway widening, extensions, and large intersections.
                Program 2.20.E:        Identify streets where traffic should be slowed.
                Program 2.20.F:        Consider lane narrowing, driver education, traffic speed alert
                                       trailers, and other traffic calming remedies.
                Program 2.20.G:        Advertise the use of transit, bicycling, and walking for commut-
                                       ing, shopping, recreation, and school trips.
City of Benicia General Plan                             revised 11.16.04 (Measure C)                  71
Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              Program 2.20.H:        Reserve right-of-way for new alternate transportation facilities
                                     that contribute to street and roadway congestion relief.
              Program 2.20.I:        Coordinate traffic signal improvements and synchronization
                                     and continue to implement timing changes.
              Program 2.20.J:        Develop adequate funding for keeping streets, alleys and
                                     sidewalks in good repair.
              Program 2.20.K:        Identify and prioritize transportation facilities maintenance
                                     projects for roadways, sidewalks, and off-street trails and paths.
              Program 2.20.L:        Identify areas of the city that are pedestrian-unfriendly and
                                     develop corrective plans.
              POLICY 2.20.3:         Maintain Lake Herman Road as a rural, two-lane, curving scenic
                                     route.
              GOAL 2.21:             Encourage Benicia residents and employees to
                                     use alternatives to the single-occupant automo-
                                     bile.
              POLICY 2.21.1:         Provide and promote a range of travel alternatives to the use of
                                     the private automobile.
              “Design Strategies for Encouraging Alternatives to Auto Use Through Local Develop-
              ment Review,” prepared by ABAG and BAAQMD, provides a number of site planning
              strategies for commercial and residential development that aim at reducing auto use
              by making pedestrian and bicycle travel more attractive.
              Program 2.21.A:        Advertise the benefits of Transportation Demand Management
                                     (TDM) measures and conduct public outreach programs to
                                     educate the public about options available within the city.
              Program 2.21.B:        Implement Transportation Control Measures (TCMs) appropri-
                                     ate to Benicia.
              POLICY 2.21.2:         Encourage new development patterns that facilitate bicycling,
                                     walking, and transit for commute, shopping, recreation, and
                                     school trips.
              Program 2.21.C:        Consider denser, mixed-use developments, particularly in the
                                     Downtown area.
              Program 2.21.D:        Consider the feasibility of extending East Second Street from
                                     East “L” Street to East “K” Street.
              GOAL 2.22:             Alleviate traffic congestion near school sites.
              POLICY 2.22.1:         Work closely with the School District in addressing traffic
                                     congestion near schools.
72                                                                        City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                   C. Circulation
                Program 2.22.A: Develop a plan jointly with the School District for reducing
                                traffic congestion at and near school sites.
                Program 2.22.B: Encourage the School District to continue the comprehensive
                                crossing guard program.
                Program 2.22.C: Adjust phasing/timing of signal lights on routes to schools, and
                                consider providing increased crossing guards and/or police
                                direction of traffic.
                Program 2.22.D: Encourage the School District to implement citywide busing
                                and promote carpools for trips to school.
                Program 2.22.E: Promote School District provision of adequate off-street park-
                                ing, drop-off and pickup facilities, and designated carpool
                                parking at each school.
                Program 2.22.F: Study the need for and feasibility of a pedestrian bridge linking
                                the middle school and high school.
                GOAL 2.23:      Ensure adequate parking while maintaining
                                aesthetic landscape features.
                POLICY 2.23.1:  Provide adequate on-street and off-street parking.
                Program 2.23.A: Continue to allow on-street parking where needed for abutting
                                uses (e.g., Military East).
                Program 2.23.B: Preserve and improve the East Second and “E” Street parking
                                lot. Consider double-deck parking if need warrants.
                Program 2.23.C: Allow flexible parking requirements for uses smaller than 2,000
                                square feet.
                Program 2.23.D: Update parking requirements based on actual local parking
                                generation studies wherever, appropriate, and consider parking
                                proximity to transit corridors.
                POLICY 2.23.2:  Reduce the visibility of parking lots.
                Program 2.23.E: Allow future parking to be divided into smaller lots with
                                generous internal and perimeter landscaping.
                Program 2.23.F: Recommend parking to be located behind or alongside (but
                                not in front of) buildings, where possible.
                GOAL 2.24:      Continue to provide safe and direct access to the
                                Industrial Park.
                POLICY 2.24.1:  Continue to ensure public access to private roads in the
                                industrial and Port areas.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                    73

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              Program 2.24.A:        Investigate establishment of Industrial Park bus service.
              Program 2.24.B:        Investigate alternate routes that would better accommodate
                                     access from the freeway to the Port and Industrial Park.
              Program 2.24.C:        Identify solutions to circulation problems associated with truck
                                     traffic by maintaining a database of truck-related citizen or
                                     business complaints in combination with truck counts and
                                     accident data.
              GOAL 2.25:             Improve auto and non-auto access into the Old
                                     Arsenal, without disrupting existing neighbor-
                                     hood, historic, and environmental values.
              POLICY 2.25.1:         Consider alternative modes of transportation to the auto in
                                     planning new access and in improving existing routes into the
                                     Arsenal.
              Program 2.25.A:        Improve access into the Arsenal from I-680.
              Program 2.25.B:        Depending on City’s determination of need and impacts,
                                     decide whether to connect the Lower Arsenal with the Down-
                                     town, such as through East “H” Street, including bike, pedestrian,
                                     and emergency access.
              It is important to link the Lower Arsenal area with Downtown for economic
              development and maximum utilization of the waterfront, historic, and cultural
              assets. There are two alternatives: (1) open the gate and allow access over the hill
              to the Lower Arsenal; and (2) open the gate and allow access via Bayshore Road.
              The City will investigate alternative alignments, mindful of “H” Street residents’
              concerns about through-traffic and Benicia Industries’ concerns about Port
              security.
              GOAL 2.26:             Ensure that scenic and environmental amenities
                                     of I-680 and I-780 are not compromised.
              POLICY 2.26.1:         Promote the
                                     use of
                                     freeway right-
                                     of-way for
                                     alternative
                                     commute
                                     methods
                                     (e.g., car pool
                                     lanes, transit,
                                     and off-road
                                     bike paths).
74                                                                       City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                     C. Circulation
                POLICY 2.26.2:  Encourage the preservation of I-780 as four lanes, but support
                                spot widenings at selected locations (e.g., the approach to the
                                Benicia-Martinez Bridge on/off merge lanes) to address future
                                capacity problems while still maintaining a four-lane mainline
                                freeway.
                POLICY 2.26.3:  Support Caltrans’ Benicia–Martinez Bridge project, advocating
                                the following: (1) continued toll collection in the northbound
                                direction with the toll plaza located at the southern end of the
                                bridge; (2) elimination of existing lane merge problems at the I-
                                680/I-780 interchange; (3) retaining direct access to existing
                                interchanges at East 2nd and East 5th Streets, (4) accommodat-
                                ing rail transit on the bridge in the future, and (5) only widen I-
                                680 upon evaluation of alternatives.
                POLICY 2.26.4:  Ensure that the Benicia–Martinez Bridge project adequately
                                reflects the community’s concerns.
                Program 2.26.A: Continue to monitor and comment on Caltrans planning
                                activities and documentation as the bridge planning process
                                continues.
                GOAL 2.27:      Ensure an active community deliberation process
                                in response to Caltrans proposals now and in the
                                future.
                POLICY 2.27.1:  Monitor Caltrans’ planning process for I-680 and I-780 improve-
                                ments and communicate the City’s concerns and priorities to
                                Caltrans.
                POLICY 2.27.2:  Ensure the continuation of the following City policies in
                                discussions with Caltrans about changes to I-680 and I-780:
                                A) Preserve the Lake Herman interchange vista look-out and
                                    rest area.
                                B) Relocate the Industrial interchange northbound off-ramp
                                    and southbound on-ramp from the south end of the Sul-
                                    phur Creek overcrossing at Bayshore Road to the north end
                                    at Industrial Way.
                                C) Use the existing toll building at the existing Benicia-
                                    Martinez Bridge for a passenger train station for the UP rail
                                    line. Provide adequate access to and automobile parking at
                                    the station. Provide for the station to accommodate a light
                                    rail passenger line on the new bridge.
                                D) Preserve direct access to and from I-780 at East Second and
                                    East Fifth Streets.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                     75

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
                                E) Preserve the existing westbound exit from I-780 at Colum-
                                    bus Parkway and ensure that existing commercial buildings
                                    are not removed.
                                F) Keep I-780 four lanes. Support spot widenings at selected
                                    locations (e.g., the approach to the Benicia-Martinez Bridge
                                    on/off merge lanes) to address future capacity problems
                                    while still maintaining a four-lane mainline freeway.
                                G) Only support the widening of I-680 to six lanes upon
                                    evaluation of alternatives.
                                H) Do not permit sound walls or retaining walls along I-780.
                                    Permit sound walls and retaining walls that the community
                                    believes would provide benefits that outweigh drawbacks.
              POLICY 2.27.3:    Ensure that the Benicia residential and business community is
                                informed about Caltrans’ project planning activities, and solicit
                                public input on Caltrans projects.
              Program 2.27.A:   Review existing plans and work with Caltrans to develop
                                proposals that reflect the consensus.
76                                                                   City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                  D. Community Services
                D. COMMUNITY SERVICES
                1. PUBLIC AND QUASI-PUBLIC
                Public and quasi-public facilities uses provide a variety of services to the public
                including police, fire, water, sewer, and education. Local government entities (e.g., the
                City of Benicia and the Benicia Unified School District) occupy a large portion of
                Public/Quasi-public lands. In keeping with the nature of these facilities in serving the
                public, they are distributed throughout the City. Figure 2-7 shows existing public and
                quasi-public facilities as of 1995.
                PUBLIC AND QUASI-PUBLIC GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
                GOAL 2.28:               Improve and maintain public facilities and ser-
                                         vices.
                POLICY 2.28.1:           Require that new development not reduce the levels of service
                                         in existing neighborhoods below City standards.
                Program 2.28.A:          Establish standards for city services and facilities, as approved
                                         by the City Council (see also Program 2.6.E).
                GOAL 2.29:               Provide for churches to locate where conflicts
                                         with adjacent land uses will be minimized.
                POLICY 2.29.1:           Inside the
                                         Urban
                                         Growth
                                         Boundary,
                                         allow
                                         churches
                                         outright in
                                         community
                                         commercial
                                         zones and as
                                         a conditional
                                         use in other zones. Make every effort to provide land for
                                         needed religious assembly when planning large new projects in
                                         these zones.
                POLICY 2.29.2:           Encourage the location and design of church facilities to be
                                         compatible with neighboring properties.
                POLICY 2.29.3:           In any future developments, consider earmarking land for quasi-
                                         public uses.
City of Benicia General Plan                                revised 11.4.03 (Measure K)                   77
Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
 PUBLIC FACILITIES
  LEGEND
  Planning Area Boundary
  City Limits
  Existing Proposed
                                                 Schools
                                                 Fire Stations
                                                 Other Public/Quasi-Public
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Go
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             o         dy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ear
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             lo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 u
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  gh
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ER   M A N RO A D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E H
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LAK
                                                                                                                                                                                              RE
                                                                                                                                                                                               SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Water
                                                                                                                                                                                                   RV
                                                                                                                                                                                                    OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Treatment Plant
                                                                                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                         R
                                                                                                                                                                                                               AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              INDUSTRIAL WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              d
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E.
                                                                                                            Lake
                                                                                                            Herman
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            INTERSTATE 680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ba
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Private Waste Water
                                                                              IV E
                                                                         DR                                                                                                                                          City                                                                              Treatment Plant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Suisun
                                                                     E
                                                                OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                            nd S     Corporation
                                                            R
                                                                                                                                                                                                        E. 2
                                                                                                                                                      IVE                                                    TRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ET   Yard                                                                                       BA
                                                                                                                                                   DR                                                                                                                                                             YS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PA RK
         CO                                                                                                                                    A          C
                                                                                                                                            AM                                                                                                                                                                                 HO
                                                                                                                                                         H E L S E A HI LL S D R IVE
              LU
                   M                                                                                                                     OR                                                                                                                                                                                     RE
                       BU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RO AD
                                                                                                                                  PA N
                            S
                                PA
                                   R
                                                                                                                                                                                        Reservoir                                                                                                                                   ROA
                                       KW                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                            AY
                                                                                                  DRI
                                                                                                       VE                                                                                                                                                                             Armory
                                                                                               GS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Cemetery
                                                                                           HA ST I N
                                                                                                                                                                                       Senior Citizen's                                 HIL LC RE ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Camel Barn Museum
                                                                                                                                                                                           Center
                                                                         IN                                                T O N ROA D
                                             BENICIA        TER
                                                                STA
                                                                   TE                                        SOUTHA
                                                                                                                      MP
                                                                                                                                                       Reservoir                                                                                     Police
                                                                                                                                                                      h ST RE
                                                                                     78
                                                   S TAT E                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     City Hall
                                                                                                                                                                W. 7t Library
                                                        PA R K                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Clock Tower
                                                                                                                                                                                  ET                                                                 Post Office
                                                                                                                                                               Veteran's
                                                                                                                                                                    MILITARY Hall
                                                                                                                                                                             WEST                                                                                                                                   ADAMS ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Cemetery      Comandant's
                                                                                                                                                                   Youth Center                                                              Gymnasium              Residence
                                                                                                                                                                                           Benicia                                          Pool Complex          Pier
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     1st STREET
                                                                                                  Southampton                                                                              Capitol                                                Waste Water
                                                                                                      Bay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Treatment Plant
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5th Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ferry Slip
                                                                                                            UINEZ               STRA                                                                                                      Community
                                                                                                       CARQ                          IT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Buildings                                                             U              NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              O                                         TY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L   AN                                   UN                           SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SO                                   CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CON                                                                        800    0       800 1600
                                                    Figure 2-7. Public/Quasi-public Facilities
78                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          City of Benicia General Plan
                                                                                  D. Community Services
                2. PARKS AND RECREATION
                The City of Benicia has an extensive park, trail, and open space system, as well as a
                Parks, Trails and Open Space Master Plan (1997) that seeks to elaborate on the
                existing system by adding parks, bikeways and improved community trails.
                STANDARDS
                The General Plan provides
                standards for four catego-
                ries of City Parks: Regional,
                Community, Neighborhood,
                and Waterfront. The catego-
                ries are defined in Section
                A, Land Use of this chapter
                (Chapter 2).
                EXISTING PARKS
                Benicia has approximately
                700 acres of existing parks;
                the largest part of this
                acreage is in the Lake
                Herman Regional Park (577
                acres). Benicia also has
                several recreational centers:
                the Senior Center, City Gym,
                James Lemos Pool complex,
                and the Youth Activities
                Center.The City has a joint
                use agreement with the
                Benicia Unified School
                District that provides for the
                sharing of facilities. In
                addition, the City has several parks/recreation facilities not categorized in the Parks,
                Trails, and Open Space Master Plan.These include one public launch ramp, two fishing
                piers, and small waterfront parks. Table 2-13 and Figure 2-8 list and locate the City’s
                various parks and recreational facilities. The City’s 1997 Parks Master Plan provides a
                full description of all parks within the City as of 1997.
City of Benicia General Plan                               revised 11.16.04 (Measure C)                  79

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LEGEND
 PARKS AND OPEN SPACE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Planning Area Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City Limits
     PARK PLANNING DISTRICTS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Existing Planned
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City Parks
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Bicycle Routes/Lanes
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Paved Community Trails
                              2
                                                            3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Improved Community Trails
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ▲                ▲          Staging Areas (Major/Minor)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Open Space
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Vacant Lots
                                                       1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Future Industrial
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     G          oo
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   dye
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            r
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                S
                                                                                                              OPEN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              lo
                                                                                                              SPACE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ug
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OPEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SPACE
                                            OPEN
                                            SPACE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ▲
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ROA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LAKE
                                                                                                                                                                                                          RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                           SE
                                                                                                                    ▲
                                                                                                                                                                                                               RV
                                                                                                                                              1                                                                 OI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ROA
                                                                                                                                              Lake                                                                        D
                                              ?                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     T
                                                                                                                                              Herman                                                                                                                                              EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      INDUSTRIAL WAY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  dS
                                                                                                                                                    29                                                                                                                       2n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    INTERSTATE 680
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              W
                                                                                   ▲                              2                ▲                                                                                                                                                          AY
                                                  ▲                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  y
                                                                                        4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ba
                                                   3                     IV E
                                                                    DR                                                                                                7
                                                                E
                                                           OS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Suisun
                                                       R
                                                                                                                                                                                          8
                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                             I   VE
                                                                                                                                                                               ▲                                                                                                                                                     BA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       YS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HO
                                                                                                                                                          DR                                                                 2
                                                                                                              6                                      MA                 C                                                 E.                                                                                                                           RE
       CO                                                                                           31                                        OR
                                                                                                                                                 A                                                                               S
                                                                                                                                                                        H EL S EA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ROA
            LU
                                                                                                                                       PA N                                                                                                    T
                 M
                     BU                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EE
                          S                                                                                                                                                                                                                TR                                                                                                               D
                              PK
                                                                                                                                                                                R IV E
                                   W
                                                                                                     E
                                                                                                                                                                                                     32
                                                                                                S DRI
                                                                                                                                                                      HI LL S D
                                       Y.
                                                                                                      V
                                                                                              IN G                                                                                                                                                                                                             RK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             HILLCREST                       PA
                                                                                            H AST
                                               ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          18                                                                                        AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              E. 5th STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16
                                                                    INT                                                                                                                                                                                      17
                                                                        ER                                                  PT
                                                                                                                                 O N ROA D
                                                                          STA                                           M
                                                                             TE                               S O U THA
                                            BENICIA
                                                                                                                                                                                  ST
                                                                                  78
                                                                                                                                                                           W. 7th
                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                                                                                                  19                                                                                                                                                                   15
                                                S TAT E                                                                                                    9                                                                                                                                                                                                                ▲
                                                                                                                                                                                   REET
                                                    PA R K                                          ▲                                                                                                                33                                  MILITARY EAST                                   GRANT ST.
                                                                                                    ?                                                                                                                                              ? ?                                                                                     ADAMS ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                              MILITARY WEST                                                                       ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             22                                         28
                                                                                                                                                                                                                20                                  23
                                                                                                                            11                    12 10                                                                   21                        24                                            30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1st STREET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       27
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               26
                                                                                              Southampton
                                                                                                  Bay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            14
                                                                                       ▲                                                                                                                                                                          ▲               ?
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     13
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ▲
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TY
                                                                                                     UINEZ                           STRA                                                                                                                                                                                                         UN
                                                                                                CARQ                                      IT                                                                                                                                                                                          CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             UN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CO                                  SCALE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A             CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      800    0       800 1600
                                               Figure 2-8. Parks and Open Space
80                                                     revised 11.16.04 (Measure C)                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                       D. Community Services
                Table 2-13. Existing and Future Parks and Recreation Facilities within City
                Limits, 1995
                MAP NO.* FACILITY NAME                                                     ACRES
                1.           Lake Herman Regional Park                                       577.0
                2.           Benicia Community Park                                           50.0
                3.           Channing Circle Park                                              2.5
                4.           Gateway Park                                                      0.5
                5.           Jack London Park                                                  7.7
                6.           Park Solano                                                       2.0
                7.           Frank Skillman Park                                               3.0
                8.           Southampton Park                                                  6.0
                9.           Benicia Views II                                                  0.5
                10.          Willow Glen Park                                                  4.5
                11.          Matthew Turner Park (West 12th Street)                            2.5
                12.          West 9th Street Park                                              6.0
                13.          Point Benicia Spit                                                0.3
                14.          Turnbull Park                                                     0.3
                15.          Clocktower                                                       —
                16.          Francesca Terrace                                                 5.0
                17.          Duncan Graham Park                                                2.0
                18.          Overlook Park                                                     3.5
                19.          Bridgeview Park                                                   4.5
                20.          City Park                                                         4.5
                21.          Civic Center Park                                                 3.5
                22.          Benicia Senior Citizens’ Center                                  —
                23.          Benicia City Gymnasium                                           —
                24.          James Lemos Pool Complex                                         —
                25.          Youth Activity Center                                            —
                26.          Fitzgerald Field                                                  4.0
                27.          Little League Field                                               4.0
                28.          Ethelree Saraiva Park                                             0.5
                29.          Park D-7 (future)                                                 3.5
                30.          Bottle Hill Park (future)                                         0.5
                31.          Hastings Drive Neighborhood Park (future)                        10.0
                32.          Perth Way Neighborhood Park (future)                              8.0
                33.          St. Catherine’s Wood Neighborhood Park (future)                   0.5
                34.          Waterfront Park                                                   4.3
                SUBTOTAL                                                                    721.1
                             Benicia State Recreation Area                                   469.0
                             Benicia State Capital Historic Park                               1.5
                Source: Parks, Trails, and Open Space Master Plan
                * These numbers refer to locations on Figure 2-8.
City of Benicia General Plan                                    revised 11.16.04 (Measure C)             81

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              PARK AND RECREATION FACILITY NEEDS
              The Parks,Trails and Open Space Master Plan evaluated the existing park and recre-
              ation system to determine future needs for Benicia.The analysis was conducted for
              the City as a whole, and for three districts divided along census tract boundaries (see
              inset in Figure 2-8):
              • District 1 is the Downtown and Old Town area, bounded on the north by Military
                 Street.
              • District 2 is the Southampton subdivision.This district accounts for almost 70
                 percent of the City’s population.
              • District 3 is the eastern part of the City. It includes a few older residential areas on
                 the east side of East Second Street, but most of it is developed for industrial uses.
              Overall Population
              The Parks Master Plan compared acreages of existing and planned park land in
              relation to both the existing and projected population of the City. Using the standard
              per acre shown in Table 2-14, the City has more than adequate regional parkland, but
              is deficient in community and neighborhood parks. The Parks Master Plan identified
              a shortfall of 35 acres of neighborhood park and 18 acres of community park in 2010.
              Table 2-14. Amount of Existing Park Land per Capita
              PARK TYPE                      ACRES                 ACRES/1,000            STANDARD
                                                                     PEOPLE             (ACRES/1,000
                                                                                           PEOPLE)
              Regional Park                   577                       20                    10
              Community Park                    50                       2                      2.5
              Neighborhood Parks                59                       2                      3.5
              Recreational Facilities            8                       0.3                  —
              Totals                          694                       24.3
              District Population
              Using the standards shown in Table 2-14 in the Land Use section, the Parks Master
              Plan found differing parkland needs by district. District 1 has an adequate park land
              through 2010. District 2 will be deficient by 33 acres of neighborhood park land in
              the year 2010. District 3 will be deficient by 5 acres of neighborhood park land in the
              year 2010.Thus most parkland deficiency is in District 2.
82                                                                          City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                  D. Community Services
                Distance
                The Parks Master Plan used a half-mile mile radius standard to evaluate each neigh-
                borhood park. Using this standard, major service gaps were found in the western and
                southwestern portions of District 2, and the eastern tip of Downtown (District 1).
                Facility Type and Description
                The number of recreational facilities provided in the City and in each district was
                compared with the recreational facility standards to determine which areas were
                deficient in given facilities.The evaluation determined that there will be a citywide
                deficiency of six tennis courts by 2010 (four in District 2; two in District 3).
                FUTURE PARK DEVELOPMENT
                Several sites are shown on Table 2-13 as future parks. A brief description follows.
                Park D-7. (Map No. 29). This 3.5-acre neighborhood park is planned for the northeast-
                ern portion of the Southampton development. Proposed uses range from a commu-
                nity center, public pool, and tennis courts, to volleyball courts, playgrounds, and
                croquet courts.
                Bottle Hill Park. (Map No. 30).This 0.5-acre neighborhood park, in the southeastern
                portion of the Downtown area, will provide panoramic views of the Carquinez Strait,
                and sheltered areas for a tot lot, and picnic facilities.
                Hastings Drive Neighborhood Park. (Map No. 31). This proposed 10-acre park is
                located in the Southampton open space in the central western portion of the
                Southampton development.The site contains a small drainage channel and is sur-
                rounded by existing homes.The topography in the area would necessitate terracing
                for facilities.The park will include a multi-purpose playing field, tennis court, basket-
                ball courts, playground, grass play area, picnic area, path, and benches.
                Perth Way Neighborhood Park. (Map No. 32). Perth Way Neighborhood Park is a
                proposed 8-acre neighborhood park located in the open space in the eastern portion
                of the Southampton development.The site is relatively flat, but high in elevation,
                providing views toward Suisun Bay. Planned facilities include a multi-purpose playing
                field, tennis court, basketball court, playground, grass play area, picnic area, path, and
                benches.
                St. Catherine’s Wood Neighborhood Park. (Map No. 33). This 0.5-acre neighborhood
                park, located directly north of Solano Square at First Street, will include a playground,
                an entry plaza, and a seating area.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                              83

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              PARKS AND RECREATION GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
              Goals, policies, and programs in this section call for adding parks and recreation
              facilities while maintaining and improving existing parks and recreation facilities.
              GOAL 2.30:              Maintain and improve existing parks and recre-
                                      ation programs.
              POLICY 2.30.1:          Enhance existing city recreation facilities and programs.
              Program 2.30.A:         Develop programs that promote higher and better use of
                                      Benicia’s recreation facilities and programs.
              Recreation facilities include parks and buildings.
              Program 2.30.B:         Conduct periodic surveys about ways to improve City recre-
                                      ation facilities and programs.
              Program 2.30.C:         Direct the Parks, Recreation & Cemetery Commission to
                                      annually audit and recommend additions to and updates of the
                                      Parks Master Plan.
              Program 2.30.D:         Establish cooperative relationships with public agencies and
                                      applicable public interest groups in developing plans for parks
                                      and recreation programs.
              Program 2.30.E:         Distribute special park features (e.g., gazebos, bandstands,
                                      fountains, sculpture, overlooks, etc.) at key locations in neigh-
                                      borhood and community parks to enhance neighborhood
                                      character, provide a focus for a park, or create a place for
                                      viewing.
              Program 2.30.F:         Continue to share City park facilities with the School District
                                      and consolidate park and school lands wherever feasible.
              Program 2.30.G:         Develop a process to evaluate existing facilities and determine
                                      their utilization.
              POLICY 2.30.2:          Increase resident awareness of the available recreational
                                      opportunities in the city.
              Program 2.30.H:         Develop public information materials (including a color map
                                      and table of citywide recreation facilities), and a comprehensive
                                      sign system about parks and recreational opportunities.
              POLICY 2.30.3:          Incorporate water conservation into park planning and design.
              Program 2.30.I:         Use primarily native plant species and other drought tolerant
                                      plants in all parks and open space areas.
84                                                                         City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                          D. Community Services
                Program 2.30.J: Use drip irrigation and other water efficient irrigation methods
                                in all parks.
                POLICY 2.30.4:  Protect plant and animal life as part of any park improvement
                                project involving sensitive habitat areas of local or regional
                                significance.
                POLICY 2.30.5:  Design park improvements to facilitate accessibility and mainte-
                                nance.
                Program 2.30.K: Regulate concessions stands in park and recreation areas
                                consistent with the Parks,Trails, and Open Space Master Plan.
                POLICY 2.30.6:  Continue to establish appropriate uses and programs for Lake
                                Herman Regional Park that (a) preserve and maintain its natural
                                condition and scenic value while providing for increased,
                                passive, low impact recreational opportunities and (b) maintain
                                and/or enhance Lake Herman’s wetlands to attract a variety of
                                wildlife to the area; (c) preserve rock outcroppings and
                                creekside vegetation.
                GOAL 2.31:      Maintain safety at parks/open space.
                POLICY 2.31.1:  Improve and maintain safety in existing parks and design park
                                improvements to facilitate security and policing.
                Program 2.31.A: Continue coordination with the City police department to
                                provide mobile patrol of parks and open space areas.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                   85

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              Program 2.31.B:   Continue coordination with the City fire department regarding
                                fire season warning and control, emergency vehicle access,
                                support facilities, and response.
              Program 2.31.C:   Continue to coordinate with neighborhood watch programs to
                                provide added security at parks, along trails, and in the open
                                space areas.
              Program 2.31.D:   Coordinate with the Benicia Unified School District regarding
                                safety concerns at joint use facilities.
              GOAL 2.32:        Expand the City’s park system to accommodate
                                future community needs.
              POLICY 2.32.1:    Establish new parks/recreation areas.
              Program 2.32.A:   Ensure that lands dedicated for park land are of sufficient in
                                size to accommodate the uses and facilities proposed, graded
                                for those uses, and free of hazardous and toxic waste materials
                                for each park site.
              Program 2.32.B:   Regularly monitor County, State, and federal funding sources
                                and apply for loans and grants to acquire, develop, and rehabili-
                                tate park land and facilities.
              Program 2.32.C:   Identify and incorporate the needs of neighborhoods in devel-
                                oping new parks and facilities.
              POLICY 2.32.2:    Continue to develop and enhance recreational benefits of the
                                shoreline and seek public access along the waterfront.
              Program 2.32.D:   Explore public access on private waterfront through collabora-
                                tive planning or a development review process.
86                                                                   City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                  D. Community Services
                BENICIA STATE PARKS
                The State Department of Parks and Recreation maintains and operates two parks in
                Benicia: the State Capitol Historic Park and the Benicia State Recreation Area.The 1.5
                acre State Capitol Historic Park is located on the corner of First and West G Streets. It
                includes the building used as California’s State Capitol from 1853–1854, the Fischer-
                Hanlon House, associated historic structures and Victorian Garden.The 469-acre
                Benicia State Recreation Area is located in western Benicia along the Benicia-Vallejo
                border, southwest of I-780.This recreation area is predominantly marsh but also
                provides extensive hiking, jogging, and biking trails, a fishing area, and picnic areas.
                (See Chapter 3, Section D, for more information on trails in the Planning Area.)
                GOAL 2.33:              Assure long-term maintenance of the State Parks.
                By itself, the City may not be able to assure maintenance of a State park.This implies
                working with the State to achieve the goal.
                Program 2.33.A:          Develop a Strategic Plan for addressing State park issues.
                Program 2.33.B:          Work with the State to maintain and improve both parks and
                                         identify needed improvements.
                For example, utility lines that cross the State Recreation Area should be re-routed.
                Program 2.33.C:          Work with the State to keep the State Recreation Area open to
                                         the public for day use.
                Program 2.33.D:          Work with the State to assure that the Capital maintains maxi-
                                         mum opening hours for public enjoyment and use.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                             87

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              3. SCHOOLS
              EXISTING FACILITIES
              Public and Private Schools
              Benicia is served by the Benicia
              Unified School District (BUSD).
              Within the Benicia city limits are
              five public and one private
              elementary schools, one public
              and one private intermediate
              school, one public high school, and one continuation high school. For the 1997-98
              school year, fall district-wide enrollment was 5,381. Enrollment figures for each school
              facility are shown in Table 2-15.
              Table 2-15. School Enrollment and Capacity, 1997–1998
              SCHOOL                             GRADE                ENROLLMENT                    CAPACITY
                                                 LEVEL                   1997-1998                  1997-1998
              Public Schools
                Semple Elementary                  K-5                         448                        516
                Mills Elementary                   K-5                         374                        474
                Mary Farmer Elementary             K-5                         450                        515
                Henderson Elementary               K-5                         657                        671
                Turner Elementary                  K-5                         478                        518
                Benicia Middle School              6-8                       1,312                     1,351
                Benicia High School               9-12                       1,586                     2,089
                Liberty High School               9-12                          76                         86
              Private School
                St. Dominic’s                      K-8                         346                        346
              FUTURE FACILITIES
              The number of students expected in Benicia’s schools, and the need for additional
              facilities is closely related to the amount of new housing. The District has some
              capacity to accommodate existing infill potential but can not accommodate signifi-
              cant new development.
              The student generation rates used by the City and BUSD based on 1990-91 statistics
              assume 0.10 elementary school students for a multi-family housing unit and 0.30
              8
                 Capacity can vary according to the distribution of portable classroom facilities among the various
                  campuses. In addition, as new construction is completed, these figures must be revised.
88                                                                                  City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                    D. Community Services
                elementary school students for a single family housing unit. For middle school, the
                rates are 0.045 for a multi-family unit and 0.14 for a single-family unit. For high school,
                the rates are 0.055 for a multi-family unit and 0.16 for a single-family unit.
                Based on these generation rates the following table illustrates existing and projected
                enrollment to Year 2002.
                Table 2-16. School Enrollment, 1997 and Projected
                SCHOOL                      ACTUAL             ACTUAL         PROJECTED      PROJECTED
                                              1997               1998             2000           2002
                Public Schools
                 K–5                          2,425             2,407             2,407          2,348
                 6–8                          1,303             1,312             1,350          1,420
                 9–12                         1,550             1,662             1,938          2,014
                PUBLIC SCHOOL TOTAL          5,278              5,381            5,682          5,782
                 Private School                  346              346               346            346
                Source: Benicia Unified School District; St. Dominic’s Priory School
                Given limited residential buildout in the City, no new schools are anticipated. The
                high school is developing a progressive capacity master plan for the expansion of
                facilities to make room for new students on the existing 47-acre site. Increasingly,
                school districts rely on development permit fees to generate funds for new school
                facilities. Based on 1997 fee rates, the District calculates that about one-third of the
                cost of the new school facilities needed to serve new development generated by this
                Plan would be funded.
                SCHOOLS GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
                Goals in this section stress City/School District cooperation.
                GOAL 2.34:              Ensure adequate school facilities to serve all
                                        residential areas.
                POLICY 2.34.1:          Approve new residential projects only if adequate school
                                        facilities are available or will be available when needed.
                Program 2.34.A:         Continue to work with the School District to identify appropri-
                                        ate sites if needed for future expansion and new construction
                                        of public schools.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                             89

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              GOAL 2.35:              Cooperate with the School District to provide
                                      opportunities for citizen use of the schools.
              POLICY 2.35.1:          Continue to seek innovative ways for the City to use school
                                      facilities and grounds jointly with the School District.
              Program 2.35.A:         Continue to maintain and implement the joint-use agreement
                                      between the City and BUSD.
              Program 2.35.B:         Maintain zoning that, in the event any schools are closed or
                                      relocated, will support the reuse of closed school sites for
                                      public or quasi-public uses.
              4. WATER
              Sulphur Springs Creek Water-
              shed and Lake Herman
              Sulphur Springs Creek and its
              main tributary, Paddy Creek, form
              the largest watershed within the
              Planning Area. Of the approxi-
              mately 18 square mile watershed
              area, the upper six square miles
              lies outside of the Planning Area in
              the Vallejo Sphere Of Influence. Paddy Creek, which drains a three square mile
              watershed, joins the lower reach of Sulphur Springs Creek just below the Lake
              Herman outlet.
              The Lake Herman reservoir on Sulphur Springs Creek stores watershed runoff along
              with excess water from the North Bay Aqueduct, a component of the State Water
              Project and the City’s principal potable water supply.The reservoir is typically filled
              during the spring and drawn down during the summer and fall. Both the City and
              Exxon draw on the reservoir during periods of high demand.
              WATER SUPPLY
              Benicia has a long history of having a local shortage of fresh water. Benicia’s potable
              water is currently supplied by the California State Water Project (SWP) through the
              North Bay Aqueduct (and the City of Vallejo in the event of a water shortage).The
              City’s Water Treatment Plant is located on Lake Herman Road and was expanded in
              1989.
              WATER QUALITY
              Water quality problems typical of commercial and residential land uses affect aquatic
              habitat and stormwater discharge throughout the urbanized portions of the Planning
              Area. Lake Herman, which is the City’s back-up water supply, is considered a
90                                                                         City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                                 D. Community Services
                eutrophic water body by the Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB).
                Eutrophic waters are characterized by high nutrient loads, excessive algal and aquatic
                vascular plant growth, low water clarity, and reduced oxygen concentrations in
                bottom waters. However, the City also stores good quality North Bay Aqueduct water
                in Lake Herman, and the current mixture of water in the lake is deemed sufficient to
                meet water quality standards.
                While no specific data are available on water quality for other surface waters in
                Benicia, it is reasonable that water quality in other minor creeks and drainages would
                be similar to that found in other urbanized portions of the Bay Area, since Benicia is
                subject to the same point and non-point sources as other jurisdictions.
                Groundwater
                The Public Safety Background Report lists a number of confirmed and potential
                groundwater contamination sites throughout the City. However, Benicia’s reliance on
                imported SWP water for its municipal water supply means that the groundwater
                quality problem sites have little significant impact on drinking water quality. Instead,
                they have the potential to affect water quality in local creeks and the receiving waters
                in the Carquinez Strait and Suisun Bay, since groundwater eventually flows to surface
                locations.
                Groundwater contamination upstream from Lake Herman could reach the City’s
                water supply.Two upstream contamination sites have been identified at Syar Quarry
                and the Hastings Mercury Mine.While these sites appear to be of relatively lower
                concern than downstream sites, they should be monitored.
                WASTE WATER TREATMENT
                Benicia’s sewer system dates from the time when sanitary sewers and storm drains
                flowed together into the Carquinez Strait. Separation of sanitary from storm water
                flows was completed and interceptors were constructed to carry waste water to the
                Waste Water Treatment Plant (WWTP) at the lower end of East Fifth Street.
                In June 1996, Benicia residents passed a bond measure to upgrade the City’s wastewa-
                ter treatment plant (WWTP).The upgrade will (a) increase the WWTP’s firm capacity to
                sufficiently serve existing development and projected infill development within
                existing City Limits, (b) eliminate excessive noise, odors, and the use of gaseous
                chlorine from the Plant, (c) address problems with deteriorating equipment and
                facilities, and (d) create a flood wall along the southern and eastern borders of the
                Plant.
                WATER GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
                Goals, policies, and programs focus on meeting the needs of the existing and future
                development envisioned by this Plan with an adequate supply of high quality drinking
                water and sufficient wastewater treatment capacity.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                            91

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
              GOAL 2.36:               Ensure an adequate water supply for current and
                                       future residents and businesses.
              POLICY 2.36.1:           Approve development plans only when a dependable and
                                       adequate water supply to serve the development is assured.
              POLICY 2.36.2:           Continue to pursue and secure adequate water sources of the
                                       highest quality available.
              Program 2.36.A:          Pursue use of reclaimed wastewater—especially for major
                                       industrial users—where feasible.
              POLICY 2.36.3:           Implement measures to reduce water consumption.
              Program 2.36.B:          Initiate water conservation programs and conduct drought
                                       contingency planning.
              Program 2.36.C:          Continue to implement City-adopted water conservation Best
                                       Management Practices (BMP). (see Glossary)
              Program 2.36.D:          Continue to require development to utilize adopted City
                                       standards for low-water-use landscaping.
              POLICY 2.36.4:           Encourage public and private uses to minimize water use and
                                       to recycle processed water whenever and wherever feasible.
              Program 2.36.E:          Promote the retrofitting of public buildings with water conser-
                                       vation features.
              Program 2.36.F:          Assist hospitality-related businesses to actively promote water
                                       conservation.
              GOAL 2.37:               Identify and preserve groundwater resources.
              POLICY 2.37.1:           Work with the RWQCB to protect groundwater quality.
              POLICY 2.37.2:           Ensure the cleanup of groundwater contamination resulting
                                       from the IT Panoche Hazardous Waste Facility.
              GOAL 2.38:               Protect water quality.
              POLICY 2.38.1:           Continue to require the use of feasible and practical Best
                                       Management Practices (BMP) to protect receiving waters from
                                       adverse effects of construction and urban runoff.
              Program 2.38.A:          Continue the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Program
                                       (SWPPP) and the Industrial Pretreatment Program, and continue
                                       to implement the Erosion Control Ordinance.
              Such measures would include providing water conservation literature to visitors and
              tourists and installing a full range of water-conserving fixtures in hotels and restau-
              rants.
92                                                                         City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                         D. Community Services
                GOAL 2.39:      Provide safe drinking water and improve its taste
                                and odor.
                POLICY 2.39.1:  Ensure that water quality goals are consistently met.
                Program 2.39.A: Continue to cooperate in regional efforts by organizations such
                                as the CALFED Program to improve the quality of the City’s
                                source water.
                Program 2.39.B: Continue to optimize treatment operations in conjunction with
                                the implementation of the City’s five- and 10-year Capital
                                Improvements Programs.
                Program 2.39.C: Educate the public about City efforts to improve the taste and
                                odor of its drinking water.
                GOAL 2.40:      Ensure adequate wastewater treatment capacity to
                                serve all development shown in the General Plan.
                POLICY 2.40.1:  Approve changes in land use designations for new develop-
                                ment only if adequate wastewater treatment capacity is as-
                                sured.
                POLICY 2.40.2:  Promote use of reclaimed wastewater where feasible.
                Program 2.40.A: Prepare, adopt, and implement a sewer maintenance and
                                replacement program.
                Program 2.40.B: Continue to implement the City’s Wet Weather Management
                                Plan.
                POLICY 2.40.3:  Encourage developments with projected high strength dis-
                                charges to reduce pollutants directly to the City’s wastewater
                                system.
                Program 2.40.C: Educate developers about recycling and other technological
                                methods where feasible.
                Program 2.40.D: Continue to pursue the City’s Pollution Prevention Program for
                                all users of the City’s wastewater system including commercial,
                                industrial, and residential.
                Program 2.40.E: Continue to pursue the City’s pretreatment program for
                                industrial dischargers.
                GOAL 2.41:      Minimize WWTP operational upsets, potential dis-
                                charge of inadequately treated wastewater, and
                                the emission of odor and noise.
                POLICY 2.41.1:  Continue efforts to replace the gaseous chlorine system with a
                                less hazardous chemical (such as a liquid chlorine system) that
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                  93

Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
                                      will address the potential safety impacts to the neighborhood
                                      surrounding the WWTP.
              POLICY 2.41.2:          Continue to work with neighbors to implement programs that
                                      minimize odor, noise, and potential safety impacts to the
                                      neighborhood surrounding the WWTP.
              5. RECYCLING GOALS, PROGRAMS, AND POLICIES
              GOAL 2.42:              Enhance the recycling of solid waste.
              POLICY 2.42.1:          Strive to accomplish the mandated objectives of the California
                                      Integrated Waste Management Act.
              Program 2.42.A:         Adopt and implement a Source Reduction and Recycling Plan
                                      (SRRP) and Hazardous Household Waste Plan (HHWP) which
                                      include components for waste characterization, source reduc-
                                      tion, recycling, composting, special waste diversion, education,
                                      public information, disposal facility capacity, funding, and the
                                      safe use, disposal, and recycling of household hazardous materi-
                                      als.
              Program 2.42.B:         Encourage local recycling facilities to be available to the public.
              Program 2.42.C:         Pursue establishment of curbside service that would pick up
                                      and compost yard waste and make it available to City residents
                                      for a reasonable cost.
              6. UTILITIES
              The City of Benicia owns and operates its own water and wastewater treatment
              plants. Additionally, the City owns a seven acre corporation yard, where maintenance
              equipment is stored and maintained.
              POWER AND ENERGY USE
              Benicia’s principal sources of power come from natural gas and electricity supplied
              by the Pacific Gas and Electric Company.The regional supply system which feeds
              Benicia is a closed loop system; thus interruption of any single trunk line would not
              result in a complete blackout. No reliable estimate of future demand for power is
              possible due to variables of energy availability and the effects of the economy on new
              construction. No immediate limitations on supply capability are forecast.
              TELECOMMUNICATIONS
              Telephone communication is generally provided by Pacific Bell to Benicia. Century
              Cable provides television cable for subscribers in Benicia.
94                                                                         City of Benicia General Plan

                                                                               D. Community Services
                Growth and change in the telecommunications field has resulted in unprecedented
                demand for new commercial antenna and associated equipment.The antennas and
                associated structures can pose aesthetic problems because of their size, location, or
                number.The City controls antennas and similar structures through the use permit
                process.
                UTILITIES GOALS, POLICIES, AND PROGRAMS
                GOAL 2.43:             Allow installation of telecommunications equip-
                                       ment and distribution networks that maintain
                                       and protect health, safety, and quality of life and
                                       avoid visual clutter.
                POLICY 2.43.1:         Minimize the visual impacts of siting exposed commercial
                                       antenna structures in scenic corridors and residential and
                                       historic districts.
                Program 2.43.A:        Establish design requirements for commercial antennas and
                                       associated equipment and distribution networks.
City of Benicia General Plan                                                                          95
Chapter 2. Community Development and Sustainability
96                                                  City of Benicia General Plan
