City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Land Use
                                       LAND USE ELEMENT
                                            JUNE 2011
PART 1: BACKGROUND AND PLANNING ISSUES
A.       Purpose of the Land Use Element
State law requires that the General Plan include a Land Use Element that designates land for
housing, business, industry, and open space, as well as other uses deemed appropriate by the
agency (Government Code Sections 65302-03). Although all the General Plan elements are
needed to comprehensively address multiple planning issues, the Land Use Element is
generally considered to be the most representative of and essential to the General Plan,
because it guides and directs the physical development of the community. This Element
constitutes the required Land Use Element for the City’s General Plan; in addition, it forms the
land use component of the Area Plan adopted for the Santa Clarita Valley by the County of Los
Angeles.
The Land Use Element is the City’s and County’s long-term blueprint for development of
property to meet the Santa Clarita Valley’s future needs for new housing, retail, office, industrial,
parks, open space, and other uses. The element contains a Land Use Map and goals, policies
and programs designed to address the development issues facing the community through a
variety of land use planning strategies, along with the type, intensity, quality, and location of
future uses within the planning area. Issues identified within each of the other General Plan
elements have been integrated into this element, to the extent that they affect land use
planning. The element also serves as a statement of the standards and targets for residential
population density and building intensity. The Land Use Element is the broadest of the elements
in its scope, and forms the basis for implementing sound land use policies.
The Land Use Element addresses existing development patterns in the Santa Clarita Valley
planning area and establishes a framework for focusing future growth in a logical and orderly
manner. All of the principles of community and land use planning are applied to the preparation
and adoption of a comprehensive, long-term land use plan for the physical development of the
Valley. The process of developing the land use plan involves analysis of existing land use
patterns and projected growth; current and future availability of public services and facilities;
availability of water and other needed resources; the need to protect sensitive habitats and
natural resources; protection of existing and future residents from natural and man-made
hazards; analysis of social and economic conditions and needs; and consideration of the
constraints and opportunities inherent in the physical environment. Based on this analysis, the
element establishes the distribution of land uses by type and intensity. In addition, the element
addresses the Valley’s development pattern as an integrated network of villages, each with its
own community character. Equally important in the Land Use Element is the goal to provide all
residents with a well-rounded and healthy lifestyle including a variety of jobs, housing, goods,
and services to meet the diverse needs of the Valley’s growing population.
                                                 L-1                                    June, 2011

Land Use                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Specifically, the Land Use Element serves the following purposes:
    1. The Land Use Element informs the public of the City’s and County’s land use goals,
         objectives, and policies for long-term development, and outlines programs designed to
         implement the stated goals.
    2. The Element serves as a guide for the day-to-day operational decisions of staff and
         decision makers with respect to development matters. It sets forth policies on which to
         base recommendations and decisions regarding land use issues, and provides a basis
         for informing citizens and developers about the City’s and County’s policies on growth
         and development.
    3. The Element establishes land use classifications for property within the planning area
         and sets forth standards of density and intensity for each classification, as well as
         projections of future population growth and its spatial distribution.
    4. The Element addresses issues identified in other General Plan elements that affect land
         uses and development patterns, including circulation systems, infrastructure availability,
         housing needs, economic development goals, resource conservation, open space
         preservation, and public safety.
    5. As a State-mandated element, it fulfills one of the requirements of California
         Government Code Section 65000 et. seq. for preparation of adequate General Plan
         documents.
B.       Relation of the Land Use Element to Other Elements of the General Plan
State law requires that each element within a General Plan be consistent with all the other
elements of the Plan. This section describes how the Land Use Element has been prepared to
maintain consistency with each of the other General Plan elements adopted by both the City
and the County.
Circulation Element
Closely related to the Land Use Element is the Circulation Element, which is directly affected by
and has a constraining effect upon the viability of the land use plan. The Circulation Element
contains a map showing major transportation facilities within the Santa Clarita Valley, including
major streets (highways), rail and public transit routes, stations and terminals, and airport
facilities. A logical correspondence between land use and circulation is essential for an effective
plan.
This Land Use Element was evaluated in conjunction with the system of streets and highways
set forth in the Circulation Element, through use of a computerized traffic model analysis. The
objective of the traffic model analysis was to ensure that streets and highways are designed to
convey vehicles through the planning area at acceptable service levels when the land uses
shown in the Land Use Element are developed.
June, 2011                          L-2

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Land Use
In addition, the map and policies of the Land Use Element were designed to encourage
reduction of vehicle trips and use of other transportation modes, including public transit, cycling,
and walking. This goal is promoted through inclusion of mixed-use districts, which allow
supportive services to be located in proximity to residential neighborhoods; inclusion of a master
plan for trails into the Circulation Element; and designation of higher residential densities in
areas served by public transit.
The relationship between the Land Use and Circulation Elements cannot be over-emphasized.
Traffic conditions and congestion are a direct result of the land uses that are approved and
constructed in the planning area. When land use types are separated to an extent that residents
are forced to take multiple vehicle trips to obtain services and reach employment centers, the
number of vehicles on roadways will increase. The only way to allow continued economic
development and creation of housing within the Santa Clarita Valley, without exacerbating traffic
congestion to unacceptable service levels, is to plan for alternatives to use of the single-
occupant vehicle and single-purpose vehicle trips. This can be done in a number of ways, some
of which are described in the Circulation Element. With respect to the Land Use Element,
emphasis has been placed on allowing mixed uses in order to allow residents to reach services
in ways that are not exclusively automobile-dependent. Limited commercial service centers will
be allowed within residential neighborhoods, and will be accessible by walking, bicycling, and
bus transit. Multiple family residential uses will be allowed in regional and community
commercial areas. More residences will be allowed within walking distance to rail transit stations
to facilitate rail commuting to employment outside of the Santa Clarita Valley. Mixed residential
densities will be allowed, to permit housing alternatives at all income levels and age preferences
in proximity to transit jobs, and services. Through design of the Land Use Map in consideration
of circulation patterns and needs, this General Plan will result in projected traffic impacts that
are less significant than the previous General Plan, which was largely based on the separation
of land uses.
Housing Element
The separate Housing Elements prepared for the City and the County each contain policies and
programs to ensure that adequate housing is provided to meet the needs of all Valley residents.
These elements address the need for affordable housing, housing for people with special
needs, constraints to providing affordable housing, the agency’s progress in meeting its housing
goals, quantified objectives for provision of housing, a survey of adequate sites for housing, a
resource inventory, and identification of at-risk affordable units and methods of preservation.
This Land Use Element is consistent with the Housing Elements prepared for both the City and
the County because the location and density ranges shown for residential land use districts on
the Land Use Map have been designated in consideration of the housing needs projected for all
economic and demographic segments of the Santa Clarita Valley’s residents, including
households with special needs and those with incomes of less than the County median.
Adequate sites for attached and multi-family housing have been identified to ensure that the
need for affordable housing has been met in the Santa Clarita Valley. Further, the number of
dwelling units that can be built in the planning area based on the land use plan will ensure that
the regional housing needs allocated to the Valley by the Southern California Association of
Governments (SCAG) will be met.
                                                  L-3                                   June, 2011

Land Use                                                            City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Conservation and Open Space Element
The Conservation and Open Space Element contains maps and policies to ensure preservation
of an open space greenbelt around large portions of the Santa Clarita Valley, in addition to
preserving water quality, historic and cultural resources, scenic views, and providing
recreational facilities to enhance the quality of life for Valley residents.
The Land Use Element was designed to ensure that irreplaceable natural resources and open
spaces are preserved and protected from encroachment by future development. The Land Use
Map designates a “green belt” of undeveloped land within and adjacent to the foothills
surrounding the Santa Clarita Valley, with areas designated for rural development located
between urban and suburban densities and the foothills. In addition, the Land Use Map was
designed to protect Significant Ecological Areas and the riparian areas adjacent to the Santa
Clara River and its tributaries, as well as ensuring provision of adequate open space for
recreational purposes, water conservation and quality, and habitat preservation.
Noise Element
The Noise Element contains maps and policies to ensure that residents are not exposed to
health risks or nuisances due to noise generated from freeways and high-volume roadways,
airports, industrial and recreational uses, special events, and other uses emitting loud sounds.
Policies in the Noise Element address sound attenuation measures to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare, such as setbacks, noise barriers, and buffering.
The Land Use Element is consistent with the map and policies of the Noise Element through its
requirements for buffer areas between “sensitive receptor” uses and noise sources. Sensitive
receptors include residences, schools, hospitals, preschools, and other uses for which intrusive
noise is considered annoying and/or unsafe. Policies have also been included in the Land Use
Element to ensure noise attenuation to safe levels within individual development projects.
Safety Element
The Safety Element contains maps and policies to ensure that residents are not exposed to
health risks due to air pollution, earthquakes, wildland fires, or other environmental hazards, and
that adequate provisions are made for crime prevention, law enforcement, and fire protection
services.
The Land Use Element is consistent with the Safety Element because land uses were
designated in consideration of the locations of hazard areas, including known earthquake fault
zones, areas subject to flooding or wild fires, unstable soils, and other environmental hazards.
In addition, the Land Use Element includes policies to ensure that new development plans in the
City are evaluated for conformance with accepted crime prevention measures, and that
adequate law enforcement and fire protection services are provided to ensure the safety of City
residents.
June, 2011                           L-4

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Land Use
Economic Development Element
The Economic Development Element contains policies to ensure the long-term economic health
and viability of existing and future Valley businesses. The Land Use Element is consistent with
the Economic Development Element because land uses were designated in consideration of
employment centers, village hubs, mixed use corridors and nodes. Further, the Land Use
Element identifies varied housing types throughout the Valley to match the full range of
employment types and levels.
C.      Land Use Categories
When developing a Land Use Element and Land Use Map, certain terms are typically used to
describe existing and planned land use types. Since these land use categories are referred to
often throughout the text of this element, the following general descriptions are intended to
clarify what is meant by the terms residential, commercial, industrial, and so forth. It should be
noted that the following terms are general in nature and list uses typically found in most urban
areas. The general land use terms listed below should not be interpreted as a description of
permitted uses in this Plan; a general description of permitted uses in this plan is contained in
Section L of this Element.
    •   Residential – The residential category includes dwelling units developed at various
        densities and with varying housing types, including single-family detached, single-family
        attached multiple-family mobile home parks, and senior housing. Special residential
        uses include live-work units and group living facilities.
    •   Commercial – The commercial category includes retail and offices providing goods and
        services to the general public, and wholesale and service uses provided to businesses.
        Commercial uses also include food services, personal services, automobile services,
        entertainment and hospitality services, day care services, and regional commercial uses
        such as big box retailers and auto malls.
    •   Mixed Use – The mixed-use category generally includes commercial retail, office, and
        service uses intermingled with higher density residential uses, within a master-planned
        complex (consisting of one or more buildings) designed to ensure that residents are not
        adversely impacted by commercial operations or traffic, and that businesses benefit from
        the proximity of customers living nearby. The intended benefits of mixed-use
        development include a reduction in vehicle trips by residents to shopping areas, and the
        proximity of residents to employment-generating uses.
    •   Industrial – The industrial category includes heavy manufacturing, less intensive
        industrial uses that are typically located in business parks, and research and
        development complexes. Light industrial activities include warehousing, wholesale trade,
        and some assembly. Industrial uses may include fabrication and assembly of large
        items, resource extraction, processing of raw or recycled materials, and businesses that
        use or generate hazardous materials.
                                                 L-5                                   June, 2011

Land Use                                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
    •   Public and Institutional – The public and institutional category includes government
        buildings, hospitals, libraries, schools, colleges, fire and police stations, solid waste
        facilities, museums, cultural and community centers, and other similar public uses. In
        addition, private schools, churches, convalescent care and other social care facilities,
        day care services, private meeting and convention facilities, and similar uses may be
        included. Special uses in this category include correctional facilities. It also includes the
        transportation and communication uses including freeways and major arterials,
        bikeways, railroads, park and ride lots, truck terminals, airports, train stations, multi-
        modal transit stations, communication facilities, and similar uses.
    •   Open Space and Recreation – The open space and recreation category includes the
        Angeles National Forest and land used for private and public recreational facilities,
        conservancy land and other land set aside for preservation of open space and natural
        resources, and local and regional parks and multi-purpose trails. Golf courses and water
        bodies are also included.
    •   Rural Lands – The rural lands category includes low-density residential uses on large
        lots, in areas characterized by rural development interspersed with natural open space.
        Agricultural uses in rural lands include grazing, horticulture, row, field, and tree crops,
        and limited keeping of livestock, horses and other large animals.
D.      Meeting the Challenges of Regional Growth
According to the regional planning agency for the Los Angeles basin, Southern California
Association of Governments (SCAG), a major challenge for Southern California will be
continuing to meet the demands of rapid urban growth over the next several decades. A 2006
SCAG report states:
        For decades, Southern California has experienced some of the most dramatic growth
        seen anywhere in the world. Our collective population now surpasses 18 million. But it’s
        not going to stop there. By 2035, experts tell us that another six million people are
        coming and that more than two-thirds of these will be children born to our growing
        families. Even as we have enjoyed a robust economy and weathered the recent
        downturn better than many parts of the state, growth and development issues are at the
        forefront of public concern. High on the list of complaints are increasing congestion, loss
        of open space, and an ill-defined but strongly held belief that “livability” is slipping away.
As the region’s Metropolitan Planning Agency responsible for preparing regional plans for
mobility, air quality, and housing, SCAG urges all local planning agencies to consider regional
needs when preparing their general plans. Issues such as air quality, open space,
transportation, housing, water supply, and jobs are not confined within city or county
boundaries. A unique opportunity for the City of Santa Clarita and the County of Los Angeles in
this One Valley One Vision planning effort is to consider regional issues within an appropriate,
meaningful context for the entire Santa Clarita Valley.
June, 2011                          L-6

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                          Land Use
The challenges of determining where growth should occur and ensuring that housing is provided
to new residents are also linked to transportation. Location of new housing without consideration
for where residents will work and shop will result in more traffic congestion and air pollution. To
address regional planning needs, SCAG has developed a regional growth vision based on four
key principles:
     •   Mobility – Getting where we want to go;
     •   Livability – Creating positive communities;
     •   Prosperity – Long-term health for the region; and
     •   Sustainability – Preserving natural surroundings.
In order to achieve these principles SCAG has formulated a plan for its six-county Southern
California planning area calling for the following measures:
     •   Focusing growth in existing and emerging centers and along major transportation
         corridors;
     •   Creating significant areas of mixed-use development and walkable communities;
     •   Targeting growth around existing and planned transit stations; and
     •   Preserving existing open space and stable residential uses.
SCAG’s growth strategy calls for changes to land use and transportation trends on two percent
of the land area within the six-county metropolitan region in order accommodate projected
growth to achieve the goals of mobility, livability, prosperity, and sustainability. Within the Santa
Clarita Valley, the two-percent growth strategy identifies areas with potential for growth in
proximity to the three Metrolink commuter stations in Downtown Newhall, Saugus, and Canyon
Country. (The existing temporary Princessa Metrolink station is being evaluated for relocation in
the future to a permanent Metrolink station on the Valley’s east side).
City and County staff compiled growth statistics and projections for the Santa Clarita Valley
when preparing the Land Use Map for the General Plan update. As of 2008, there were
approximately 80,500 dwelling units within the Valley, of which 56,000 were in the City and
24,500 were in the County. Another 40,500 dwelling units had received land use approval,
including 33,500 units in County areas and 7,000 units within the City, and several thousand
more dwelling units were the subject of pending land use applications. The estimated population
of the Santa Clarita Valley in 2008 was 252,000, with 177,000 people living in the City and
75,000 residing in unincorporated County areas. From these numbers, it is expected that
growth, and the related issues of quality of life, will continue to be pressing for Valley residents
and decision makers in the coming decades. According to a citizen survey in 2000, Valley
residents identified traffic, growth, community, cultural arts, environmental issues, public safety,
economic development, parks, open space, and transit as significant concerns. The primary
objective of the Land Use Element is to demonstrate how projected growth can be
accommodated within the Valley, and managed to maintain livability, mobility, sustainability, and
prosperity for all residents.
E.       Valley of Villages
The physical setting and history of the Santa Clarita Valley have combined to create several
distinctive communities, each with its own special character, development patterns, and
lifestyles. Topographically, many neighborhoods are separated from adjacent development by
ridgelines or canyons. The location of the Santa Clara River and Interstate 5, both of which
transect the planning area, also act as barriers that separate communities. In addition, the
historical development of the Valley took place over a long period of time during which
                                                  L-7                                     June, 2011

Land Use                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
development occurred in different areas, at different times, and for different reasons. Old Town
Newhall, Saugus, and Castaic developed along transportation routes, while Valencia and
Stevenson Ranch developed according to master plans prepared by residential builders.
Outlying areas, such as Val Verde and Hasley Canyon, developed as low-density rural areas
based on their residents’ desire for retreat from high-intensity urban centers.
The diversity of settlement patterns within the Santa Clarita Valley is viewed as a positive
aspect of the community, an acknowledgement of the area’s history and topography, in
recognition that the Valley can accommodate and provide diverse areas suitable for different
lifestyles. However, the benefits of a unified approach to good planning cannot be ignored in
favor of diversity. It may appear that Valley residents desire two seemingly inconsistent goals:
maintenance of diversity and community identity, and a coordinated approach to orderly
development. It is the aim of the One Valley One Vision planning effort to bring these two goals
together into two workable planning policy documents, the City’s General Plan and the County’s
Area Plan. The theme of these updated plans is “Valley of Villages,” in recognition of the various
communities and neighborhoods within the Santa Clarita Valley that wish to maintain their own
distinctive character, while at the same time recognizing their place in the “big picture” plan for
development within the entire planning area.
The term “village” brings many images to mind. A village is a community in which people know
one another, support local businesses, gather together at community events, and share
common ideals about their future. The term “village” also implies a community that can sustain
itself over many years without being severely impacted by economic setbacks, loss of housing,
lack of education, inadequate parks or public services, and hazards or pollution that threatens
its residents. Village residents typically send their children to neighborhood schools, use
neighborhood parks, walk along neighborhood streets and trails, and work close to home. More
than anything else, a village invokes the concept of quality of life based on a healthy living
environment and productive social and civic interaction. Village residents can also be a part of a
larger network comprised of neighboring villages, connected by transportation routes and
sharing major community facilities that benefit the larger Valley area.
The various existing communities identified in the Santa Clarita Valley, including approved
specific plans are described below, and their general locations are indicated on Exhibit L-1.
Newhall
Newhall is generally located in the City of Santa Clarita and was one of the earliest permanent
settlements in the Valley, established in 1876 in conjunction with the construction of the
Southern Pacific Railroad. Henry Mayo Newhall, who had deeded land to Southern Pacific
Railroad to lay track connecting Los Angeles and San Francisco, also deeded Southern Pacific
a parcel of land to build a depot and a town to be called Newhall. Old Newhall was once the
largest community in the Valley, and its early development, typical of many western towns, was
based on oil, mining, and the railroad. Newhall maintains its historic character, and includes the
residence of silent film star William S. Hart, whose 300-acre ranch is now a County park,
museum, and tourist attraction.
Prior to completion of the interstate highway system, Main Street (formerly San Fernando
Road), which runs parallel to the railroad tracks and served as the community’s main street, was
a principal link between the San Joaquin Valley and the Los Angeles Basin. It still serves as the
backbone for Downtown Newhall’s commercial district.
June, 2011                          L-8

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                     Land Use
Commercial land uses are concentrated in what has been called Old Town Newhall, along
Lyons Avenue and Main Street. Residential uses in Newhall include higher density multi-family
and single-family uses, both north and south of Lyons Avenue. Some of the older single family
and mobile home residences in east Newhall are in need of rehabilitation. The City completed a
new 17,000 square foot recreation and community center in Old Town Newhall, offering a
variety of programs and containing a Sheriff’s substation. The Metrolink train station, which
provides commuter services and a parking lot adjacent to the community center, was built on
the site of the original Newhall train station.
In December 2005 the City of Santa Clarita adopted the Downtown Newhall Specific Plan as a
foundation for facilitating redevelopment and enhancement of the area. Based on extensive
public input, economic analysis, and planning design, the specific plan encompasses 20 blocks
(550 acres, including a portion of Hart Park) and provides opportunities for mixed-use and
transit-oriented development. Approximately 700 new dwelling units and over 250,000 square
feet of new commercial space are projected by the specific plan, in addition to existing housing
and business in the area. Both new development and redevelopment are accommodated in the
specific plan.
                                                L-9                                   June, 2011

Land Use        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
June, 2011 L-10
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                         Land Use
Because the Downtown Newhall Specific Plan was the first plan targeted by the City towards
transit-oriented development, it will serve as a prototype for other districts in the Valley that will
be clustered around transit centers. The Design Principles for Transit Oriented Development as
identified in the document will be considered in planning for similar districts near other existing
and future transit centers. These principles included the following:
    •    Make great public places;
    •    Make great streets (both commercial and residential);
    •    Live above stores;
    •    Live near transit;
    •    Build a variety of buildings;
    •    Create a variety of housing choices;
    •    Provide for the right mix of retail;
    •    Provide the right amount of parking, in the right locations.
Implementation strategies in the specific plan included street improvements, provision of
additional on-street parking and a future parking structure, re-routing of through-traffic to
Railroad Avenue, bicycle baths, streetscape beautification, utility upgrades, affordable housing
assistance, billboard abatement, historic preservation, and creation of a plaza for outdoor
markets. The plan also contains detailed architectural guidelines designed to promote human-
scale, pedestrian-oriented streets and buildings consistent with the old-town themes. Many of
these implementation strategies have begun.
The primary planning issues for Newhall include implementation of the Downtown Newhall
Specific Plan through redevelopment efforts, attracting private investment combined with public
funds to create a mixed-use, transit-oriented, pedestrian-friendly, live-work-play environment
that will provide dining, entertainment, retail, commercial, and housing choices to both residents
and visitors. This will result in Newhall providing additional services including parking amenities
and a new branch library which is under construction. Other planning issues include the future
extension of Dockweiler Drive to Lyons Avenue, the future expansion of The Master’s College
campus, development of the 4.2 million square foot Gate-King industrial park, and providing any
needed drainage infrastructure improvements.
Valencia
The community of Valencia is generally located within the City of Santa Clarita and is part of the
original 37,500-acre Newhall Ranch, a Mexican land grant acquired by Henry Mayo Newhall
and later owned by the Newhall Land and Farming Company. Named after a city in Spain,
Valencia was initiated in 1965 as a master planned community. Residential, commercial, and
industrial developments form the basic community structure, supported by shopping centers,
recreational facilities, schools, colleges, a medical campus, golf courses, professional offices,
and other support services connected by a system of walkways called paseos. The community
is home to the local Los Angeles County Civic Center, College of the Canyons, California
Institute of the Arts, Santa Clarita’s City Hall, the Valencia Town Center Mall, and Six Flags
Magic Mountain. Developments such as the Valencia Gateway (comprised of the Valencia
Industrial Center and Valencia Commerce Center) have made Valencia the largest center for
business and technology in the Valley and have resulted in the creation of approximately 60,000
jobs. New industrial development continues west of Interstate 5 in North Valencia, including a
postal distribution facility.
                                                  L-11                                   June, 2011

Land Use                                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Both the City and the County have jurisdiction over portions of Valencia, although the majority of
the land is within City limits. Since 1965 more than 20,000 residential units have been
constructed and over 50,000 residents call Valencia home. The primary planning issues for
Valencia will be promoting development that provides employment opportunities for Valley
residents, and maintaining Valencia’s role as an economic center for the Valley, as other
regional commercial uses are constructed in neighboring areas.
Saugus
Generally located within the City of Santa Clarita and established in 1887, Saugus was named
for the Massachusetts birthplace of Henry Mayo Newhall and owes its existence to the Southern
Pacific Railroad. Saugus has a colorful history. The Saugus Speedway, originally designed in
1924 as a rodeo arena, was the setting for the last great train robbery in California, which took
place behind the speedway in 1928. A Metrolink station is now located near the speedway,
which includes parking and provides a transfer point between commuter rail and buses. The
80-acre Santa Clarita Central Park is located in Saugus.
Residential areas of Saugus are located in Seco Canyon and Bouquet Canyon. Residential
development has also occurred in Haskell Canyon and Plum Canyon. Commercial uses in the
area primarily serve local residents. Saugus also contains older industrial development along
Railroad Avenue, interspersed with newer commercial uses.
The northern portions of Saugus are hilly, with tree-lined streets adjacent to hills covered with
natural vegetation. The natural areas remaining along Bouquet Canyon Creek present an
opportunity to enhance the area by creating a greenbelt connecting the community with other
parts of the Valley.
The primary planning issues for Saugus include addressing traffic congestion in established
neighborhoods, vehicular access to activity centers and freeways, the need for beautification
and public amenities such as roadway landscaping, trails, and the need for enhanced
commercial to serve a broader range of needs for Saugus residents.
Canyon Country
Canyon Country is partially located within the City of Santa Clarita and partially located within
unincorporated Los Angeles County, in the eastern portion of the Santa Clarita Valley along
Soledad Canyon Road east of Saugus and extending north of Sand Canyon along State Route
14 to Agua Dulce. Portions of Canyon Country lie within both the City and the County. This area
has the largest population of any community in the Valley and contains a wide range of housing
types, including large-lot single-family custom homes, single-family tract homes, multiple-family
developments, and mobile home parks. Commercial and manufacturing activities are
concentrated along both sides of Soledad Canyon Road and along the northerly portion of
Sierra Highway within the planning area. A business park/industrial hub, Centre Pointe Business
Park, is located on Golden Valley Road. The City’s Sports Complex and Aquatics Center
provide recreational facilities serving all Valley residents, and the Via Princessa Metrolink
station serves the east Valley communities. Commercial development is located along Soledad
Canyon Road between White’s Canyon and Sierra Highway, which includes the Jo Anne Darcy
Canyon Country Library and a movie theater complex. Newer townhomes and apartment are
located along State Route 14 between Sand Canyon and Via Princessa. In addition, there are
residential neighborhoods in Mint Canyon and Tick Canyon within unincorporated County
territory. A variety of architectural styles exist along Soledad Canyon Road. Homes along the
northern section of Sierra Highway are generally rural and of very low density, with the
exception of multi-family development near the intersection of Sierra Highway and Soledad
Canyon Road.
June, 2011                          L-12

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                     Land Use
One issue for residents in Canyon Country has been access to jobs in the Valencia area to the
west. However, with the completion of the Cross-Valley Connector, traffic movement between
Canyon Country and employment centers along Interstate 5 has improved significantly. Transit
service improvements and additional park-and-ride facilities will also be evaluated to address
this need.
College of the Canyons opened an East Valley campus on Sierra Highway in Canyon Country
during the fall of 2007. The campus, encompasses 70 acres and accommodate 8,000 full-time
students when fully built out. The campus will operate as a full-service community college to
residents on the east side of the Santa Clarita Valley.
Planning issues for Canyon Country include an opportunity to upgrade land uses along Sierra
Highway in the area of the new college campus, from Soledad Canyon Road north to Vasquez
Canyon Road. In this area Sierra Highway will be widened to six lanes and there is an
opportunity to provide services to area residents and the college on vacant land fronting the
highway. Canyon Country residents have expressed a desire for higher end retail and
restaurant uses in their area. In addition, older non-conforming uses in the area can be
gradually phased out to upgrade the character of development and encourage new users to
Canyon Country. This area will be planned as a mixed-use corridor in order to create jobs and
provide new housing and commercial services for area residents, as well as for college students
and faculty. The mixed-use corridor designation will encourage a mix of uses in a pedestrian-
friendly environment, creating a focal point for Canyon Country. In order to realize the
redevelopment potential along this corridor, a coordinated effort will be needed to address
regional drainage infrastructure issues.
Another planning opportunity for Canyon Country lies in the land adjacent to State Route 14
access points. Four existing on- and off-ramp systems provide direct freeway access to the
area, and represent opportunities to enhance entryways into the community.
Sand Canyon
The Sand Canyon area is generally located within the City of Santa Clarita, southeast of
Canyon Country and is comprised predominantly of low-density single-family residential uses.
The area is rural with extensive stands of oak trees and is characterized by large estate homes
and lots, many of which are equestrian and enjoy direct access to an equestrian trail system
linking the community. The community is accessible via Sand Canyon Road and Placerita
Canyon Road, and is bordered on the south and east by the Angeles National Forest.
Sand Canyon is largely developed. A challenge for the Sand Canyon area will be ensuring land
use compatibility between homes and adjacent natural areas in Angeles National Forest and
along the Santa Clara River. Major planning issues include protecting the rural and equestrian
character from development pressures to create more traditional subdivisions in this low-density
area; increasing multiple purpose trail linkages; and providing an effective interface between
residents and National Forest lands. In addition, development in the area must comply with the
City’s Special Standards District to maintain the rural community character desired by residents.
                                                L-13                                  June, 2011

Land Use                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
The eastern portion of the Sand Canyon region, outside the Santa Clarita city limits, is home to
disturbed lands resulting from current and past aggregate mining practices, former military
industrial support activities, and Superfund hazard properties. It is to the benefit of the region to
have these properties restored to an economic land use rather than left in a disturbed state.
These highly impaired lands are appropriate for future conversion to land uses complementary
to the surrounding topography, national forest, and Santa Clara River setting. Such land uses
should be consistent with the policies of this plan including jobs/housing balance, shortened
commute times, and siting of new uses largely within the footprint of the disturbance area. Such
uses should be planned so as to avoid adverse effects on the Santa Clara River SEA.
Placerita Canyon
Site of the first gold strike in California in 1842, Placerita Canyon is generally located within the
City of Santa Clarita and is now a rural residential area located northeast of downtown Newhall.
Equestrian-oriented residential uses among oak woodlands typify development in this area,
which still contains scattered ranches. Oil fields are located in the eastern portion of the canyon,
west of State Route 14. East of State Route 14, Placerita Canyon is predominantly undeveloped
with much of the land contained in the Angeles National Forest. Placerita Canyon is home to
The Master’s College, a private four-year liberal arts institution, and the Placerita Canyon
Nature Center. Two historic ranches in Placerita Canyon have been converted to other uses but
retain the rural character of the area: Melody Ranch is now used primarily for filming and to host
the annual Cowboy Festival and other events; and the Golden Oak Ranch is used by the Disney
Company for filming and other corporate uses. A substantial number of newer estate homes on
large lots have been constructed in the area in recent years.
Planning issues in Placerita Canyon include accommodating expansion plans for The Master’s
College; upgrading non-compliant older structures; extending sewer lines to serve existing uses
throughout the area to protect groundwater quality; providing flood control and drainage
improvements; providing additional vehicular access (possibly through extension of Dockweiler
Drive); and opportunities for future development of the 100-acre site located at the westerly
entrance of Placerita Canyon. In addition, development in the area must comply with the City’s
Special Standards District to maintain the rural community character desired by residents.
Castaic
Castaic, located in unincorporated Los Angeles County, developed from its role as a highway
stop containing small cafes, hotels and automotive services along the old Ridge Route, which
opened in 1914. By-passed when Highway 99 (now Interstate 5) opened in 1933, portions of the
Ridge Route can still be driven today. When the Ridge Route was first constructed, it cut 30
miles off the Los Angeles to Bakersfield route and allowed the journey to be completed by
automobile in only four days. The eight lanes of Interstate 5 now bisect Castaic, with new
residential development on both sides of the freeway and the older portion of the community on
the east side.
The 600-mile long California Water Project has turned the community of Castaic into one of the
planning area’s major recreational centers. Man-made Castaic Lake, the water project’s western
terminus, is a popular spot for swimming, sailing, fishing, boating, and water skiing. The Castaic
Sports Complex is located just south of Castaic Lake and provides sports opportunities for all
ages. These recreational attractions have increased Castaic’s growth potential, but have also
resulted in traffic impacts, especially on weekends.
June, 2011                            L-14

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Land Use
Land use in Castaic is mixed, with new residential development surrounding freeway-oriented
commercial uses along Castaic/Parker and Lake Hughes Roads. The community still provides
important services and facilities to the trucking industry, and there is a need to ensure that long-
term parking and servicing of big rigs does not adversely impact area residents. Castaic’s
commercial corridor is changing from a small highway oriented service center along I-5 to
include more goods and services for residents. There is potential for additional commercial infill
development. In addition, there is an opportunity to expand services to recreational users of the
local lakes.
Also within Castaic is the Pitchess Detention Center (Wayside Honor Rancho), a Los Angeles
County incarceration facility. A portion of the property is unused and presents an opportunity for
future planning.
Hasley Canyon located north of Val Verde and southwest of Castaic, is considered an outlying
subarea of the Castaic community. With the exception of an older existing mobile home park,
the area is characterized by low-density estate homes on larger lots amid scattered oak trees,
and supports a rural equestrian lifestyle. Major planning issues for Hasley Canyon include
maintaining compatibility of proposed development with the area’s rural character. Los Angeles
County developed a Community Standards District (CSD) for Castaic to address a wide range
of planning issues for this evolving community. Regulations in the CSD include lot size
requirements for new homes, hillside development restrictions, provisions for trail connections
and protection of native vegetation, and buffering between incompatible uses. In addition, the
CSD limited the expansion of trucking-related uses in the Castaic center and prohibited
clustered subdivisions in the Hasley Canyon and Sloan Canyon areas.
Val Verde
Val Verde is located in unincorporated Los Angeles County, three miles west of Interstate 5 and
is developed primarily with single-family homes in a rural setting, surrounded by chaparral-
covered hillsides and scattered canyon oaks. The community is located near the intersection of
San Martinez and Chiquita Canyon Roads in the hills north of State Route 126. The area was
subdivided in the 1920’s and lots were sold for use as vacation homes by African-American
residents of Los Angeles. Today the area is ethnically diverse. The County of Los Angeles
operates Val Verde Park, a community park with a swimming pool, open space, equestrian
stables, and recreational amenities that provides a focal point for area residents.
Major planning issues for Val Verde include potential nuisance impacts from expansion of the
landfill in Chiquita Canyon, the compatibility of proposed developments with the village’s rural
character, and providing residents with increased access to employment opportunities, social
services, and adequate infrastructure.
Agua Dulce
Agua Dulce is located in unincorporated Los Angeles County in the Sierra Pelona Valley
northeast of Canyon Country. The Antelope Valley Freeway (State Route 14) is located to the
south, providing access to the community via Agua Dulce Canyon Road and Escondido Canyon
Road. The community’s setting is distinctively rural and completely surrounded by hills,
imparting a feeling of separation from nearby urban areas. Vasquez Rocks County Park,
located just north of Agua Dulce off of State Route 14, is an area of unique geologic formations
that has been the site of many movies and television shows.
                                                 L-15                                   June, 2011

Land Use                                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Agua Dulce has been ranching country since the 1870’s. Mining activity in nearby Soledad
Canyon first brought attention to the area, bringing more ranchers into the community. The
construction of Sierra Highway and the Antelope Valley Freeway have increased accessibility
into the community, bringing additional residents; however, the land use character remains rural
and equestrian, with a small commercial “town center,” and a privately-owned airport.
Residents wish to maintain Agua Dulce as a rural community, but are generally open to
additional low-density, large-lot, equestrian-oriented homes in the area utilizing non-urban
infrastructure systems in accordance with its community standards district. There is also an
opportunity to enhance the rustic village center to provide residents with more goods and
services and serve as a community focal point.
West Ranch (Stevenson Ranch, Sunset Pointe, Westridge, and Pico Canyon)
West of Interstate 5 are various communities in unincorporated Los Angeles County that have a
common setting and shared interests, generally referred to as West Ranch. One of these is
Stevenson Ranch, located west of Interstate 5 and north of Pico Canyon Road, a master-
planned community developed in phases under a plan approved by Los Angeles County. The
project’s 4,000 acres are largely developed except for the last phase, which proposes 3,467
residential units. Over 100 acres of commercial uses were included, nearly all of which are
developed with regional commercial, restaurant and office uses along the freeway corridor
(Valencia Marketplace). The project also included 45 acres of parkland.
Adjacent to Stevenson Ranch is Westridge, a residential community that includes elementary,
junior high, and high school sites. South of Stevenson Ranch lie the residential community of
Sunset Pointe and the rural residential area of Pico Canyon, located west of The Old Road.
Pico Canyon extends into both City and County areas, and includes the Santa Clarita
Woodlands State Park, Towsley Canyon State Park, Ed Davis Park, and the historic oil town of
Mentryville. Mentryville is the location of Pico #4, the first successful oil well in the western
United States. Surrounding the developed areas are significant stands of oak trees and the
Lyon Canyon Significant Ecological Area.
The primary planning issues for Pico Canyon include compatibility of proposed developments
with the Lyon Canyon SEA, the Santa Clarita Woodlands, and other parks and natural areas in
the area.
F.      Specific Plans
Specific Plan Process
State planning law provides a process for local governments to use in approving large, complex
development projects in a manner that provides for long-term buildout, phased with construction
of infrastructure and public facilities, and supported with funding plans and implementation
strategies. Such projects may be approved using the specific plan process, pursuant to
Government Code Sections 65450-65457 and applicable local ordinances. Any applicant that
meets the minimum requirements for filing a specific plan (including public agencies) may
submit a project for review under these statutes, and each specific plan submittal will be
reviewed on its own merit by the reviewing authority, based on whether the project is located
within the City or the County.
June, 2011                         L-16

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Land Use
Every specific plan approved in California must be reviewed using the same process used for a
general plan or area plan, and must include the following components:
    •   The distribution, location, and extent of the uses of land, including open space, within the
        area covered by the plan;
    •   The proposed distribution, location, and extent and intensity of major components of
        public and private transportation, sewage, water, drainage, solid waste disposal, energy,
        and other essential facilities proposed to be located within the area covered by the plan
        and needed to support the land uses described in the plan;
    •   Standards and criteria by which development will proceed, and standards for the
        conservation, development, and utilization of natural resources, where applicable;
    •   A program of implementation measures, including regulations, programs, public works
        projects, and financing measures necessary to carry out the project;
    •   An explanation of how the specific plan is consistent with the General Plan and/or Area
        plan;
    •   Any other subjects who in the judgment of the planning agency are necessary or
        desirable for implementation of the General Plan and/or Area Plan.
Approved Specific Plans
Significant portions of the planning area encompassed by the General Plan are included in
specific plans that have already received land use approval. As these areas build out pursuant
to approved specific plans and subdivision maps, the resulting land uses will be integrated into
the Valley’s development pattern and circulation network. Therefore, the following previously
approved projects were considered in drafting the General Plan Land Use Element and other
related elements.
Newhall Ranch
The County of Los Angeles adopted the Newhall Ranch Specific Plan on May 27, 2003. The
planning area encompasses 11,963 acres and extends approximately 5 miles from east to west,
and 5½ miles from north to south, from about one mile west of Interstate 5 to the Ventura
County Line, both north and south of State Route 126. The southerly portion of the site contains
steep terrain and high plateaus of the Santa Susana Mountains; over 6,000 acres of the
planning area will remain in open space, including two special resource management areas.
The adopted plan will allow construction of 20,885 dwelling units, 629 acres of mixed-use
development, 67 acres of commercial, 249 acres of business park, and 37 acres of visitor
commercial uses. Neighborhood parks, a 15-acre lake, public trails, an 18-hole golf course, fire
stations, a branch library, and school sites are also planned, along with water and sewer
infrastructure. The specific plan states the project’s intent is to provide a high-quality, master
planned environment, which offers homes, shopping, employment, and recreational
opportunities. Development of the project is expected to occur over a 25-year timeframe.
A key design feature of the Newhall Ranch Specific Plan is its emphasis on the creation of
interrelated villages, separated by significant open space areas and natural landforms. The plan
avoids “leap-frog” development into the Santa Susana foothills and instead accommodates
                                                 L-17                                   June, 2011

Land Use                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
projected growth in areas adjacent to existing and planned infrastructure, urban services,
transportation routes and employment centers. Villages proposed by the project include
Landmark Village, Mission Village, Homestead Village, and Potrero Village.
Natural landmarks and topographical features define each village. According to the specific
plan, dividing the large project into villages allows for the creation of convenient village centers
and gives future residents optimal access to commercial, recreational, and public facilities. In
addition, this design gives residents access to nature by providing undeveloped open space
accessible by trails from each village. Land uses were located to accommodate and preserve
major natural landforms and significant environmental features, such as the river corridor,
ridgelines, hillsides, creeks, bluffs, and oak woodlands. Each village and its central activity area
will be allowed to develop a unique sense of identity, inspired by the natural features of the site.
The village concept was designed to provide residents with a greater sense of identity with their
community. Through its design and planned development pattern, the Newhall Ranch Specific
Plan reinforces the theme for the Santa Clarita Valley as a Valley of Villages.
Northlake
The Northlake Specific Plan was approved for 3,623 residential units, both single family and
multi-family, on 1,330 acres located two miles north of Castaic. The plan also calls for 450 acres
of open space, school sites, and a golf course; however, the project proponents have requested
revisions to the proposed project amenities that are under review by Los Angeles County. When
developed, this project will be considered a part of the Castaic village community.
Canyon Park (Fair Oaks Ranch)
The Canyon Park Specific Plan (commonly known as Fair Oaks Ranch) is a residential
development located between Sierra Highway and State Route 14, near Via Princessa. The
project includes 4,763 multi-family units and 637 single-family units on approximately 308 acres,
and is nearly built-out. The project is bisected by the Antelope Valley Freeway and contains no
commercial uses. Therefore, there is an opportunity to create a service center for Fair Oaks
Ranch in the vicinity of the project.
Whittaker Bermite Property
The 989-acre Whittaker Bermite site is situated in the center of the City and was used for over
80 years as a production site for military explosives and flares by various manufacturers.
Manufacturing operations ceased in 1987. During these years, manufacturing and testing of
various chemicals on the site involved use and improper disposal of hazardous materials,
resulting in chemical contamination of both soil and groundwater. Directly beneath the site lies
the Saugus Aquifer, a significant groundwater source for the Valley. Since manufacturing
operations ended, remediation of soil and groundwater contamination (including perchlorate)
has been ongoing; however, more progress must be made prior to redevelopment of the site.
The Porta Bella Specific Plan was approved for the property, which proposed clean-up of
contaminants and re-use of the site for mixed uses, including 1,244 single-family units,
1,667 multi-family units, 96 acres of commercial and office uses, 407 acres of open space, and
42 acres of recreational use. Extension of major roadways designed to traverse the planning
area include Via Princessa, Magic Mountain Parkway, and Santa Clarita Parkway. However,
more work is needed to ensure site clean-up and the location of uses in an appropriate manner
to avoid future health risks. The City has joined environmental agencies and the water district in
promoting remediation of this brownfield site and re-use of the property for productive purposes.
June, 2011                           L-18
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Land Use
Downtown Newhall Specific Plan
As noted above in the description of Newhall, the Downtown Newhall Specific Plan has been
adopted by the City to encourage mixed-use and transit-oriented development in the historic
community of Newhall, in order to promote new investment, spur economic development, and
create new residential opportunities in this area. Other opportunities include creation of an arts
district in the vicinity of existing theaters in the area, and construction of a new library. The
Downtown Newhall Specific Plan was adopted in 2005.
Valencia Specific Plans
The North Valencia Specific Plan was adopted in 1998. The project encompassed 707 acres
generally bordered by Newhall Ranch Road, Bouquet Canyon Road, Magic Mountain Parkway,
east of San Francisquito Creek. The Specific Plan provided for a mix of residential and
commercial uses, open space, and an industrial center. A significant segment of the Santa
Clara River was preserved as open space as part of the specific plan.
The North Valencia Specific Plan No. 2 was adopted in 2000 for 596 acres in the northern
portion of the City, generally located north of Newhall Ranch Road west of McBean Parkway.
The Specific Plan called for mixed-use development, including residential, industrial and
commercial uses. A major component of this project was preservation of open space in
environmentally sensitive areas along San Francisquito Creek.
Both of these Specific Plan areas have been fully built out.
Vista Canyon Specific Plan
On May 10, 2011 the City Council adopted the Vista Canyon Specific Plan subject to annexation
to the City. This project, which is in the Canyon Country area, includes a significant
employment center and town center for the eastern Santa Clarita Valley. The Vista Canyon
project is expected to create between 2,500 and 4,000 permanent jobs, the majority of these
being associated with the corporate office campus, professional office space retail uses
integrated around a “Main Street.”
Vista Canyon Ranch also proposes the development of 1,100 dwelling units and 950,000
square feet of commercial floor area, together with related infrastructure, including a new Multi-
Modal Transportation Station (Metrolink Station and Bus Transfer Station) and water
reclamation plant (which would provide recycled water for irrigation use on- and off-site).
The project would add another 21 acres of parks/recreation facilities. The developers are
proposing a new City park—the ten-acre Oak Park. Other recreational amenities include a
Town Green, a Community Garden, the River Education/Community Center and project trails,
including significant extensions of the Santa Clara River Trail. Up to six private recreational
facilities would be constructed throughout the project.
As part of the project proposal, there are approximately 13 acres of new public streets, including
the extension of Lost Canyon Road from Fair Oaks Ranch to Vista Canyon Road and the
construction of the Vista Canyon Road Bridge to connect Lost Canyon Road and Soledad
Canyon Road.
                                                 L-19                                  June, 2011

Land Use                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Pending and Future Specific Plans
At the time this General Plan was adopted, several specific plan projects were in the process of
being prepared for properties within the planning area, but were not yet ready for public
hearings or land use decisions. The City and County agreed that these projects would not be
shown on the Land Use Map or reflected in the City’s General Plan or the County’s Area Plan
until such time as each such specific plan project is completed and reviewed, in conjunction with
an environmental document prepared to meet the requirements of the California Environmental
Quality Act, and circulated for public review and input. However, the decision not to reflect these
projects in the City’s General Plan or the County’s Area Plan until the required review process
for each project is completed should not be interpreted to mean that any of the pending specific
plans will or will not be approved in the future. Nothing in this General Plan shall be interpreted
to preclude the future review of any application for a specific plan that is pending at the time of
General Plan adoption. If and when the applicants for each pending specific plan project
complete the requirements for review and approval, the decision on each project will be made
based on the merits of the project, which shall include conformance with all applicable policies
of the City’s General Plan or the County’s Area Plan. In addition, other specific plans may be
undertaken in the future that are not yet identified, and each specific plan will be evaluated
based on its own merits and conformance with the applicable policies of the City’s General Plan
or County’s Area Plan.
It should be noted that both the City and the County encourage use of the specific plan process
for preparation of comprehensive master plans for development. This process allows for
flexibility that can lead to innovative design solutions beyond that allowed by regulations in the
zoning ordinance. Particularly in mixed-use developments where walkable, pedestrian-oriented
neighborhoods are desired, such as near transit centers, the specific plan process is
encouraged. Policies have been included in this element to encourage preparation of specific
plans where appropriate to meet the goals for more healthy, vibrant, and attractive communities.
G.        Demographic Characteristics of the Santa Clarita Valley
Past Population Trends
A significant amount of the population growth in Los Angeles County over the past two decades
has occurred in North Los Angeles County, which includes both the Santa Clarita Valley and the
Antelope Valley (including the cities of Palmdale and Lancaster). In 2000 the City of Santa
Clarita was the fourth largest city within the County in terms of population (following Los
Angeles, Long Beach, and Glendale). The fastest-growing cities from 1990 to 2000 were Santa
Clarita, Palmdale and Lancaster, which maintained annual average growth rates significantly
higher than the County as a whole. During that decade, the Santa Clarita Valley grew by almost
60,000 residents to reach 212,611 by 2000, a population growth of over 39 percent.
June, 2011                           L-20

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                     Land Use
The Valley’s population has diversified as a result of this growth, with the percentage of
residents who are of Hispanic, Asian, African-American, and mixed ethnicity backgrounds
growing by over 75 percent between 1990 and 2000 (from 41,555 to 73,733). Households within
the Valley had a higher average household income than County residents as a whole ($83,900
in the Valley compared to $63,909 as a Countywide average in 2000). The population continues
to reflect larger households than the Countywide average, indicative of young families with
children. Average household size increased from 2.93 to 3.09 persons per household over the
Census decade. In the 2000 Census, the largest age group represented in the Valley was the “5
to 17” age bracket. Almost a third of the population in the planning area is under the age of 18,
and less than 10 percent of the population in 2000 were in the over 65-year age bracket.
Projections for Population and Households
Based on a detailed analysis of the planning area conducted by traffic analysis zones, staff from
the City and County have determined that population of the Santa Clarita Valley at full build-out
of the uses shown on the Land Use Maps of the City’s General Plan and the County’s Area Plan
will be approximately 460,000 to 485,000 residents, comprising approximately of 150,000 to
155,000 households. This analysis was conducted based on the need to project ultimate
development in terms of various indicators, including dwelling units, commercial-industrial
space, job creation, water use, traffic generation, noise generation, housing needs, park needs,
and other public services and facilities. In compiling these projections, staff members from the
City and County planning and traffic divisions reviewed data from multiple sources, including
existing geographic information system (GIS) data layers, existing and proposed zoning,
existing and proposed general plan land use designations, property subdivisions, existing
development patterns, pending development applications, approved planning entitlements,
topographic and environmental constraints, and other relevant information. The methodology
used by staff to develop these detailed demographic projections involved the following steps:
     1. Staff prepared projections for each traffic analysis zone (TAZ) contained in the traffic
        model. For purposes of traffic modeling, a TAZ is a portion of land within the planning
        area in which certain land uses have been designated, the development of which is
        expected to generate new vehicle trips to serve future development. Only undeveloped
        or under-utilized land will be expected to be used for new development that will generate
        new vehicle trips. Therefore, each TAZ must be analyzed to determine the percentage of
        land that is already fully built-out, and the amount of land that is available for new
        development or rebuilding. There are 455 TAZs in the traffic model for the planning area.
     2. Staff compared each TAZ with a current aerial photograph and Planning Department
        records to determine the amount of developable land in each one. Land was considered
        to be developable if it was vacant or under-utilized, privately owned, designated and
        zoned for future development, and free of major constraints such as ridgelines and
        floodways.
     3. For undeveloped and under-utilized land within each TAZ, staff estimated the projected
        actual build-out capacity under the draft Land Use Map, considering parcelization,
        surrounding development, access, topography, drainage patterns, infrastructure
        capacity, and similar site constraints.
                                                L-21                                  June, 2011

Land Use                                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
    4. The result of this analysis was an estimated build-out capacity for each TAZ in terms of
         dwelling unit number and type; non-residential development potential (including
         commercial, business park, retail, and institutional space); public uses, including
         government and school facilities, parks and open space; and land devoted to
         infrastructure (such as streets and highways, transmission corridors, and flood control
         easements).
The projections generated from the TAZ analysis represent staff’s best efforts to achieve a
realistic vision of actual build-out potential for the planning area. In preparing the One Valley
One Vision land use projections, staff acknowledged that portions of the planning area are
already largely developed, and that the City’s General Plan and the County’s Area Plan are not
based on a “clean slate” of vacant, undeveloped land. Existing uses and development patterns
must be recognized in planning for new uses.
For purposes of a theoretical comparison, the TAZ analysis could be compared to the “worst
case” build-out projections of the Land Use Maps of the City’s General Plan and County’s Area
Plan. The worst case scenario assumes that all existing uses are subject to demolition,
reconstruction, or intensification to achieve the maximum density allowed by the Land Use Map.
For example, if an area is designated for single-family residential uses at five dwelling units per
acre and the area is already developed at four dwellings per acre, the worst case scenario
assumes that the existing subdivisions would be replaced with new subdivisions at a higher
density, or that existing units would be subdivided into multi-family structures to achieve the
higher density. Because many areas of the Santa Clarita Valley have been developed within the
last 20 years with structures that have useful life-spans of 50 years or longer, staff determined
that it would be unreasonable to assume that all existing development would be replaced with
new development at the highest possible density allowed by the Land Use Map. For this
reason, the “worst case” scenario under the land use plan was not used as the basis for
demographic projections. Instead, the TAZ analysis described above formed the basis for
reasonable build-out projections of land use, dwelling units, population, and employment.
H.       Economic Issues for the Santa Clarita Valley
Economic Assets in the Valley
The Santa Clarita Valley contains a wide variety of retail, office, industrial, medical, and
entertainment centers that provide employment, goods, and services to both regional and local
market areas. As an example, the Valencia Gateway consists of six commerce centers,
including the regional mall, auto mall, office, and industrial parks; contains 4,700 acres; and
houses more than 5,000 businesses. At build-out, the Gateway will encompass 22.5 million
square feet. The following summary of some of the major economic assets in the Valley is
intended to be representative of the quality and scale of these developments, rather than a
complete listing of all business projects in the planning area.
Retail Centers. Primary shopping districts in the Valley include the following:
    •    Valencia Marketplace – a power center located west of Interstate 5 in Stevenson Ranch,
         containing a variety of big box anchor stores and supportive retail and food
         establishments;
June, 2011                           L-22

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                        Land Use
    •   Westfield Valencia Town Center – a regional shopping mall with almost 2 million square
        feet of retail, restaurants, and office space, and a cinema complex. In 2010, a 300,000-
        square foot expansion of the mall was opened with the goal of adding 40 new retailers,
        more outdoor pedestrian plazas and seating, and children’s play areas;
    •   Old Town Newhall – as planned within the adopted Downtown Newhall Specific Plan,
        this area has potential for growth into a prime specialty retail and dining area with a
        direct rail link to Los Angeles;
    •   The Valencia Auto Center - home to over 20 auto dealer brands located in central
        Valencia;
    •   The Plaza at Golden Valley – a lifestyle center on the east side of SR-14 at Golden
        Valley Road in Canyon Country, slated for 618,000 square feet of retail space for home
        and discount department stores, restaurants, specialty retail, a fire station and clinic.
Office Parks: Primary office parks in the Valley are generally located within the City adjacent to
the Golden State Freeway (Interstate 5) and include the following:
     •   Valencia Corporate Center – an 80 acre office park with 1.6 million square feet of office
         space;
     •   Town Center Drive – a 23-acre office park with 395,000 square feet of office space.
Industrial Parks: Primary industrial parks in the Valley include the following:
     •   Valencia Industrial Center - a 1,150 acre business park with 10.4 million square feet of
         manufacturing and warehousing space;
     •   Rye Canyon Business Park – a 377 acre business park with 3.1 million square feet of
         office, manufacturing and warehousing space;
     •   Gate King Industrial Park – a 203 acre business park with 4.2 million square feet of
         manufacturing and warehousing space approved but not yet constructed;
     •   Valencia Commerce Center – a 1,600 acre business park with 12.9 million square feet
         of manufacturing and warehousing space;
     •   Centre Pointe Business Park – a 240 acre business park with 4.5 million square feet of
         manufacturing, commercial and warehousing space.
Medical Center: The Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital (HMNMH) campus, located in
west Valencia with 750 employees, includes a 230-bed inpatient facility, medical offices and
outpatient services that provide health services to Valley residents. The HMNMH medical
campus currently includes the Santa Clarita Valley’s only trauma center. The approved 15-year
HMNMH Master Plan includes an additional inpatient building, three medical offices, on-site
parking facilities, and a helipad.
                                                  L-23                                   June, 2011

Land Use                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Entertainment Center: Six Flags Magic Mountain and Six Flags Hurricane Harbor theme parks
together attract more than 3 million annual visitors from the national and international tourist
markets with world-class roller coasters and water rides. The Six Flags theme parks are jointly
one of the Santa Clarita Valley’s largest employers, providing 3,900 jobs during the summer
months.
Higher Education Institutions: The Santa Clarita Valley is home to three colleges, with a total
enrollment of over 15,000 students and a variety of educational programs providing job training
and employment development, as described below:
     •  College of the Canyons (COC) – a full-service community college with an enrollment of
        approximately 16,000 students and two locations, the East and West Valley campuses.
        COC provides several award-winning programs focused on economic and workforce
        development of the Santa Clarita Valley, including the Center for Applied Competitive
        Technologies, the Advanced Technology Incubator, the Small Business Development
        center, and additional programs that retrain the existing workforce with marketable skill
        sets targeted to existing business industry clusters.
     •  California Institute of the Arts (CalArts) – the nation’s first art institute to offer Bachelors
        of Fine Arts and Master of Fine Arts in both the visual and performing arts, CalArts is
        dedicated to training and nurturing the next generation of professional artists, fostering
        brilliance and innovation within the broadest context possible.
     •  The Master’s College – a private four-year liberal arts college; a 10-year Master Plan
        was approved in 2009 which will add additional educational facilities, dormitories and a
        new chapel/auditorium.
Transportation Links: The location of the Santa Clarita Valley at the confluence of major
highway and rail corridors provides an excellent opportunity to move both people and freight
efficiently in and out of the Valley. These links include the following:
     •  Freeways - Interstate 5 provides links between the Los Angeles basin, the San
        Joaquin/Central Valley, and northern California. State Route 14 provides access to
        Palmdale and Lancaster, and to major vacation resorts along the eastern Sierra Nevada
        Mountains. State Route 126 provides access to the coastal areas of Ventura County.
        Just to the south of the planning area, Interstate 210 provides links to the San Gabriel
        Valley and Inland Empire region of San Bernardino and Riverside Counties.
     •  Rail – Metrolink, a service of the Southern California Regional Rail Authority, is a
        regional rail system providing commuter and passenger service between the Valley and
        employment centers in the San Fernando Valley, Los Angeles, and other areas to the
        south. There are three Metrolink stations in the Santa Clarita Valley, which are served
        by a public bus system. In addition, plans for a future high-speed rail linking northern and
        southern California show a route generally following State Route 14 through the Newhall
        Pass.
        Freight rail service is provided by Union Pacific, using the same tracks as Metrolink.
        Freight rail spurs service some of the industrial areas of the community.
     •  Airports – the Valley has access to the Los Angeles International Airport, the Bob Hope
        (formerly Burbank/Glendale/Pasadena) Airport, and the Palmdale Airport. The Agua
        Dulce Airport is also located in the Santa Clarita Valley.
June, 2011                           L-24

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                     Land Use
Employment Trends
From 1992 to 2005, almost 40,000 new jobs were created in the Santa Clarita Valley. Between
2000 and 2005, job growth averaged about 3,900 jobs per year. Most of this job growth
occurred in the manufacturing, services, retail trade, and construction sectors. The planning
area is becoming a significant employment center in north Los Angeles County.
Growth in construction was due to the rapid rate of development in the Valley since 1990, but
construction as a component of the economy will slow as the Valley builds out and construction
activities decline. More lasting are jobs in the manufacturing sector, which has added jobs in the
Valley; this sector is involved in manufacture of machinery, transportation equipment, and
electronics. Wholesale trade also showed an increase in job creation, reflecting the Valley’s
excellent location for warehousing and distribution of goods.
The Services sector accounted for the greatest number of new jobs in the planning area, adding
18,960 new jobs between 1992 and 2005. Nearly half of these were in Business Services,
including office workers and support staff. Job growth in other areas included Transportation
and Utilities, and Retail Trade.
The total number of jobs in the Santa Clarita Valley in 2005 was 124,200, of which about
60 percent (74,889) were located within the City limits. The remaining 49,311 jobs were located
in the unincorporated County areas, primarily west of Interstate 5 within Magic Mountain,
Stevenson Ranch, and the Valencia Commerce Center (including the Postal Distribution
Center). Major Valley employers include Six Flags Magic Mountain, the William S. Hart School
District, Princess Cruises, the Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital, Woodward HRT, and
Quest Diagnostics.
Although the planning area had higher job growth than the County as a whole, average pay per
worker in the Valley has been only about 75 percent of the County average. In 2000, an
average employee in the Valley earned $29,201 annually compared to $39,671 for Los Angeles
County. This may reflect the number of service workers in the Valley, the lack of major
corporate headquarters, and fewer jobs in financial and legal services.
Employment Projections
To project future job growth, a variety of data sources were used to identify actual employment
numbers for existing businesses in the Valley. Based on this data, an average number of jobs
per square foot of non-residential uses was derived; this number projected an employment
generation range of one employee per approximately 550 to 725 square feet of floor area. Staff
then estimated the potential for future construction or expansion of non-residential development
on vacant and underutilized land in the planning area that is developable and designated for
employment-generating uses. Based on this analysis, staff estimated that over 59 million square
feet of new commercial, industrial and/or institutional space could be built within the Valley. (It
should be noted that the actual number may fluctuate based upon floor areas of new
construction). Using the employment generation factors and the estimated square footage of
new employment-generating uses, staff developed a range of estimated employment at build-
out of the General Plan Land Use Map. The estimated number of new jobs under General Plan
build-out ranges from 98,322 to 128,850. Added to existing jobs within the Valley, the total
number of jobs in the planning area is estimated to range from 217,910 to 286,254 at General
Plan build-out.
                                                 L-25                                 June, 2011

Land Use                                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Projections for Commercial and Industrial Development
To project future commercial and industrial development, staff members from the City and
County conducted a detailed analysis of the planning area according to traffic analysis zones.
This task force reviewed data from multiple sources, including existing geographic information
system (GIS) data layers, existing and proposed zoning, existing and proposed General and
Area Plan land use designations, property subdivisions, existing development patterns, pending
development applications, approved planning entitlements, topographic and environmental
constraints, and other relevant information. The methodology used by staff to develop these
detailed development projections involved the following steps:
1. Staff prepared projections for each traffic analysis zone (TAZ) contained in the traffic model.
    For purposes of traffic modeling, a TAZ is a portion of land within the planning area in which
    certain land uses have been designated, the development of which is expected to generate
    new vehicle trips to serve future development. Only undeveloped or under-utilized land is
    expected to contain future development that will generate new vehicle trips. Therefore,
    each TAZ must be analyzed to determine the percentage of land that is already fully built-
    out, and the amount of land that is available for new development or rebuilding. There are
    455 TAZs in the planning area’s traffic model.
2. Staff compared each TAZ with a current aerial photograph and Planning Department
    records to determine the amount of developable land in each one. Land was considered to
    be developable if it was vacant or under-utilized, privately owned, appropriately designated
    and zoned, and free of major constraints such as ridgelines and floodways.
3. For undeveloped and under-utilized land within each TAZ, staff estimated the projected
    actual build-out capacity under the draft Land Use Map, considering historical development
    trends, parcelization, surrounding development, access, topography, drainage patterns,
    infrastructure capacity, and similar site constraints.
4. The result of this analysis was an estimated build-out capacity for each TAZ in terms of
    commercial and industrial development potential (square footage). The estimated build-out
    capacity for the entire planning area is 40,896,590 square feet of commercial space and
    40,735,960 square feet of industrial space.
The projections generated from the TAZ analysis represent staff’s best efforts to achieve a
realistic vision of actual commercial and industrial development potential for the planning area.
In preparing the One Valley One Vision commercial and industrial development projections, staff
acknowledged that portions of the planning area are already largely developed and that the
Area Plan is not based on a “clean slate” of vacant, undeveloped land. Existing uses and
development patterns must be recognized in planning for new uses.
For purposes of a theoretical comparison, the TAZ analysis could be compared to the “worst
case” commercial and industrial build-out projections of the Area Plan land use map. The worst
case scenario assumes that all existing uses are subject to demolition, reconstruction, or
intensification to achieve the maximum density allowed by the land use map. For commercial
and industrial uses, maximum density is established by the calculation of floor to area ratios
(FARs). An FAR is the total floor area of a building to the area of land on which the building is
located. The Area Plan specifies a maximum density of .50 FAR for the Neighborhood
Commercial (CN) land use designation, .75 FAR for the Community Commercial (CC) land use
designation, 1.0 FAR for the Industrial (I) land use designations and a maximum density of 2.0
June, 2011                         L-26

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                      Land Use
FAR for the Regional Commercial (CR) and Business Park (BP) land use designations.
Because many areas of the Santa Clarita Valley have been developed within the last 20 years
that have useful life-spans of 50 years of longer, staff determined that it would be unreasonable
to assume that all existing development would be replaced with new development at the highest
possible density allowed by the land use map. For this reason, the “worst case” scenario under
the land use plan was not used as the basis for commercial and industrial build-out projections.
Instead, the TAZ analysis described above formed the basis for reasonable build-out
projections.
Jobs/Housing Balance
The jobs/housing balance compares the available housing and available jobs within a
community. Currently, over half of employed Valley residents must travel out of the Valley to
work. In 2000, the Valley had a jobs-household ratio of 0.88, as compared to the County-wide
ratio of 1.43 jobs per household. By 2008, the Valley’s jobs/housing ration was estimated to
range from 1.3 to 1.5 jobs per household. Achieving a jobs/housing balance can significantly
reduce the total number of vehicle trips on the road network and provide greater quality of life
for residents. Improving the jobs/housing balance requires planning for the location, intensity,
and nature of jobs and housing in order to encourage a reduction in vehicle trips and miles
traveled, and a corresponding increase in the use of mass transit and alternative transportation
methods such as bicycles, carpools, and walking. Strategies include locating higher-density
housing near employment centers, promoting infill development, promoting transit-oriented
development, actively recruiting businesses that will utilize the local workforce, developing a
robust telecommunications infrastructure (including broadband service to homes and
businesses), developing workforce skills consistent with evolving local economies, and
providing affordable housing opportunities within the community.
Using projected estimates of employment and residential development allowed by the Land Use
Maps of the City’s General Plan and the County’s Area Plan, it is estimated that the jobs-
housing ratio within the Santa Clarita Valley will maintain a minimum of 1.5 jobs per household
and could approach nearly 2:1 depending on development trends. The City and County have
identified a goal of achieving at least 1.5 jobs per household, as stated in the policy section of
this Element.
Economic Development Efforts
The term economic development as used in the context of this Land Use Element describes
efforts by the City and the County to promote land use planning that enhances the local
economy of the Santa Clarita Valley, by expanding job creation, provision of goods and services
to both retail and wholesale consumers, movement of goods, diversification of the economic
base, enhancement of land values, attraction of new businesses to the area, and retention and
expansion of existing businesses within the Valley. Although successful economic development
will benefit local jurisdictions by enhancing the local tax base, this is not the primary
consideration for these efforts. The City and County understand that economic vitality is
necessary to ensure the health and well-being of Valley residents.
In 2006, the City obtained approval of a State of California Enterprise Zone designation as one
of 42 designated zones throughout the State. The Santa Clarita Enterprise Zone designation
became effective July 1, 2007 and will remain in effect for 15 years. The designation provides
for tax credits for qualifying businesses that can substantially reduce their State income tax
obligation.
                                                L-27                                   June, 2011

Land Use                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
The City has formed a Redevelopment Agency, with the City Council acting as the Agency
Board of Directors. The Redevelopment Agency has designated a Redevelopment Project Area
and adopted a Redevelopment Plan for this area, which generally includes about 913 acres
within Downtown Newhall, along Main Street and south of Lyons Avenue. The Agency funded
the preparation of the Downtown Newhall Specific Plan and is undertaking roadway and
infrastructure improvements in the area pursuant to the adopted plan. During the life of the
Redevelopment Plan, the Redevelopment Agency expects approximately 1,780 housing units
will be either constructed or rehabilitated within the Redevelopment Area.
The City of Santa Clarita’s Economic Development mission is to aid in the economic growth of
the Santa Clarita Valley by fostering and encouraging responsible economic development
opportunities that result in: 1) a jobs/housing balance established through quality employment
opportunities for residents; 2) an economic base through increased sales tax generation; and 3)
economic wealth by attracting external monies to the local economy.
In working towards a jobs/housing balance, the City and County have targeted four main
industry clusters for expansion in the Santa Clarita Valley – Entertainment, Aerospace,
Biomedical, and Technology, further described below.
     •  Entertainment: According to a 2005 Labor Base Analysis compiled by Alfred Gobar and
        Associates, approximately 6,600 Santa Clarita residents currently work in the film
        industry and approximately 58 percent of those workers commute out of the Valley for
        work. The Valley is home to over 20 sound stages that serve as the ongoing production
        home for several television shows as well as hosting temporary filming for movies,
        commercials, and music videos.
     •  Aerospace: With existing employers such as Aerospace Dynamics, ITT Aerospace
        Technologies, and Woodward HRT, the future is bright for aerospace advancement in
        the Santa Clarita Valley. Through a partnership with College of the Canyons, local
        aerospace companies in the Santa Clarita Valley have been able to train new and retrain
        existing employees. This training partnership has produced a collaboration model that is
        recognized statewide for its innovation.
     •  Biomedical: Several companies have relocated to the Santa Clarita Valley since 2000
        that specialize in biomedical and life sciences, creating a biomedical cluster in the Valley
        with companies such as Mann Biomedical, Advanced Bionics, Quest Diagnostics,
        Boston Scientific, BioNess, Celestis, and more. Many of these businesses are located in
        the Mann Biomedical Park, located in the Rye Canyon Business Park. The Valley is
        now home to more than 1,100 biotechnology jobs, and there are opportunities for
        continued job growth in this clean industry to create high paying jobs for residents of the
        Valley.
     •  Technology: A unique feature of the Santa Clarita Valley’s business environment is the
        location of a thriving business district. The Valencia Gateway hosts nearly 1,500
        companies and 45,000 employees, making it the largest and fastest growing center for
        business, technology, and industry in Los Angeles County. Three of Southern
        California’s premier technology companies merged in 2005 to offer audio, video, and
        information technology services to businesses, homeowners and homebuilders, all
        under one roof, with the creation of Access Tech, Inc. in Valencia.
June, 2011                          L-28

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                        Land Use
In order to reach the goal of enhancing and expanding the local economic base, the City and
the County work to attract and retain businesses in the retail, restaurant, and entertainment
sectors that Santa Clarita Valley residents wish to patronize, thereby reducing sales tax leakage
to other areas outside the Valley.
To generate economic wealth from external sources, the City and the County target two primary
opportunities: location filming and visitor attraction. These efforts are described below:
    •   The City of Santa Clarita launched its Film Office in 2002 to increase filming in the Santa
        Clarita Valley and to brand the Valley as one of Los Angeles County’s most filmed and
        film-friendly areas. Santa Clarita has several advantages for the film industry, including a
        varied landscape suitable to depict international and domestic locations as well as being
        located within the 30-mile zone of several studios and production companies. Despite
        statewide loss of filming to other states and countries in recent years, the Santa Clarita
        Valley has been able to increase location filming. In 2007, location filming contributed
        over $20 million to the local economy.
    •   In addition to the tourist attractions of Six Flags Magic Mountain and Six Flags Hurricane
        Harbor theme parks, the City focuses on visitor attractions through event tourism. The
        City sponsors or supports several special events throughout the year to attract visitors
        who positively impact the local economy without increasing need for public services.
        Some of these events include the Amgen Tour of California cycling race, the Cowboy
        Festival, and adult and youth sport tournaments. These events along with the two
        theme parks in the Valley draw more than 3 million business and tourist travelers
        annually to the Valley.
I.      Urban Form, Community Design, and City Beautification
The legal basis for all land use regulation is the police power granted to cities and counties to
protect the public health, safety, and welfare of their residents. Justice William O. Douglas,
speaking for the Supreme Court on this matter, wrote:
        The concept of the public welfare is broad and inclusive…the values it represents are
        spiritual as well as physical, aesthetic as well as monetary. It is within the power of the
        legislature to determine that the community should be beautiful as well as healthy,
        spacious as well as clean, well balanced as well as carefully patrolled. (Berman v.
        Parker, 348 U. S. at 33)
As noted above, the authority granted to local planning agencies has been interpreted by the
Supreme Court as extending to land use regulation for the purpose of creating an attractive,
aesthetically pleasing community character. In 2004, the California Legislature codified this
authority by adopting the following legislation:
        The text and diagrams in the Land Use Element that address the location and extent of
        land uses, and the zoning ordinances that implement these provisions, may also express
        community intentions regarding urban form and design. These expressions may
        differentiate neighborhoods, districts, and corridors, provide for a mixture of land uses
        and housing types within each, and provide specific measures for regulating
        relationships between buildings, and between buildings and outdoor public areas,
        including streets. (California Government Code Section 65302.4)
                                                  L-29                                  June, 2011

Land Use                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
The City of Santa Clarita has adopted the Community Character and Design Guidelines (2009)
and a Beautification Master Plan (2001) which contain design guidelines for individual
development projects and for overall community design. During the One Valley One Vision
planning effort undertaken by the City and the County to develop consistent plans for the Santa
Clarita Valley, much discussion focused on the urban form and design characteristics desired
throughout the Valley.
Urban form refers to the combination of individual elements in the built environment which
together make up the cities and neighborhoods in which we live, work, play, and travel: the
houses, schools, parking lots, shopping centers, streets, parks, business centers, offices and
public buildings which together create urban places. The idea of urban form can be considered
at varying scales of development. At the largest scale, the distribution of land uses and open
space within the Valley can be considered one aspect of urban form. At the smallest scale,
within the context of an individual development site, urban form can describe the placement of a
building on a lot, the location of parking and access, and the height and massing of the building
relative to the street. At an intermediate scale, urban form can describe the physical
relationships between neighborhoods and streets, and between residential and non-residential
uses. Urban form is partly determined by natural features in the area, such as rivers, mountains,
lakes and forests. Urban form also results from thousands of small, incremental decisions made
over many years, each decision adding a building, parking lot, or other feature to the urban
landscape. Sometimes these decisions result in unintended consequences that are not
recognized until much later. Urban planners use terms such as density, concentration,
centrality, diversity, mixed use, connectivity, and proximity to define aspects of urban form.
Community design is a term often used by planners to refer to the overall style and “look” of a
community, based on predominant architectural styles, landscape materials, use of signs, street
lights and street furniture, and other aspects of the built environment that convey a visual
message about the community’s setting, history, and character. For example, mountain
communities often encourage use of gable roof designs and architecture typical of European
mountain areas; desert communities often emphasize use of adobe-style southwestern motifs;
and California Mission communities often promote Mission-style buildings. Collectively, these
elements are referred as the “community design” of the area. Even communities that do not
have specific design themes such as Alpine, Mission, or Southwest, often develop a general
design style based on prevalent development trends in the region. Cities that have no
community design standards risk losing a particular community identity, as corporations and
franchises that use standard building plans tend to construct the same big boxes, chain stores,
and fast food restaurants throughout their service area. Loss of community identity has been
criticized by urban planners and social critics in recent years, most notably in James Howard
Kunstler’s book The Geography of Nowhere, which labels many modern cities as “depressing,
brutal, ugly, unhealthy, and spiritually degrading”.
City beautification, as used in the City’s master plan, refers to the City of Santa Clarita’s efforts
to enhance public spaces such as streets, gateways, public buildings, and plazas with
landscaping, lighting, signage and other improvements, in order to eliminate blight and beautify
the city. Beautification also includes ongoing maintenance of these improvements.
A summary of how the General Plan deals with urban form, community design, and
beautification in the Santa Clarita Valley is provided below.
June, 2011                          L-30

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Land Use
Urban Form
At a macro scale, looking at the distribution of land uses throughout the Santa Clarita Valley,
development has been shaped by the National Forest lands occupying the mountain ranges to
the north, east, and south of Valley communities. The Land Use Maps for the City’s General
Plan and the County’s Artea Plan have reinforced the concentration of urban land uses within
central portions of the Valley by designating significant areas of open space and rural residential
uses between more developed areas and the National Forest lands. The intent of these
designations is to maintain urban uses within the flatter portions of the Valley that have access
to infrastructure, roads, and public facilities, and to minimize encroachment of urban
development into hillside areas. The overall urban form has also preserved open space near the
Santa Clara River throughout most of the Valley, in order to protect water quality and provide
scenic views, recreational trails, and habitat preservation.
At the intermediate scale, or neighborhood level of urban form, the City’s General Plan and the
County’s area plan provide opportunities in some areas to create more urban environments with
mixed uses, walkable pathways, and ready access to public transit. Residential densities and
building heights in these areas have been increased to promote additional housing opportunities
in proximity to supportive commercial and public services. In particular, the areas around rail
commuter stations in Newhall and Saugus have been designated through specific plans with
denser mixed uses to promote transit-oriented development, as suggested by SCAG in the
Compass 2% Strategy discussed in Section D, above. The urban form desired in these areas is
called Transit-Oriented Development (TOD), which is defined as moderate- to high-density
development located within an easy walk of a major transit stop, generally with a mix of
residential, employment, and shopping opportunities. TOD encourages walking and transit use
without excluding the automobile. TOD can be new construction or redevelopment of one or
more buildings whose design and orientation facilitate transit use. Benefits of a well-designed,
vibrant TOD neighborhood include increased transit ridership and decrease of vehicle trips;
provision of mobility choices; increased public safety; reduction in household income devoted to
transportation cost; reduced air pollution and energy consumption; conservation of resources
and open space; enhanced economic development; and increased housing supply.
In order to promote TOD, policies have been included in the General Plan that encourage
supportive densities, a mix of land uses, and design characteristics which may include but are
not limited to higher residential density, reduced parking requirements, traffic calming strategies,
street patterns with smaller blocks and high connectivity, and architecture that orients buildings
to sidewalks, plazas and parks, rather than to parking lots. Within the planning area, transit-
oriented development is planned in proximity to the Metrolink stations in downtown Newhall,
Valencia, and Canyon Country (at the permanent east-Valley station location).
At the scale of site-specific development, the General Plan contains policies to encourage the
maintenance of neighborhood character in the various villages throughout the planning area,
and to ensure that each new development incorporates measures for pedestrian accessibility,
multi-modal opportunities, water conservation and quality, energy conservation, and other
similar measures.
Throughout all elements and policies of the General Plan, the focus has been to avoid the
negative effects of urban sprawl. Urban sprawl has been described by Oliver Gillham in The
Limitless City as “a form of urbanization distinguished by leapfrog patterns of development,
commercial strips, low density, separated land uses, automobile dominance, and a minimum of
public open space.” Urban sprawl is a function of the following factors:
                                                 L-31                                   June, 2011

Land Use                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
     •   The strength or vibrancy of activity centers and downtown areas;
     •   Accessibility of the street network;
     •   Residential density;
     •   The mix of homes, jobs, and services at the neighborhood level.
In general, areas with vibrant commercial areas, accessible and walkable street networks,
higher residential densities, and mixed uses can avoid the urban forms characteristic of urban
sprawl. Sprawl is created by both transportation and land use patterns; therefore, both issues
must be addressed in order to avoid the negative effects of this urban form. Policies have been
included in both the Land Use and Circulation Elements to address this issue.
Community Design
According to the City of Santa Clarita’s Architectural Design Guidelines, “no single architectural
theme is being promoted, but rather the emphasis is to promote variety…Caution should be
exercised when considering architectural styles that have recently become popular (i.e.
’trendy’), but have not yet stood the test of time. In addition, historic styles that cannot be
faithfully replicated should be avoided.”
In keeping with the Valley of Villages concept, each neighborhood or community within the City
may define the community characteristics that are considered appropriate for that area. For
example, residents in Canyon Country have endorsed rustic and natural building styles with
emphasis on materials such as wood, stone, and enhanced paving. Design standards specific
to Sand Canyon and Placerita Canyon have been included in the City’s Zoning Ordinance, and
will remain in place. Because of its historical character, development in Newhall is subject to a
Special Standards District and the Downtown Newhall Specific Plan standards. Saugus, an
area that is largely developed but may experience rebuilding over time, is seeking renovation of
its older commercial areas with more architectural detailing. Valencia, with the largest
commercial and industrial areas in the city, is also the site of more modern multi-story
development and contemporary designs. Although Valencia is nearly built out, any new
development within the remaining industrial portions of Valencia will be required to follow the
City’s design guidelines.
Within the County portion of the planning area, the design standards for Newhall Ranch are
outlined in the adopted Specific Plan. The Community Standards Districts adopted by Los
Angeles County will maintain desired design characteristics in Agua Dulce and Castaic.
City Beautification
Because the City and County are working together to promote comprehensive planning for the
Santa Clarita Valley, opportunities exist for the One Valley One Vision effort to identify means of
preserving and enhancing the scenic environment through a common approach to streetscape
design and landscaping along arterial streets and highways and major gateways. In addition,
preservation and enhancement of significant ridgelines, hillsides, and the Santa Clara River
provide opportunities for beautification efforts throughout the Valley.
1.       Streetscapes along Major Arterials
In its Beautification Plan, the City has identified a goal of providing landscaped medians within
major arterial roadways, in order to provide aesthetic appeal, control vehicle circulation, calm
traffic, and provide area for directional and traffic signs. Specifically, the following arterials are
identified for landscape median enhancement:
June, 2011                            L-32

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Land Use
    •   Via Princessa
    •   Santa Clarita Parkway
    •   Soledad Canyon Road
    •   Railroad Avenue
    •   Newhall Ranch Road (Cross Valley Connector)
    •   Lyons Avenue
    •   Sierra Highway
    •   Bouquet Canyon Road
Standardized, drought-tolerant plant palettes along with decorative concrete are desired in the
medians, which will help to enhance and unify the community. Policies and implementation
measures have been included in this Element to promote coordination between the City and
County on uniform approaches to streetscape design, including plant materials, hardscape, and
street furniture.
2.      Unified Sign Program and Street Furniture
Another area in which the City and County can coordinate beautification efforts is provision of
unified signs, especially for regional trails, trail heads, open space and preserve areas. In
addition, consistent street furniture such as bus shelters, benches and trash cans can be used
to unify streetscapes throughout the Valley.
Both the City and the County will continue to require new development to provide utilities
underground, in order to avoid the visual effects of overhead lines. In addition, the two agencies
may coordinate on undergrounding projects for major arterials where appropriate.
3.      Preservation of Significant Ridgelines, Hillsides, and Scenic Resources
The Santa Clarita Valley is characterized by numerous canyons, hills, and mountains. The
planning area consists of a mountainous complex of sedimentary rock formations dissected by
long, narrow tributary valleys of the Santa Clara River. The Valley floor, which ranges in
elevation from 1,000 to 3,000 feet above sea level, is surrounded by mountain ranges, including
the San Gabriel, Santa Susana, and Sierra Pelona ranges. About half of the planning area
consists of land on slopes of 10 percent or less, with the remaining area containing steeper
slopes.
Both the City and the County have recognized the hillside areas of the Valley to be important
resources and have adopted hillside management regulations to restrict development on
steeper slopes, but the current hillside ordinances of the two agencies differ as to both process
and intent. The County’s ordinance applies to average slopes of 25 percent and greater, while
the City regulates development on areas with an average cross slope of greater than 10
percent. The ordinances also vary in terms of development requirements for hillside areas.
While both the City and the County regulate density of development based upon slope
steepness, the City’s ordinance also regulates building placement to preserve designated
ridgelines. Currently, the County has not delineated significant ridgelines throughout the
planning area, but has done so within the Castaic Community Special Standards District.
Although County policies do not prohibit building placement on ridgelines, the County’s
ordinance is intended to protect hillsides from environmental degradation, preserve public safety
and property, and maintain the natural topography to the extent possible. The County has
prepared Hillside Design Guidelines (1989) to assist developers in preparing plans for hillside
areas, but these are advisory only. The County’s hillside ordinance requires no discretionary
review for new development below density thresholds. The City’s ordinance requires
preservation of natural topographic features, designated ridgelines, maintenance of off-site and
on-site views, and landform grading.
                                                L-33                                    June, 2011

Land Use                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Sensitive treatment of the Valley’s prominent hillsides and ridgelines is considered to be
important for several reasons. These features contribute to the character of the Valley of
Villages by forming a distinctive backdrop between neighborhood communities. They provide a
scenic open space greenbelt around the perimeter of the Valley and provide residents with a
connection to the natural mountain environment. In addition, as the supply of land in level
portions of the Valley diminishes, the development pressure for building in hillside areas is likely
to increase. Therefore, it was considered to be important in the One Valley One Vision planning
effort to reach agreement between the City and the County on a coordinated approach to
ridgeline preservation and hillside protection, and policies have been added to the Land Use
Element to address these issues.
4.       Preservation of the Santa Clara River as an Ecological Resource
The Santa Clara River traverses the entire Valley and represents a joint opportunity to preserve
and plan for the protection and enhancement of this significant resource. Los Angeles County
has designated over 40,000 acres adjacent to the Santa Clara River as a Significant Ecological
Area, which encompasses the surface and subsurface hydrology of the river from its
headwaters to the western county border. As the last unchannelized river in Los Angeles
County, the Santa Clara River represents opportunities to support diverse wildlife and
vegetation communities. In some areas of the Valley open space and trails are provided
adjacent to the river, and future plans for Newhall Ranch will preserve the river corridor in that
project. Land use policies have been included to require that future planning in both City and
County areas adjacent to the river consider the scenic and environmental qualities of this
resource, with the goal of creating a continuous greenbelt along the river to the extent feasible.
J.       Planning for Public Health and Environmental Quality
Throughout much of the last sixty years, a period that has seen substantial growth in suburban
areas, the relationship between city planning and public health has often received little
emphasis in local land use policies. Planners have tended to focus more on other aspects of
the urban environment such as zoning regulation, design guidelines, provision of infrastructure,
and economic development. Recently, however, several studies have raised concerns about
the link between health and the urban environment, particularly the effects of urban sprawl.
These studies cite increasing cases of obesity, diabetes, asthma, cancer, depression, and other
ills that appear to be related to the lifestyle in modern urban areas.1 In the book Urban Sprawl
and Public Health, the authors ask:
1
   See Urban Sprawl and Public Health: Designing, Planning, and Building for Healthy Communities, by
Howard Frumkin, Lawrence Frank, and Richard Jackson, Island Press, Washington, 2004, for an
extensive bibliography on the subject.
June, 2011                           L-34

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                         Land Use
          What is life like in the expanding metropolitan areas? It is automobile-oriented; many
          young families live in neighborhoods with neither sidewalks nor walkable destinations. It
          is transient; most Americans cannot live in the same community throughout their lives
          and grow old with friends from school or child-raising years. It lacks diversity; in
          homogeneous subdivisions, many children grow up never befriending or even meeting
          anybody from a lower social class or, for that matter, from a wealthier social class. It is
          restrictive; many young people without driving licenses or cars, living in subdivisions
          without shops, community centers, and public transportation, are bored and alienated.
          As we age and reach the point where we no longer should be driving, there are few
          options such as walkable town centers with nearby services and user-friendly transit, a
          matter of growing concern to the baby boomer generation.2
Post-World War II actions of the federal government that led to creation of sprawling suburbs
around American cities, including funding of freeway construction and provision of home
mortgage lending guarantees, were intended to promote adequate housing, jobs, and healthy
lifestyles. However, some of the unintended consequences of suburban development are now
being recognized. Increased use of the automobile for commuting between suburban residential
areas and urban job centers has raised air pollution levels significantly, leading to rising rates of
respiratory illness and contributing to climate change. Increased paving over native vegetation
and soil to create streets and parking lots has resulted in more stormwater runoff and less
infiltration of surface water into the water tables, causing increased water pollution and flood
control needs. Lengthy commutes by parents to out-of-town jobs takes away valuable time with
their children. Young people and seniors without access to vehicles become isolated. Increased
energy use for gasoline, and for heating and cooling of inefficient building construction, has
increased our dependence on fossil fuels. Sedentary lifestyles contribute to epidemics of
obesity, diabetes and associated diseases. In addition, urban environments dominated by
automobile use are often unsightly.
According to the U. S. Green Building Council, new development can affect ecosystems in
many ways, including land consumption, habitat destruction, and increased erosion. “The
impacts of increased impervious surfaces to stormwater runoff should be controlled to mimic
natural conditions and protect water quality…Heat from the sun is absorbed by buildings and
paved surfaces and is radiated back, increasing temperatures in surrounding areas. External
lighting systems may cause light pollution to the night sky and interfere with nocturnal ecology.”3
New development also affects the environment based on the need and options for travel to and
from the site. According to the Federal Bureau of Transportation Statistics, vehicle use in the
United States nearly tripled, from 1 to 2.85 trillion miles per year, between 1970 and 2002.
Vehicles are responsible for approximately 20 percent of U. S. greenhouse gas emissions
annually. Vehicle fuel consumption and emissions contribute to climate change, smog, and
particulate pollution, all of which have negative impacts on human health. The infrastructure
required to support vehicle travel (parking and roadway surfaces, service stations, fuel
distribution networks, etc.) increases the consumption of land and nonrenewable resources,
alters storm water flow, and absorbs heat energy exacerbating heat island effects.
The use of zoning to separate land uses by allocating different uses within different areas was
intended to create more orderly and organized cities. In the early years of the 1900’s, zoning
was used and supported by the courts to separate residences from noxious industrial uses. In
the One Valley One Vision planning effort, the City and County have addressed the public
2
  Op. cit., page xiii.
3
  U. S. Green Building Council, LEED-NC (New Construction) Version 2.2 Reference Guide, 2006, page
19.
                                                L-35                                     June, 2011

Land Use                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
health issues associated with urban sprawl and separation of land uses through the Land Use
Maps and policies found in all of the elements of the City’s General Plan and the County’s Area
Plan. The Land Use Maps have been designed to limit urban uses within rural and hillside
areas, in order to preserve a greenbelt around the developed portions of the Santa Clarita
Valley and promote infill development within the urban core areas. Opportunities to mix
compatible service uses with residential uses are provided within all rural and urban residential
land use designations, subject to agency review. Commercial land use designations will allow
inclusion of multi-family residential uses, where appropriate. Mixed-use designations have been
included for transit-oriented urban areas, underutilized commercial corridors, and neighborhood
village areas. Emphasis has been placed on higher residential densities near transit centers to
limit dependence on the automobile and promote non-motorized transportation methods, and
policies have been included to ensure that public health factors such as walkability are
considered in all aspects of design review for future development projects.
K.      Coordination of Land Use Plan with Resources and Other Agencies
In addition to the issues identified in the preceding sections, State law requires that a Land Use
Element be coordinated with other agencies to ensure that adequate resources and support
services will be provided in the planning area to support build-out of the designations shown on
the Land Use Map. A summary of how the Land Use Element has addressed these issues
follows.
Water Availability
The Castaic Lake Water Agency (CLWA) was formed in 1962 for the purpose of contracting with
the California Department of Water Resources (DWR) to provide a supplemental supply of
imported water to the water purveyors in the Valley. CLWA serves an area of 195 square miles
in Los Angeles and Ventura Counties, and wholesales imported water to local retail water
purveyors through an extensive transmission pipeline system. In 2005, the retail water
purveyors served about 65,800 connections.
The California Urban Water Planning Act requires water utilities with more than 3,000
connections to update and submit an Urban Water Management Plan (UWMP) every five years.
In 2005, the Castaic Lake Water Agency (CLWA) prepared an UWMP that included CLWA and
four local retail water purveyors that provide retail water service to customers in the Santa
Clarita Valley: CLWA Santa Clarita Water Division; Newhall County Water District; Valencia
Water Company; and Los Angeles County Waterworks District No. 36 (which participated even
though it has fewer than 3,000 connections). The UWMP was prepared for a 25-year period,
from 2005 – 2030. Growth projections for this planning period were based on the One Valley
One Vision planning effort jointly undertaken by the City and County..
Water resources available to CLWA and the retail water purveyors include wholesale (imported)
water supplies from the State Water Project (SWP); local groundwater supplies from the
Alluvium and Saugus Formation aquifers; and transfers, exchanges, and groundwater banking
programs. The use of recycled water is also an important component of the districts’ water
management planning. The UWMP also details plans for short-term contingencies such as
droughts, earthquakes, or service interruptions.
The 2005 Urban Water Management Plan adopted for the Valley’s water providers concluded
that adequate water would be available to serve projected growth through year 2030. However,
a subsequent 2007 federal court decision to protect habitat in the threatened Sacramento-San
Joaquin Delta curtailed State Water Project allocations for 2008-09. SWP reductions may be
June, 2011                          L-36

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                         Land Use
experienced in future years if habitat conditions for the Delta smelt and other endangered
species are not improved. In order to address potential future reductions of SWP allocations,
the local water districts are currently working to update the Urban Water Management Plan for
the Santa Clarita Valley.
The districts are also developing additional plans and programs to ensure long-term water
supply for the Valley in future planning periods beyond year 2030. According to the 2005
UWMP, the districts are aggressively implementing water audits/repairs, public outreach,
conservation pricing, residential plumbing retrofit, residential ultra-low flush toilet replacement,
large landscape conservation, and conservation programs for commercial, industrial, and
institutional uses. In addition, the CLWA has explored opportunities for water exchanges, water
banking, and conjunctive use (the coordinated operation of multiple water supplies to achieve
improved supply reliability).
CLWA has also developed plans for use of recycled water to meet long-term water supply
needs. Currently, wastewater from the two water reclamation plants operated by the County
Sanitation Districts is treated to tertiary levels and discharged to the Santa Clara River.
Recycled water from the Valencia reclamation plant has been used for landscape irrigation
(including Westridge Golf Course) and construction. The Newhall Ranch development is also
planning to construct a water recycling facility, and water is available from oilfield production.
By 2030, CLWA projects that 17,400 acre-feet per year of recycled water will be available for
landscaping purposes. However, more infrastructure will be needed in order to deliver this water
to end users.
Two major factors that affect water usage are weather and water conservation. Historically, the
districts have found that when the weather is hot and dry, water usage increases. During the
1987-1992 drought period, overall water requirements due to the effects of hot, dry weather
were projected to increase by approximately 10 percent. However, as a result of extraordinary
conservation measures enacted during this period, the overall water requirements actually
decreased by more than 10 percent. The greatest opportunity for conservation is in developing
greater efficiency and reduction in landscape irrigation, which can represent more than
50 percent of the water demand for residential customers, depending on lot size and amount of
landscaping. The General Plan contains policies for conservation of irrigation water through
implementation of drought resistant landscaping materials and irrigation techniques.
More detailed information about water supply is contained in the Conservation and Open Space
Element of the General Plan.
Schools
Seven public school districts serve the Santa Clarita Valley planning area, listed below:
         •   William S. Hart Union High School District;
         •   Saugus Union Elementary School District;
         •   Newhall Elementary School District;
         •   Sulphur Springs Union Elementary School District;
         •   Castaic Union School District;
         •   Acton-Agua Dulce Unified School District; and
         •   Los Angeles Unified School District.
                                                L-37                                      June, 2011

Land Use                                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
All school districts have been impacted by residential growth over the last decade, and all
schools are using temporary portable classrooms to accommodate student enrollment. In
addition to public schools, the planning area includes nine private schools, the Golden Oak
Adult School, and the Learning Post.
In planning for school capacity needs, school districts consider two factors: 1) the addition of
new dwelling units within their district boundaries; and 2) changes in household size due to
changing demographics, which may lead to increased enrollment. Given the existing
overcrowding of public schools in the planning area, anticipated growth, and competing land use
interests between schools and other public facilities, opportunities to share resources are being
explored. While some of the districts have used year-round academic calendars in this past,
none of the districts are using multi-track year-round education anymore for capacity expansion,
and it is unlikely to be used in the future within the Santa Clarita Valley. Other methods of
expanding facility space are being considered, including continued use of portable classrooms,
use of two-story buildings, use of multi-purpose rooms, shared library facilities, joint use of
technological resources, and shared recreational facilities. In addition, various funding sources
are being explored such as developer impact fees, state bond proceeds, or local bond
measures.
In general, an elementary school campus is recommended to include a minimum of 10 net
usable acres; middle schools require 25 acres; and high schools require 35-40 acres. Many of
the existing schools in the Valley are below these recommended areas. Because of the use of
portable classrooms, outdoor play and field area is limited at many schools.
Funding for new school construction is provided by statewide bond measures and development
impact fees. Funding to support students generated by new development is provided through a
combination of these revenue sources, which may vary based on voter approval of bond
measures and State funding availability. In addition, districts may use mitigation agreements
reached with developers to ensure construction of new schools as dwellings are occupied.
Colleges within the planning area include the following:
    •   College of the Canyons (COC). Part of the California Community College System and
        fully accredited, COC offers a variety of two-year degree programs in academic and
        technical fields as well as access to four year and graduate degrees through the
        University Center. The University Center is an innovative concept in higher education
        with a mission to provide immediate access to upper-division and graduate level
        education opportunities through its affiliation with partnering universities, such as the
        University of La Verne, Chapman, University, California State University Bakersfield,
        California State University Northridge, and the University of California Los Angeles.
        Enrollment in both COC campus locations for spring, 2008 was 21,300 students,
        surpassing the State’s enrollment target for 2016. The west campus is located on
        158 acres in Valencia and contains 664,623 square feet of building space, including a
        950-seat theater. Recent additions to the Valencia campus include three new buildings,
        two additions to existing buildings (the Library and Media Arts building) and one building
        under construction (Student Services/Administration, scheduled for completion in 2011).
        In addition to college classrooms, COC includes facilities for the William S. Hart Union
        High School District’s Early College High School (ECHS), where students can take both
        high school and college level classes in order to graduate with both a high school
        diploma and an associate’s degree. The ECHS opened with 86 freshman students in
        2008 and will add a new class each year.
June, 2011                         L-38

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                        Land Use
         The east campus, located on 70 acres in Canyon Country, opened in 2007 with 35,000
         square feet of instructional space including science labs, computer labs, library, book
         store, classrooms, and other facilities. The east campus served 3,500 students and
         offered more than 300 courses in its first semester. At build-out, the east campus will
         serve nearly 10,000 students and contain at least seven permanent multi-story buildings.
    •    California Institute of the Arts (Cal Arts). Cal Arts is the Nation’s only fully accredited
         visual and performing arts college, and has won a national reputation as the first art
         institute to offer Bachelor’s of Fine Arts and Master’s of Fine Arts degrees in both the
         visual and performing arts. Founded through a partnership between Walt Disney, the
         Los Angeles Conservatory of Music, and the Choinard Art Institute, the campus is
         located on a 60-acre site in Valencia. Cal Arts has a film and entertainment focus and
         animation training program. Emphasis is placed on new and experimental work, and
         students are admitted solely on the basis of artistic ability.
    •    The Master’s College is a private liberal arts college located on over 100 acres in
         Placerita Canyon, and offers 50 Bachelor of Arts and Bachelor of Science degrees.
         Enrollment is estimated at 1,000 students. The Master’s College is planning a facility
         expansion on the current campus.
The challenge to provide additional school facilities needed to support new development will be
met through on-going cooperation between the City, County, and school districts. Master-
planned communities, such as Newhall Ranch, provide for school sites and funding
mechanisms in their specific plans. As infill occurs in other portions of the planning area,
however, it will be necessary to explore all options to alleviate over-crowding. Policies have
been included in the General Plan to address coordination of land use planning with school
facility planning.
Parks
The provision of adequate park space and facilities to serve residents is not only required by
State planning law, but is recognized as necessary to provide for public health and quality of life.
Parkland provides recreational and aesthetic benefits as well as increased environmental
quality, through maintenance of open space, permeable land area for surface water infiltration
and percolation, trees and vegetation for habitat, and the economic benefits of increased
property values. The Land Use Element is required to consider the number, size, and
distribution of parklands and facilities to ensure that these public amenities will be adequate to
serve the ultimate population level at build-out of uses permitted by the Land Use Map.
Based on a 2003 GIS inventory, the Valley contains over 14,000 acres of parkland, including
both local and regional parks located within City and County areas; however, much of this
parkland consists of natural open space and is not developed for active recreational uses.
There are four State Parks located within the Planning Area: Castaic Lake Recreation Area,
Placerita Canyon State Park, Vasquez Rocks State Park, and the Santa Clarita Woodlands. In
addition, recreational facilities within the Angeles National Forest and Los Padres National
Forest lands within and adjacent to the planning area are available for public use by Valley
residents. A more detailed discussion of specific park locations and acreage is contained in the
Conservation and Open Space Element.
                                                 L-39                                    June, 2011

Land Use                                                            City of Santa Clarita General Plan
In addition to parkland, the Valley contains an integrated trail system traversing both City and
County areas and available for use by equestrians, hikers, joggers, and cyclists. Long-term
plans call for a continuous trail along the Santa Clara River, to be completed as right-of-way is
acquired. Schools also provide land and facilities for recreational use on a limited basis, through
joint use agreements.
Developed parkland in the planning area accommodates a variety of organized sports, including
soccer, baseball, tennis, volleyball, basketball, and a skateboard park. Facilities also include
picnic areas and playgrounds. A 58-acre Sports Complex was constructed by the City within a
former industrial complex in 2002, with an aquatic center added in 2003. Future expansion
plans include multi-purpose fields, a second gymnasium, the expanded skate park which was
completed in 2009, and other amenities. The County has constructed a 53-acre sports complex
in Castaic. Both the City and County operate recreational programs at their park facilities.
Passive recreational areas include conservancy land located in Towsley Canyon and the Water
Conservatory Garden and Learning Center owned by the Castaic Lake Water Agency.
The City has adopted a standard of 5 acres of parkland per 1000 residents, and the County has
adopted a standard of three 3 acres per 1,000 residents. Based on these standards and without
considering improvements or distribution of park property, it may appear that the planning area
has adequate overall parkland acreage to serve the existing population. However, much of the
land designated for parks and open space is not accessible to residents or developed for
recreational use. More parks are needed to handle specific recreational activities, such as ball
fields for youth, in order to better serve the existing population and future growth. Within the
City, there are only about 1.5 to 2 acres of developed parkland per 1,000 population, and the
City has developed a separate master plan for parks to prioritize actions needed to expand
parkland and services. Another issue for park development is distribution of park facilities, as
many local parks are concentrated within master planned communities, and outlying areas have
access to fewer local parks. There is a need for additional regional parks throughout the Valley,
as both City and County residents are active park users in this family-oriented community.
It is anticipated that future dedications of parkland will be made from new developments in the
planning area as development occurs. In addition, both the City and the County are planning for
a variety of new parks to serve the growing population’s recreational needs. The City and
County will continue to explore joint use opportunities with school districts, utility corridors, and
other service providers and agencies to expand parkland and recreational facilities, including
trails and playfields. It will be critical in the future to identify sources of funding and reserve
lands for future parkland as the planning area continues to develop, in order to provide
adequate parkland for all residents. More information about park planning is provided in the
Open Space and Conservation Element.
Libraries
The County of Los Angeles operates all public libraries in the planning area, including the Main
Branch in Valencia, the Jo Anne Darcy Branch in Canyon Country, the Newhall Branch, and a
bookmobile that serves the communities of Castaic, Acton, Agua Dulce, Val Verde, and the
Friendly Valley senior community. The County’s system contains over eight million items in its
collections and provides inter-library loan programs with other local and national libraries. Santa
Clarita library branches also maintain local and regional history collections.
In addition to the public libraries, schools provide library facilities to their students. Both Cal Arts
and The Master’s College provide libraries for students, and College of the Canyons opens their
library to both students and the general public.
June, 2011                           L-40

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                         Land Use
Based on the County Library’s service guidelines, the area and number of items within the
Santa Clarita branches are not meeting service level standards. As population increases based
on growth anticipated by the General Plan, it will be necessary to increase funding to support
library development. In order to meet the library needs of new development in the Valley, both
the City and County assess a development impact fee for library construction. Other funding
sources include property taxes, bond measures, and voter-approved special taxes.
In 2008 the City Council approved purchase of three parcels on Lyons Avenue so that the City
can move ahead with plans to build a new public library in Downtown Newhall. Along with the
new community center, this new library facility is part of the plan to revitalize Downtown
Newhall. The new library is currently under construction.
In 2010, the Santa Clarita City Council voted to take over operations of the libraries located
within the City limits starting on July 1, 2011.
Local Government Offices
Local government offices in the planning area include the Santa Clarita City Hall and Los
Angeles County Civic Center (which includes County administrative offices and the Municipal
Court), both located in Valencia. The planning area also has offices of the County Department
of Children and Family Services, and the County Department of Senior and Social Services,
which provide services for child welfare, emergency housing, food, domestic violence
assistance, and referrals to other agencies. The County Department of Public Social Service
(DPSS) has an office in Canyon Country that provides services for low-income and disabled
persons, homeless assistance, and aid to families with dependent children.
Planning issues for government service providers include providing more accessible service to
outlying portions of the planning area, and expansion of services as the population increases
over the build-out horizon of the Land Use Plan. Working together, the City and County are
exploring opportunities to maximize efficiency and provide enhanced public service by co-
locating services within a unified civic center complex, which could include City Hall, County
Administrative Offices, and the central Sheriff’s Station.
Health Services
Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital, located in Valencia, is the primary acute care hospital
serving the planning area with 230 beds for inpatient care. The hospital has a 21-bed
emergency room and is certified for pediatrics, outpatient surgery, intensive care, and
obstetrics, among other services. The hospital undertook seismic retrofitting, which was
completed in 2002. The facility contains a Level 2 regional trauma unit, one of 13 such centers
in the County; as this is the only trauma center in the planning area, its maintenance and
continued financial viability is of critical importance to Valley residents. The Hospital is planning
for expansion, along with additional medical office space for outpatient services, specialized
services, doctors offices, and hospital administrative functions.
The Santa Clarita Convalescent Hospital in Newhall is a 99-bed facility specializing in senior
care, including physical therapy and rehabilitation. Kaiser Permanente operates a facility on
Tourney Road that offers family medicine, internal medicine, obstetrics, gynecology,
dermatology, optometry, endocrinology, physical therapy, and a pharmacy. Facey Medical
Group is the largest medical care provider, with six facilities throughout the Valley in Canyon
Country, Valencia, Stevenson Ranch and Castaic, with urgent care provided at the Valencia
office. Several other medical groups provide health care services in the planning area, including
                                                   L-41                                   June, 2011

Land Use                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
an office of UCLA’s Johnson Cancer Center in Valencia. The closest medical facilities for Valley
military veterans are Wadsworth Hospital Center in West Los Angeles and the Sepulveda
Ambulatory Hospital.
Residents in remote rural portions of the planning area generally do not have easy access to
health care services. However, the Samuel Dixon Family Health Center in Val Verde provides
health care services to residents in the northwest portion of the planning area, and the Center
also operates mobile clinics.
The provision of emergency medical services is divided between basic life support (EMT) and
advanced life support (paramedic service), and is overseen by the Los Angeles County Fire
Department. All firefighters are trained in basic EMT, while paramedic units provide advanced
life support. Private ambulance companies provide emergency transportation services.
Mental health treatment is available at the Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital psychiatric
unit, the Child and Family Center, and through a number of family counseling and mental health
professionals. Services provided by both private and non-profit organizations also include
substance abuse treatment, pregnancy counseling, parenting classes, programs for AIDS and
other sexually transmitted diseases, and programs for disabled residents and those with special
education needs.
As baby boomers age, the fastest-growing segment of the population is expected to be people
in the age group 50 and older, generating increased needs for long-term care and gerontology
services. Primary planning issues for the Santa Clarita Valley will be maintaining the trauma
center, providing more services to outlying areas, and meeting the health needs of an aging
population while maintaining services to children and young people.
Cultural Amenities
In 1996 the City of Santa Clarita, in cooperation with the Arts Alliance (a representative task
force of arts community leaders) undertook an initiative to identify and address the community’s
cultural needs. In 1997 the cultural task force began Phase 1 of the Cultural Arts Master Plan,
the first of a two-part process, with the objective of assessing the needs of the arts community,
determining how arts organizations can cooperate, and make recommendations for future
cultural arts planning.
Facilities for performing and visual arts are located at California Institute of the Arts, Valencia
High School, Hart Performing Arts Theater, College of the Canyons (COC), Canyon Theatre
Guild, and Repertory East Playhouse in Newhall. In addition, the City sponsors events with
temporary stages in City parks. However, use of these facilities by the general public is limited,
and there is a lack of exhibition space for visual arts display.
June, 2011                          L-42

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Land Use
The City is the largest individual cultural arts provider, offering a variety of programs including
the Cowboy Festival, Summer Concerts in the Parks, Street Arts Festival, art and cultural grant
and scholarship programs, and classes in painting, dance, and the fine arts. Cultural awareness
is celebrated annually through the Season of Diversity program, which includes essay and
poster contests in cooperation with local schools. The City also provided funding for
construction of the Performing Arts Center at COC, thereby facilitating joint use of that facility by
the public. Cultural arts programming occurs throughout the year in this 47,000 square foot
center, including performances by the Santa Clarita Symphony, COC Theatre, Santa Clarita
Ballet, Santa Clarita Regional Theatre, Santa Clarita Master Chorale, and more. Los Angeles
County also sponsors cultural events throughout the year, including the Native American
Festival.
There is an active community of artists, performers, and musicians in the planning area that
contribute to the cultural life of the community. The Santa Clarita Artists’ Association sponsors
fine arts exhibits, and the Santa Clarita Valley Film Festival highlights the community’s
importance in the film industry.
The Cultural Arts Master Plan identified the need to provide cultural arts to all members of the
community, create a local arts agency for better coordination, and expand facilities. Community
benefits from access to the arts include increased educational opportunities, an enriched
cultural life, economic development, and redevelopment in the Newhall area. There are
opportunities to share resources in the Valley, such as school auditoriums, libraries, technology
centers, and recreational facilities for cultural arts purposes. Future planning for cultural arts
expansion in the Valley includes development of an arts district in Old Town Newhall, as
envisioned by the 2005 specific plan for that area; the need for more museum space; and
expansion of performance venues, including evaluating the feasibility of an outdoor
amphitheater.
Landfills
The Los Angeles County Department of Public Works has the responsibility to develop plans
and strategies to manage and coordinate the solid waste generated in unincorporated areas
and to address the disposal needs of the County as a whole. With respect to land use planning,
solid waste transfer and disposal sites were reviewed for their potential impacts on adjacent
uses and future residents. Based on the County’s estimates, residents generate about
11 pounds of solid waste per day.
The Santa Clarita Valley is served primarily by three Class III (non-hazardous) landfills:
Chiquita Canyon Landfill near Val Verde, the Antelope Valley Landfill in Palmdale, and
Sunshine Canyon Landfill in Sylmar. These Class III landfills receive more than 50,000 tons of
solid waste per year. With approved expansions, these landfills will have capacity to serve the
Valley beyond year 2020. However, the proposed expansion of the Chiquita Canyon Landfill has
raised concerns by residents of nearby Val Verde, who are often impacted by wind-borne odors
and truck traffic; compatibility of landfills with adjacent development must continue to be
addressed.
Both the City and County manage programs to reduce waste generation through diversion
programs such as recycling and re-use. Although these efforts will increase the life expectancy
of local landfills, they do not eliminate the need for new landfill space. In 2000, a consortium of
78 cities and Los Angeles County signed agreements to purchase the Eagle Mountain Landfill in
Riverside County and the Mesquite Regional Landfill in Imperial County. The plan calls for solid
waste to be transported to these landfills by rail.
                                                 L-43                                   June, 2011

Land Use                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Additional facilities are needed for sorting and resource recovery from solid waste, including
materials recovery facilities (MRFs), composting facilities, collection centers for electronic waste
(such as discarded computers and televisions), and recycling facilities. In addition, the re-use of
construction demolition debris requires storing and crushing of old asphalt and concrete for use
as road base, and sites for these uses are needed. However, siting these facilities is often
difficult due to local controversy from neighbors. Planning issues for the Valley include
identifying areas for these uses that are required to support Valley businesses and residents.
A previous issue regarding landfill planning, which has since been resolved, relates to Elsmere
Canyon, a canyon with coastal sage and oak woodlands habitat that provides a wildlife corridor
from the Santa Susana Mountains to the San Gabriel range. Proposed as a site for a landfill in
1989, a coordinated citizen effort to preserve Elsmere Canyon resulted in eventual withdrawal of
the application. During the environmental process for this project, thousands of Valley residents
opposed development of a landfill in Elsmere Canyon. Public concern ultimately culminated in
legislation in 1996 prohibiting the use of any land in the Angeles National Forest for landfill
purposes. In 2007, 400 acres in Elsmere Canyon were donated by the owners to a conservancy
for permanent open space. The remaing non-forest service land has since been acquired as
open space
Mineral Resources
The planning area contains extensive mineral resources. Historically, gold mining and oil
production have been the primary mineral extraction activities in and around the Santa Clarita
Valley. Other minerals in the area include construction aggregate (sand and gravel), titanium,
tuff, and rock.
Existing oil and natural gas fields are primarily located in the western portion of the Valley, with
over 700 wells in production. In 2003, approximately 3,180 acres were used for oil and natural
gas extraction in the planning area. Over 800 abandoned well sites remain in the planning area,
which may be subject to re-use or remediation.
Sand and gravel resources are primarily concentrated along waterways, including the Santa
Clara River, Castaic Creek, and east of Sand Canyon Road. A significant deposit of
construction-grade aggregate extends along the Santa Clara River approximately 15 miles from
Agua Dulce Creek in the east, to the Ventura County line on the west. Almost 19,000 acres in
the planning area are designated by the State as Mineral Resource Zone-2, or areas of prime
importance due to known economic mineral deposits.
As of 2003 there were about 525 acres of land used for mineral extraction of sand, gravel, and
rock. Generally, mining sites are located in Canyon Country, Agua Dulce, and Mint Canyon in
the planning area, and in Acton to the north. A proposed sand and gravel mining operation in
Soledad Canyon has been controversial due to concerns about noise, air pollution, truck traffic,
and visual impacts.
Additional information about mineral resources is contained in the Conservation and Open
Space Element. For purposes of the Land Use Element, however, the issues of land use
compatibility between less intense uses and extraction operations must be considered, in order
to provide for adequate separation of these uses. In addition, significant resource areas should
be protected from development as they provide a needed resource to support the construction
of new homes, businesses, and roads.
June, 2011                          L-44
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                        Land Use
Finally, the Land Use Element must consider restoration and re-use of mined areas once mining
operations cease. Where restoration to open space is not a practical end use solution, an
alternative development program which contributes to economic development, jobs-housing
balance, and/or destination eco-tourism should be encouraged.
Noise and Flood Hazards
A complete discussion of flood hazards is contained in the Safety Element, and noise is
addressed in the Noise Element of the General Plan. For purposes of the Land Use Element, it
was necessary to identify areas within the Valley that are or will be subject to flooding or
excessive noise, and to ensure that the Land Use Map avoided placing uses in these areas that
would be detrimentally affected.
In general, sensitive receptors with regard to noise impacts include residences, hospitals,
schools, convalescent care, and similar uses. The General Plan standard for these uses is
established with a rating scale known as Community Noise Equivalent Levels (CNEL). For land
planning purposes, sensitive receptors should be set back, away from noise sources such as
freeways, or otherwise protected by sound barriers such as walls or earthen berms.
Development in the Valley is required to be protected from flood hazards by either staying out of
areas prone to flooding, or through elevation of building pads in certain areas. Areas prone to
flooding are shown on the Floodplain Map in the Safety Element. Policies in the General Plan
encourage accepted flood control standards for construction.
Agricultural Resources
Agricultural resources of significance to the land use planning process are those which have
been classified by the California Department of Conservation (CDC) as important to the local or
state agricultural economy. Agricultural lands are classified by soil type, slope, and potential for
flooding and erosion hazards, with the most arable land identified as Class I and Class II by the
United States Soil Conservation Service. The best soils for agriculture are deep, generally well
drained, and easily worked. The western portion of the planning area contains soils within the
Class I and Class II categories. The remainder of the planning area contains soils less suitable
for agriculture, ranging from Class III to Class VIII.
Based on soil characteristics and the presence of agricultural uses, the CDC has designated
land suitable for agriculture on a set of maps called the “Important Farmland Series”. In order to
be identified on the Important Farmland maps, land must have been farmed within the last four
years prior to mapping. There are five categories of farmland within the planning area shown on
the state farmland maps, described below:
    •   Prime Farmland – land with the best combination of physical and chemical features able
        to sustain long-term production of agricultural crops, due to soil quality, growing season,
        and moisture supply needed to produce sustained high yields;
    •   Farmland of Statewide Importance – land with good potential for agricultural production,
        but with slightly more gradient or less soil fertility than prime farmland;
    •   Unique Farmland – land of lesser quality soil used for production of agricultural crops,
        including non-irrigated orchards or vineyards;
                                                 L-45                                    June, 2011

Land Use                                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
     •   Farmland of Local Importance – land used for agriculture that is determined by the
         County Board of Supervisors to be significant to the local economy;
     •   Grazing Land –land with native vegetation that is suited to the grazing of livestock.
The planning area contains about 1,994 acres of land designated on the State’s Farmland Map,
of which about 150 acres are located within the City of Santa Clarita. Farmland acreage is
shown on Table L-1.
                    Table L-1: Farmland Designations in the Planning Area
     State Farmland Designation       Acres in County         Acres in City         Total Acres in
                                                                                   Planning Area
   Prime Farmland                        1172.36                 128.70                1301.06
   Farmland of Statewide                  178.25                    0                   178.25
     Importance
   Unique Farmland                        364.11                  2.45                  366.56
   Farmland of Local Importance           130.17                 18.42                  148.59
   Total acreage                         1844.98                 149.46                1994.44
These designated farmlands occur in scattered locations, generally on alluvial soils adjacent to
the Santa Clara River, Castaic Creek, San Francisquito Canyon, and Bouquet Canyon. The
largest areas of farmland are located along the Santa Clara River in the western portion of the
planning area, north and south of State Route 126 in the area slated for development of Newhall
Ranch. Designated farmlands extending along the east side of Interstate 5 along Castaic Creek,
along San Francisquito Canyon, and near the intersection of Bouquet Canyon Road and
Vasquez Canyon Road, are generally smaller in scale; some are used for horse ranches, non-
irrigated cropland, improved pasture lands, and vineyards.
The largest category of designated farmland in the planning area is Grazing Land, which
includes over 61,000 acres within the planning area. Much of this land will remain vacant in the
undeveloped foothills surrounding the Valley and adjacent to U. S. Forest Service land. Land
use designations for these areas will be Rural Land, allowing low-density development on large
lots to maintain the rural and open character of designated Grazing Lands.
Law Enforcement and Fire Protection
A full discussion of law enforcement and fire protection services is contained in the Safety
Element. However, the Land Use Element addresses these issues in order to assure that new
development allowed by the land use plan will not be adversely affected by wildland fire or lack
of adequate services. In addition, policies have been added to the Land Use Element to ensure
that development plans for new structures have incorporated design measures to reduce the
potential for danger from crime and wildland fires.
Fire protection in the Santa Clarita Valley is provided by the Los Angeles County Fire
Department. There are 11 fire stations with 13 engine companies, five paramedic squads, one
hazardous material squad, and two ladder truck serving the planning area. In addition, the U. S.
Forest Service has responsibility for non-structure fires in federal forests, and maintains five fire
stations in the planning area at Bouquet Canyon, Oak Flat, Sand Canyon and Agua Dulce.
June, 2011                         L-46

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                        Land Use
According to the Fire Department, the average response time to emergency calls in the Valley is
about five to seven minutes. However, response distances and times vary due to terrain,
distance, and the size of the planning area. The department’s median response times
throughout the County are 4.5 minutes in urban areas, 5.8 minutes in suburban areas, and
8.3 minutes in rural areas.
The planning area is susceptible to wildland fires because of its hilly terrain, dry weather
conditions, and native vegetation. Steep slopes allow for the quick spread of flames during
fires, and pose difficulties for fire suppression due to access constraints for firefighting
equipments. Late summer and fall are critical times for wildland fires, as Santa Ana winds
deliver hot, dry desert air into the region. Chaparral and sage vegetation allows fires to spread
easily in hillside areas. The Fire Department has classified 80 to 90 percent of the planning area
in a Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone. Areas in the City that are prone to wildland fire
include portions of Newhall and Canyon Country, areas surrounding Sand Canyon, portions of
Pico Canyon, Placerita Canyon, Hasley Canyon, Whites Canyon, Bouquet Canyon, and all
areas at the interface between native vegetation with urban development. Records indicate that
wildland fires occur almost every year, with large fires occurring fairly regularly about every ten
years. This fire cycle is based upon the growth of vegetation in fire-prone areas.
The Fire Department operates fire suppression camps and maintains crews used for fire
protection and suppression through use of fire cuts, water-dropping helicopters, and other
equipment. However, the best planning tools for wildland fire safety are to protect hillside areas
from encroachment by urban development, to provide adequate fire flow and fire access roads
in hillside areas, and to maintain fuel modification zones between wildland areas and structures
where possible.
With regard to law enforcement, the planning area is served by the Los Angeles County
Sheriff’s Department’s Santa Clarita Valley Station, which serves over 600 square miles. Law
enforcement within the City is provided by the Sheriff’s Department under contract. The Sheriff’s
station, located in Valencia, is insufficient to meet current needs. The Department also operates
a storefront station in Newhall. New facilities and additional staffing, along with equipment and
vehicles, will be needed to serve anticipated growth allowed under the land use plan.
Discussions are underway regarding a new Sheriff Station to be jointly funded by the City and
County to serve Valley residents.
The Peter J. Pitchess Detention Center (Wayside Honor Ranch) in Castaic serves the entire
County. The jail consists of several facilities which together comprise the largest jail complex in
the County. In addition to these facilities, three youth camps serving the region are located
within the planning area. The Los Angeles County Probation Department provides secure
detention for delinquent minors in juvenile halls and control and rehabilitation programs in
camps such as Camp Scott, Camp Scudder, and Camp Francis J. Scobee. These juvenile halls
and camps provide confinement to minors ranging in age from 8 to 18 who await adjudication
and disposition of legal matters. Camps provide treatment, care, custody, and training for the
rehabilitation of delinquent minors as wards of the Juvenile Court.
Planning issues for law enforcement include expanding Sheriff station facilities and identifying
funding sources for staffing and operational needs to support the Valley’s growing population.
                                                  L-47                                   June, 2011

Land Use                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
L.      Land Use Map Designations
The Land Use Element and accompanying Land Use Map (provided as a separate exhibit)
describe and designate the distribution of land uses by type, location, intensity, and extent of
use. Designations show land planned for development as residential, commercial, industrial,
open space, public facilities, and other categories of public and private land use. Prior to
adoption of this General Plan a comprehensive assessment of existing land uses and their
distribution was conducted using aerial photo analysis, field surveys, and a geographic
information system. Land was evaluated for suitability of development type and intensity based
on topography, access, proximity to infrastructure, environmental constraints, character of
surrounding development, economic viability, and other criteria. Input on future land use needs
was solicited through extensive public participation at workshops, meetings, through
correspondence and the City’s website. Based on this analysis and input, a Land Use Map was
developed.
This General Plan is unique in that the City of Santa Clarita and the County of Los Angeles have
collaborated on a compatible system of land use designations that will maintain consistency of
planning policies throughout the entire Santa Clarita Valley. The compatible land use
designations will ensure that property owners, residents, and developers throughout the
planning area understand the relationship between the City’s General Plan and the County’s
Area Plan operate from the same set of guidelines.
Land Use Designation Descriptions
The following descriptions identify the type, density, and/or intensity of land uses that conform to
each of the land use designations shown on the Land Use Map. Any interpretation regarding
uses that are not specifically included in the following land use designation descriptions shall be
made by the designated authority, pursuant to applicable zoning regulations and based on the
intent of each designation, as set forth in this section.
It is important to note, when reading the Land Use Map and the descriptions of each land use
designation, that the maximum density or intensity is not guaranteed for any land use category.
In determining the most appropriate use for each property shown on the Land Use Map,
consideration will be given to topography; availability of roads and infrastructure; existing
development patterns; potential land use conflicts; public health, safety, and welfare; presence
of environmental resources and hazards; and other site constraints. Therefore, the upper range
of residential density and non-residential use intensity will be granted only when the reviewing
authority determines that all other applicable General Plan policies, codes, and requirements
can be met on the site.
The density designations in the Urban Residential land use designations are considered to be
net density and the density designations in the Rural Land use designations are considered to
be gross density. In practice, this means that the number of dwelling units allowed within each
development site shall be divided by the net or gross area of the property, depending on the
designation. General Plan density is an indicator of the maximum number of dwelling units per
unit of area; it does not regulate minimum lot size, which is a requirement of the Unified
Development Code, although the Non-UrbanLand use designations include minimum lot sizes.
The California Legislature has identified second dwellings on residential lots as a valuable form
of housing (Government Code Section 65852.150). State law requires that cities and counties
allow second dwelling units on residential lots without imposing onerous requirements that
would unreasonably restrict these units, except where findings are made that second units
June, 2011                          L-48

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Land Use
would result in “specific adverse impacts on the public health, safety, and welfare” (Section
65852.2). The City and the County have both adopted ordinances regarding second units in
residential areas, to implement state law; procedures and standards for second units shall be
required as set forth in the applicable zoning ordinance.
In the titles of the following land use designation descriptions, the City’s terminology for each
designation is given first, with the corresponding designation in the County’s Santa Clarita
Valley Area Plan shown in parentheses.
Non-Urban 1 (NU 1) – (County Area Plan - Rural Land 20/RL20)
The Non-Urban 1 designation identifies lands in the planning area that are distinguished by
significant environmental features and extreme development constraints. Lands in this
designation are largely undeveloped and consist of rolling hillside areas, steep slopes, and
remote mountain lands with limited access.
Uses in this designation could include single-family homes at a maximum density of 1 dwelling
unit per 20 acres, agriculture, equestrian uses, private recreation, filming, and public and
institutional facilities serving the local area. Specific allowable uses and development standards
shall be determined by the underlying zoning designation.
Clustering is permitted in this designation in accordance with the provisions of the Unified
Development Code. Individual homes and other structures should be designed in consideration
of topographic and environmental constraints.
Non-Urban 2 (NU 2) – (County Area Plan - Rural Land 10/RL10)
The Non-Urban 2 designation identifies lands in the planning area that include environmental
features and are not appropriate for intense development requiring urban services. Lands in
this category are largely undeveloped and consist of rolling hillside areas, slopes, and mountain
lands with limited access.
Uses in this designation could include single-family homes at a maximum density of 1 dwelling
unit per 10 acres, agriculture, equestrian uses, private recreation, and public and institutional
facilities serving the local area. Specific allowable uses and development standards shall be
determined by the underlying zoning designation.
Clustering is permitted in this designation in accordance with the provisions of the Unified
Development Code. Individual homes and other structures should be designed in consideration
of topographic and environmental constraints.
Non-Urban 3 (NU 3) – (County Area Plan - Rural Land 5/RL5)
The Non-Urban 3 designation identifies lands in the planning area that include environmental
features and are not appropriate for intense development requiring urban services. Lands in
this category are undeveloped or partially developed and consist of rolling hillside areas with
limited access.
                                                  L-49                                 June, 2011

Land Use                                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Uses in this designation could include single-family homes at a maximum density of 1 dwelling
unit per 5 acres, agriculture, equestrian uses, private recreation, and public and institutional
facilities serving the local area. Specific allowable uses and development standards shall be
determined by the underlying zoning designation.
Clustering is permitted in this designation in accordance with the provisions of the Unified
Development Code. Individual homes and other structures should be designed in consideration
of topographic and environmental constraints.
Non-Urban 4 (NU 4) – (County Area Plan - Rural Land 2/RL2)
The Non-Urban 4 designation provides for the maintenance and expansion of rural communities
in the planning area that are distinguished by large lot sizes (generally two acres or greater),
agricultural and equestrian uses, and an absence of urban services.
Uses in this designation could include single-family homes at a maximum density of 1 dwelling
unit per 2 acres, agriculture, equestrian uses, private recreation, and public and institutional
facilities serving the local area. Specific allowable uses and development standards shall be
determined by the underlying zoning designation.
Supportive commercial uses serving the local area, such as grocery stores, restaurants,
personal services, and retail sale of specialty goods for rural residents, such as feed and tack
stores, may be allowed in “activity areas” within this designation without a General Plan
Amendment, provided that the size, location, design, and use types are determined to be
compatible with the surrounding area through approval pursuant to the Unified Development
Code. Such “activity centers” must be at least 1 mile from any commercial land use designation
and must not exceed 5 acres in size.
Clustering is permitted in this designation in accordance with the provisions of the Unified
Development Code. Individual homes and other structures should be designed in consideration
of topographic and environmental constraints.
Non-Urban 5 (NU 5) – (County Area Plan - Rural Land 1/RL1)
The Non-Urban 5 designation provides for the maintenance and expansion of rural communities
in the planning area that are distinguished by large lot sizes (generally one acre or greater),
agricultural and equestrian uses, and the absence of urban services.
Uses in this designation could include single-family homes at a maximum density of 1 dwelling
unit per 1 acre, agriculture, equestrian uses, private recreation, and public and institutional
facilities serving the local area. Specific allowable uses and development standards shall be
determined by the underlying zoning designation.
Supportive commercial uses serving the local area, such as grocery stores, restaurants,
personal services, and retail sale of specialty goods for rural residents, such as feed and tack
stores, may be allowed in “activity areas” within this designation without a General Plan
Amendment, provided that the size, location, design, and use types are determined to be
compatible with the surrounding area through pursuant to the Unified Development Code. Such
“activity centers” must be at least 1 mile from any commercial land use designation and must
not exceed 5 acres in size.
June, 2011                         L-50

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                      Land Use
Clustering is permitted in this designation in accordance with the provisions of the Unified
Development Code. Individual homes and other structures should be designed in consideration
of topographic and environmental constraints.
Urban Residential 1 (UR 1) – (County Area Plan - Residential/H2)
The Urban Residential 1 designation provides for residential neighborhoods at densities that
require urban services. Many of these neighborhoods provide a transition between higher
density, urban development and rural communities throughout the planning area, and this
designation is appropriate in such urban/rural interface areas.
Uses in this designation could include single-family homes and other residential uses at a
maximum density of 2 dwelling units per 1 acre. Specific allowable uses and development
standards shall be determined by the underlying zoning designation.
Supportive commercial and institutional uses serving the local area, such as stores, restaurants,
personal services, limited medical services, and retail sale of specialty goods for neighborhood
residents, may be allowed in a proposed development project within this designation without a
General Plan Amendment, provided that the size, location, design, and use types are
determined to be compatible with the surrounding area through approval pursuant to the Unified
Development Code.
The clustering of development, subject to underlying zoning requirements, is encouraged on
lands with significant environmental and/or topographical features or resources, in order to
preserve open space for protection of these natural features or resources, to provide
recreational amenities, or to act as a buffer to surrounding rural communities.
Urban Residential 2 (UR 2) – (County Area Plan – Residential/H5)
The Urban Residential 2 designation provides for residential neighborhoods that typify much of
the planning area. Uses in this designation could include single-family homes and other
residential uses at a maximum density of 5 dwelling units per 1 acre. Specific allowable uses
and development standards shall be determined by the underlying zoning designation.
Supportive commercial and institutional uses serving the local area, such as stores, restaurants,
personal services, limited medical services, and retail sale of specialty goods for neighborhood
residents, may be allowed in a proposed development project within this designation pursuant to
the Unified Development Code.
The clustering of development is encouraged on lands with significant environmental and/or
topographical features or resources, in order to preserve open space for protection of these
natural features or resources, or to provide recreational amenities.
The Urban Residential 2 designation has been applied to residential areas that existed prior to
the effective date of the Area Plan and are surrounded by Rural Land designations, in order to
recognize these existing areas as conforming to the Area Plan. However, this designation in
these areas should not be interpreted as setting a precedent for expanding urban development
into adjacent Non-Urban Land designations, because these areas are not served with adequate
levels of urban infrastructure to accommodate greater densities or intensities of use. These
areas are described below and shown on Exhibit L-2.
                                                 L-51                                 June, 2011

Land Use                                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
     •  Sleepy Valley, a neighborhood in the northeastern portion of the planning area adjacent
        to the Angeles National Forest, generally located along Sierra Highway between Oak
        Street and Steele Avenue;
     •  Val Verde, a community in the western portion of the planning area adjacent to Newhall
        Ranch and the Valencia Commerce Center, generally located along San Martinez Road
        and Chiquito Canyon Road; and
     •  Tract 25965, a subdivision in the southern portion of the planning area adjacent to the
        Angeles National Forest, generally located at the intersection of Placerita Canyon Road
        and Running Horse Road.
Urban Residential 3 (UR 3) – (No Corresponding County Area Plan Designation)
The Urban Residential 3 designation provides for neighborhoods of single-family attached and
detached housing, and small-scale attached multi-family dwellings such as duplexes and
triplexes. Allowed uses include single-family homes, duplexes, triplexes and small-scale multi-
family dwellings of a scale and character that complement and are consistent with a single
family residential neighborhood at a maximum density of eleven (11) dwelling units per acre
provided associated recreational facilities are provided. Other incidental uses may be allowed,
when determined to be in conformance with the primary use, based on the standards and
requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance.
In addition to allowed residential density, supportive commercial uses serving the local area,
such as stores, restaurants, personal services, limited medical services, and retail sale of
specialty goods appropriate to the surrounding neighborhood, may be allowed within approved
activity areas without requiring a General Plan Amendment, provided that the size, location,
design, and use types are determined to be compatible with the surrounding area through
approval pursuant to the Unified Development Code. Live-work units may be allowed subject to
the requirements of the underlying zone.
Urban Residential 4 (UR 4) – (County Area Residential/H18)
The Urban Residential 4 designation provides for mixed residential neighborhoods of detaching
and attached dwellings. Allowable uses in this designation include detached and attached
single-family homes, duplexes, multiple family dwellings, and other residential uses at a
maximum density of 18 dwelling units per 1 acre. Specific allowable uses and development
standards shall be determined by the underlying zoning designation. Other incidental uses may
be allowed, where determined to be in conformance with the primary use, based on the
standards and requirements of the applicable zoning ordinance.
Supportive commercial and institutional uses serving the local area, such as stores, restaurants,
personal services, limited medical services, and retail sale of specialty goods for neighborhood
residents, may be allowed in a proposed development project within this pursuant to the Unified
Development Code. Live-work units may be allowed subject to the requirements of the
underlying zone.
June, 2011                        L-52

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                      Land Use
Urban Residential 5 (UR 5) – (County Area Plan Urban Residential/H30)
The Urban Residential 5 designation provides for medium to high density apartment and
condominium complexes in areas easily accessible to transportation, employment, retail, and
other urban services. Allowable uses in this designation include multiple family dwellings at a
minimum density of 18 dwelling units per 1 acre and a maximum density of 30 dwelling units per
1 acre. Specific allowable uses and development standards shall be determined by the
underlying zoning designation.
Supportive commercial and institutional uses serving the local area, such as stores, restaurants,
personal services, limited medical services, and retail sale of specialty goods for neighborhood
residents, may be allowed in a proposed development project within this designation pursuant to
the Unified Development Code. Live-work units may be allowed subject to the requirements of
the underlying zone.
                                              L-53                                    June, 2011

Land Use        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
June, 2011 L-54
City of Santa Clarita General Plan       Land Use
                                    E
                                   L-55 June, 2011
Land Use                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Mixed Use (MX) – (No Corresponding County Area Plan Designation)
The Mixed Use designation provides opportunities for the coordinated development of urban
villages and corridors that offer a diverse range of complementary land uses, in appropriate
locations throughout the planning area that are served by public transit, and in proximity to
supportive uses and services. In addition to the Mixed Use land use designation on the Land
Use Map, mixed-use projects may be allowed in other land use districts subject to the applicable
requirements of the zoning ordinance. Approval for any mixed-use project will be based upon a
determination that the project meets General Plan objectives for walkable, compact, connected
neighborhoods, in which the mix of uses achieves a reduction of vehicle trips, and meets other
applicable policies for sustainability and livability.
Mixed use projects will be subject to design standards and development characteristics as
evaluated in their neighborhood and regional context. These projects shall:
     •    Be the subject of community outreach and public participation led by the applicant prior
          to formal submittal;
     •    Preserve the character of existing residential neighborhoods and provide adequate
          buffer and transition;
     •    Propose an economic engine with an appropriate amount of jobs, retail, office,
          restaurant and general commercial square footage combined with neighboring and
          integrated housing types;
     •    Be internally and externally pedestrian-oriented;
     •    Consist of 360-degree architectural design with pedestrian-scaled building massing and
          forms where adjacent to existing residences, with the use of landscaping to visually
          soften hard edges of buildings;
     •    Contain varied building heights and create sight lines; and
     •    Include appropriate public and/or private recreational components.
The residential density in MX districts shall range from a minimum of six (6) to a maximum of
fifty (50) dwelling units per acre, and the maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for non-residential
uses shall range from .5 to 3.0, depending on the location of the mixed-use project, as
described below:
     Mixed Use – Neighborhood (MXN)
     Mixed-use development in these areas will be encouraged in order to create neighborhoods
     that integrate residential uses with complementary commercial services, including retail and
     office uses. Mixed-use neighborhoods should be designed in consideration of surrounding
     development patterns, proximity to public transit, providing roadway and trail linkages to
     adjacent development where appropriate. Non-residential uses consistent with this district
     include those in the Neighborhood Commercial (CN) and Community Commercial (CC)
     districts. The residential density range in mixed-use neighborhoods shall be a minimum of
     six (6) to a maximum of eighteen (18) dwelling units per acre, and maximum floor area ratio
     for the non-residential portion of the development shall be .5. Building heights shall not
     exceed 50 feet.
June, 2011                           L-56

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Land Use
    Mixed Use – Corridor (MXC)
    Mixed-use development will be encouraged along specified commercial corridors in which
    revitalization of underutilized parcels or aging buildings is desired, as shown on the Land
    Use Map, subject to the applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance. Mixed uses along
    corridors may be either vertical or horizontal, provided that residential units in these areas
    should be protected from adverse impacts of high-volume arterial streets, and will typically
    be located an appropriate distance from the roadway. Non-residential uses consistent with
    this district include those in the Neighborhood Commercial (CN) and Community
    Commercial (CC) districts. The residential density range in mixed-use corridors shall be a
    minimum of eleven (11) to a maximum of thirty (30) dwelling units per acre, and maximum
    floor area ratio for the non-residential portion of the development shall be 1.0.
    Mixed Use – Urban Village (MXUV)
    Within transit-oriented urban villages that are located in proximity to commuter rail and bus
    transfer stations, mixed-use development will be encouraged in order to promote compact,
    connected environments for residents to live, work, shop, access needed services, and
    recreate, without having to use their vehicles. Either vertical or horizontal mixed uses are
    allowed, subject to the applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance. Non-residential
    uses consistent with this district include those in the Neighborhood Commercial (CN),
    Community Commercial (CC), and Regional Commercial (CR) districts. Single-use
    residential or commercial projects which do not contain mixed uses will be allowed in these
    districts only if such projects are designed to integrate with other uses in the area so as to
    create interconnected, walkable neighborhoods, and do not include incompatible uses or
    design features contrary to the intent of the district. The residential density range in urban
    villages shall be a minimum of nineteen (19) to a maximum of fifty (50) dwelling units per
    acre and the maximum floor area ratio (FAR) for the non-residential portion of the
    development shall be 3.0.
    Mixed Use Overlay
    In addition to the mixed use land use designations, the Mixed Use Overlay identifies
    commercial areas that may be suitable for mixed residential and commercial development
    and redevelopment. The purpose of the Mixed Use Overlay is to provide a development
    alternative to the underlying commercial land use designation. This overlay allows the
    opportunity to improve the character within key commercial corridors and transit station
    locations. The overlay areas are shown on Exhibit L-3.
                                                  L-57                                  June, 2011

Land Use        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
June, 2011 L-58
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                      Land Use
Regional Commercial (CR) – (County Area Plan – Major Commercial/CM)
The Regional Commercial designation is applied to central and regional commercial districts in
the planning area, generally located around the Valencia Town Center and other major
community centers. This designation is intended to promote the development of regional focal
points for commercial, entertainment, cultural, and business uses serving the general public and
drawing from a market area encompassing the entire Santa Clarita Valley. Allowable uses
include the regional mall; retail sale of automobiles and recreational vehicles, furniture, and
home improvements; large-scale entertainment uses such as theaters and arenas; corporate
offices and financial institutions; and hospitality services, including hotels and restaurants.
Allowable uses shall have a maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) of 2.0. Coverage of the
development site by buildings shall not exceed 90 percent, except as otherwise permitted by the
reviewing authority pursuant to review as prescribed by the Unified Development Code.
Multiple family dwellings (including live-work units) may be permitted in this designation as
allowed by the zoning ordinance, provided that approval of multiple family dwellings does not
adversely impact job creation or economic development in the planning area. Where
appropriate, mixed-use development incorporating multiple-family residential with commercial
uses is allowed in this designation, pursuant to the zoning ordinance. Multiple family dwellings
shall have a minimum density of 18 dwelling units per acre and a maximum of 50 dwelling units
per acre.
Community Commercial (CC) – (No Corresponding County Area Plan Designation)
The Community Commercial designation is intended for business providing retail and service
uses which primarily serve the local market. Representative uses include restaurants, clothing
stores, hardware and auto parts stores, grocery markets, pharmacies, banks and financial
services, specialty retail, theaters and nightclubs, day care centers, and medical services.
These areas are typically located along arterial streets or at the intersections of high traffic
corridors. Allowable uses shall have a maximum FAR of 0.75. Coverage of the development
site by buildings shall not exceed 80 percent, except as otherwise permitted by the reviewing
authority pursuant to discretionary review as prescribed by the Unified Development Code.
Multiple family dwellings (including live/work units) may be permitted in the designation, subject
to the requirements of the underlying zoning designation, provided that the approval of multiple
family dwellings in the designation does not adversely impact job creation or economic
development in the planning area. Multiple family dwellings shall have a maximum density of 18
dwelling units per acre.
Neighborhood Commercial (CN) – (County Area Plan – General Commercial/CG)
The Neighborhood Commercial designation provides for small neighborhood commercial
districts that serve the short-term needs of residents in the immediate area. Allowable uses in
this designation include supermarkets; drug stores; restaurants; personal services; repair
services; light automotive services; day care centers; and other local-serving shops and
services for neighborhood residents. Neighborhood commercial centers should be integrated
into surrounding neighborhoods with appropriate screening, buffering, and pedestrian access.
More intensive uses that are incompatible with adjacent neighborhoods, such as bars and
nightclubs, heavy automobile repair, and businesses with outdoor operations or storage, are not
appropriate in this designation. Coverage of the development site by buildings shall not exceed
75 percent, except as otherwise permitted by the reviewing authority pursuant to discretionary
review as prescribed by the Unified Development Code. Allowable uses shall have a maximum
                                                L-59                                   June, 2011

Land Use                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) of .50. Specific allowable uses and development standards shall be
determined by the underlying zoning designation.
Multiple family dwellings (including live/work units) may be permitted in the designation, subject
to the requirements of the underlying zoning designation, provided that the approval of multiple
family dwellings in the designation does not adversely impact job creation or economic
development in the planning area. Multiple family dwellings shall have a maximum density of 18
dwelling units per acre.
Business Park (BP) – (County Area Plan – Office and Professional/IO)
The Business Park designation provides for mixed employment districts in areas accessible to
transportation and visible from freeways and major arterials and is intended to promote the
development of master-planned environments with a high quality of design and construction.
Allowable uses in this designation include offices; medical offices, research and development;
light assembly and fabrication; warehousing and distribution; and supportive commercial uses.
Development in this designation is expected to provide enhanced landscaping and outdoor
amenities to create a campus-like setting. Operations and storage activities are to be confined
to enclosed buildings or otherwise screened from public view. This designation is appropriate in
locations with good access and visibility from freeways and major arterials. Site areas should be
large enough to accommodate comprehensive planning, and designs shall provide compatibility
with and linkage to adjacent developments. Coverage of the development site by buildings
shall not exceed 90 percent, except as otherwise permitted by the reviewing authority pursuant
to discretionary review as prescribed by the Unified Development Code. Allowable uses shall
have a maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) of 2.0. Specific allowable uses and development
standards shall be determined by the underlying zoning designation.
Industrial (I) – (County Area Plan – Light Industrial/IL)
The Light Industrial designation provides for industrial districts in areas with adequate access,
infrastructure, and services and is intended to accommodate the most intensive types of
industrial uses allowed in the planning area. Allowable uses in this designation include storage
and distribution of goods; vehicle storage; contractor’s storage facilities; batch plants; heavy
equipment repair and sales; wholesale sales; heavy vehicle repair; and supportive commercial
uses.
Heavy industrial uses that involve processing of raw materials, generation or treatment of large
amounts of hazardous substances, or that result in an excessive emission of odors, fumes,
pollutants, vibration, noise, or other noxious, hazardous, or nuisance conditions, will not be
allowed. Encroachment of incompatible uses, such as assembly uses and general retail, are
not appropriate in Industrial areas. Coverage of the development site by buildings shall not
exceed 90 percent, except as otherwise permitted by the reviewing authority pursuant to
discretionary review as prescribed by the Unified Development Code. Allowable uses shall have
a maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) of 1.0. Specific allowable uses and development standards
shall be determined by the underlying zoning designation.
Open Space (OS) – (County Area Plan – Open Space/OS)
The Open Space designation is intended to identify and reserve land forpassive, natural and
active open space uses, including public and private parks, conservancy lands, nature
preserves, wildlife habitats, water bodies and adjacent riparian habitat, wetlands areas
June, 2011                         L-60

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Land Use
dedicated to open space use, drainage easements, cemeteries, golf courses, and other open
space areas dedicated for public or private use. Typical uses include recreation, trails,
trailheads, paseos, horticulture, limited agriculture, animal grazing, and habitat preservation.
Accessory uses incidental to the primary use, such as restrooms, visitor centers, clubhouses,
maintenance structures, and manager’s offices, may be allowed provided that such structures
do not cover more than 10 percent of the site area, except as otherwise permitted by the
reviewing authority pursuant to discretionary review as prescribed by the Unified Development
Code.
National Forest (OS-NF) – (County Area Plan – National Forest/OS-NF)
The National Forest designation identifies lands in the planning area within the Angeles and Los
Padres National Forests. For lands owned by the United States Forest Service, specific
allowable uses, maximum intensity standards, and development standards shall be determined
by the underlying zoning designation.
For privately owned lands within the National Forest (in-holdings), allowable uses in this
designation include single-family homes at a maximum density of 1 dwelling unit per 5 acres,
agriculture, equestrian uses, private recreation, privately owned commercial recreation with or
without support facilities such as lodging and dining, filming and public and institutional facilities
serving the local area. Specific allowable uses and development standards are determined by
the underlying zoning designation. Clustering is permitted in this designation in accordance with
the provisions of the Unified Development Code. Individual homes and other structures should
be designed in consideration of topographic and environmental constraints.
Bureau of Land Management (OS-BLM) – (County Area Plan OS-BLM)
The Bureau of Land Management designation identifies lands in the planning area owned by the
United States Bureau of Land Management. Specific allowable uses, maximum intensity
standards, and development standards shall be determined by the underlying zoning
designation.
Specific Plan (SP) – (County Area Plan – Specific Plan/SP)
The Specific Plan designation indentifies lands in the planning area that are governed by an
adopted Specific Plan.         Specific allowable uses, maximum intensity standards, and
development standards shall be determined by the adopted Specific Plan.
Public/Institutional (PI) – (County Area Plan – Public and Semi-Public Facilities/P)
The Public/Institutional designation identifies lands in the Planning Area that are used for
various types of public or/and community serving facilities owned and operated by public
agencies, special districts, non-profit organizations and other entities. Allowable uses include:
civic and governmental offices, public works yards, public or private schools, libraries, day care
centers, hospitals, airports and supporting medical facilities, museums, fire stations, police
stations, landfills, and prisons. Building height and coverage will be determined by the lead
agency for each project, based upon the type and intensity of use. Privately-owned facilities
serving the general public with transportation services, such as helipads, may also be
appropriate in this designation.
OVOV recognizes that there are existing utilities and associated infrastructure operating with
previous approvals located in all zones dispersed throughout the Valley. The City's ability to
                                                L-61                                    June, 2011

Land Use                                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
regulate or condition said utilities and associated infrastructure operations is at times limited
and, in some cases, preempted by other lead government agencies. It is expected that these
uses will continue, that necessary operations and maintenance are performed, that on-site
testing is needed, and that expansion will occur as demand for the utility increases. Allowable
uses shall have a maximum FAR of 0.5. Specific allowable uses and development standards
shall be determined by the Unified Development Code.
OVOV Special Development Areas
Calgrove Corridor / Smiser Ranch
An approximately 38-acre assemblage of land located east of Interstate 5, west of Wiley
Canyon Road and north of Calgrove Boulevard is commonly referred to as the Smiser Mule
Ranch within the Calgrove Corridor. The northern equestrian property remains largely
undeveloped and house multiple farming buildings, large pastures, and two equestrian
commercial buildings. A fitness center, a vacant restaurant pad and supporting parking facilities
are located on the properties to the south. Given the site’s location at the southern portion of
the Santa Clarita Valley, just north of the Newhall Pass, and its proximity and visibility to the
Interstate 5 corridor which borders the property to the west, this area is considered a gateway
into the City of Santa Clarita from the Los Angeles Basin.
Reasonable Development Potential
Based on Smiser’s gross acreage, this MX-N designation would allow for approximately
830,000 square feet of commercial development in addition to 702 residential units on the
property. However, this site has a number of physical constraints that will limit the subject
property from being developed to the maximum allowable standards. Those constraints include
oak trees, Caltrans right-of-way dedication, the future widening of Wiley Canyon Road to four
lanes, electrical easements, and drainage. Due to these known property constraints and the
sensitivity of land development to adjacent residential neighborhoods, any proposed project(s)
on this site shall not exceed 830,000 square feet (representing a floor area ratio of
approximately .5) of total residential and commercial combined development, excluding parking
facilities.
Mixed-Use Neighborhood and Desired Development Characteristics
Future use and development of this site is of careful consideration. For this mixed-use property,
potential projects will:
•   Be the subject of community outreach and public participation led by the applicant with the
    Calgrove Corridor Coalition, Calgrove corridor neighborhoods and the Wiley Canyon
    Elementary School (Newhall School District) prior to formal submittal;
•   Preserve the character of existing residential neighborhoods located along the Calgrove
    Corridor and provide adequate buffer and transition from any development on the subject
    properties;
•   Propose an economic engine with an appropriate amount of jobs, retail, office, restaurant
    and general commercial square footage combined with neighboring and integrated housing
    types;
June, 2011                          L-62

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                         Land Use
•   Be internally and externally pedestrian-oriented;
•   Consist of 360-degree architectural design with pedestrian-scaled building massing and
    forms where adjacent to existing residences, with the use of landscaping to visually soften
    hard edges of buildings;
•   Have varied building heights and create east/west sight lines; building heights taller than 55’
    would require approval of a conditional use permit;
•   Include a site-specific and a community-based recreational component;
•   Understand that introducing a higher density development at this location would have traffic
    and pedestrian circulation impacts on the existing neighborhood, and therefore to minimize
    those impacts, special attention to access points must be considered and;
•   Place internal driveways and walkways and locations of entrances and exits so not to
    disrupt the flow of traffic into or out of the existing residential neighborhoods, and to allow
    easy access to and from the project site from the Calgrove Boulevard freeway on-ramp/off-
    ramp.
North Newhall Area
The North Newhall Area (NNA) is an approximate 200-acre assemblage of land generally
bounded by the Metropolitan Water District (MWD) right-of-way on the east, Newhall Creek on
the south and west, and a significant ridgeline south of Via Princessa on the north. Most of the
NNA is located within the Placerita Canyon Special Standards District (PCSSD). The northern
approximate 100 acres of this NNA is undeveloped with a hillside to the north, oak trees and
Placerita Creek. The commercial corridor along the west side of Railroad Avenue consists of
mixed retail and commercial uses. The southern approximate 100 acres of this area is primarily
developed with existing single-family ranch style homes of varying sizes. A commercial center
with a wide mix of industrial and retail uses is located at the entrance to the NNA adjacent to
13th Street. Given the site’s characteristics, its proximity to Downtown Newhall and to the Jan
Heidt Metrolink Station location, and its surrounding and diverse communities, the NNA should
be subject to a broader and more comprehensive planning approach and have an MX-N (Mixed-
Use Neighborhood) and Community Commercial (CC) designation which acknowledges and
preserves the existing standards in the current PCSSD.
The NNA will be allowed to develop with guidelines, character and policies in place that will be
designed to be protective of the existing, developed portions of Placerita Canyon. This
development will be required to be done in a way to ensure that it provides buffering, transitional
densities and protection to the existing developed areas and not intrude in or change the
character of the developed areas of Placerita Canyon. Critical aspects of the PCSSD including
the provision of trails and other amenities to support the rural equestrian lifestyle of the existing
developed areas of Placerita Canyon shall be provided. Any development that is proposed is
intended to enhance the Placerita Canyon gateway with attractive visual amenities.
Reasonable Development Potential
Based on the NNA gross acreage of 200 acres, the MX-N and CC designations theoretically
could allow for approximately 4.3 million square feet of commercial development and up to
3,600 residential units in the NNA. However, this NNA site has a number of pronounced
                                                  L-63                                    June, 2011

Land Use                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
physical constraints and other limitations that severely limit it from being developed to the
maximum allowable standards. Those constraints include oak trees, an active creek which is a
blue-line stream, the railroad, the MWD right-of-way, drainage/hydrology issues, and potential
circulation/traffic issues. Due to these known property development constraints, and the
sensitivity of any land development to adjacent existing rural equestrian residential
neighborhoods, any proposed project(s) on this NNA site shall not exceed a total of 775
residential units and an aggregate total of 450,000 square feet of non-residential development,
excluding parking facilities. Proposed projects on the NNA shall incorporate a landscape buffer
along the MWD right-of-way and detached single-family residences adjacent to the MWD right-
of-way. Density of development should transition downward to the east, toward the MWD right
away.. Being that the NNA is part of the PCSSD, the area north of Placerita Creek will be zoned
NU-5 consistent with all like properties.
Mixed-Use Neighborhood and Desired Development Characteristics
The future uses and development of the NNA site requires careful advance planning and
consideration of any potential projects shall be required to address each of the following subject
areas:
Public Participation/Outreach
•   Be the subject of public participation and outreach led by the applicant(s) or the applicant’s
    representative, prior to formal submittal of a proposed project to the City. Such outreach
    would expressly include the Placerita Canyon Property Owners Association, as well as other
    stakeholders such as the Circle J Ranch Homeowner’s Association, the Old Town Newhall
    Association, the Hidden Knoll and Vista Valencia residents, The Master’s College, and the
    Newhall School District.
Traffic Intrusion/Gateways
•   Be internally and externally pedestrian-oriented, and have equestrian and bicycle amenities
    and accommodations;
•   Understand and acknowledge that any development at these locations will increase existing
    vehicular traffic and create new vehicular traffic, and that there will be impacts to equestrian
    and pedestrian circulation in the existing neighborhood, and therefore to minimize those
    impacts, special attention must be given to mitigate impacts caused by such identified
    access points;
•   Layout and orientation of any developments shall be designed to discourage and where
    possible prevent additional trips into Placerita Canyon caused by or resulting from such
    developments;
•   Include defined entry gateways or monuments into Placerita Canyon, complete with
    landscaping and architectural elements with signage expressly stating there is no through
    traffic allowed.
June, 2011                          L-64

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                      Land Use
Buffering and Transitions
•   Preserve the existing rural equestrian community character known generally as Placerita
    Canyon, and provide adequate buffers and transitions resulting from any proposed
    development;
•   Incorporate the current Santa Clarita Valley Trails Advisory Committee (SCVTAC) network
    of multi-use trails into adjacent neighborhoods which shall have rural and equestrian
    characteristics;
•   Require use of the MWD right-of-way as a landscaped buffer between the NNA within the
    PCSSD and the rest of Placerita Canyon, which landscaping shall consist of low water, low
    maintenance, landscape material.
Architecture
•   Consist of 360-degree architectural design with pedestrian-scaled building massing and
    forms where adjacent to existing residences, with the use of landscaping to visually soften
    hard edges of buildings;
•   Structures shall have varied building heights and designs shall create east/west sight lines;
•   Have transitional densities, as described above, decreasing in density and height in an
    easterly direction towards the MWD right-of-way away from Railroad Avenue, to include the
    MWD right-of-way as a landscaped buffer and detached single-family residences adjacent to
    the MWD right-of-way;
•   Building heights shall be subject to the same Unified Development Code requirements that
    apply to all of Placerita Canyon.
Flood Control
•   Waterway bottoms and sides shall not be improved with concrete or hard impervious
    surfaces and shall be maintained in a natural appearance;
•   Fencing shall not be permitted to cross riverbeds or waterways in a manner which denies or
    interferes with easy trail access;
•   On-site flood control mitigation would provide assistance or relief to other
    hydrology/drainage impacts within Placerita Canyon due to changes of topography on NNA
    properties.
Housing Types
•   It is not the City’s intent to see affordable housing located on this site;
•   The desired housing type in the NNA will attract residents who will assist in the economic
    revitalization of Downtown Newhall.
                                                   L-65                               June, 2011

 Land Use                                                      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
 Economic Development
 •   Based on the area’s proximity to the nearby Metrolink station and Old Town Newhall,
     propose a development that would be an economically sustainable village that is supportive
     of revitalization efforts, with an appropriate mix of retail, office, restaurant, and general
     commercial square footage combined with neighboring and integrated housing types.
 Recreation
 •   Include a site-specific and a community-based recreational component.
 Summary of Land Use Designations
 Table L-2 shows the total areas for each of these land use designations within the planning
 area, by County and City jurisdiction. Table L-3 shows the compatible zone districts within the
 County and City for each of the land use designations established by this element.
                           Table L-2: Land Use Designations and Areas
         Land Use Designation             Area in Acres       Units per Total Area        Percent
                                                                 Acre
 City (County)                        County         City
Non-Urban 1 (RL20)                    24,298.22          0.00          .05   24,298.22       7.82%
Non-Urban 2 (RL10)                    13,614.52          0.00          .10   13,614.52       4.38%
Non-Urban 3 (RL5)                     10,092.57          0.00          .20   10,092.57       3.25%
Non-Urban 4 (RL2)                     16,554.70     1,574.06           .50   18.128.76       5.84%
Non-Urban 5 (RL1)                       1,872.43    1,681.24          1.00     3,553.67      1.14%
Urban Residential 1 (H2)                6,617.77    2,435.42          2.00     9,053.19      2.91%
Urban Residential 2 (H5)                6,062.00    9,172.59          5.00   15,234.59       4.90%
Urban Residential 3                         0.00    2,087.25        11.00      2,087.25      0.67%
Urban Residential 4 (H18)                 667.52      242.52        18.00        910.04      0.29%
Urban Residential 5 (H30)                 407.90      556.74        30.00        964.64      0.29%
Mixed Use- Neighborhood                     0.00      263.73                     263.73      0.08%
Mixed Use- Corridor                         0.00      324.96                     324.96      0.10%
Regional Commercial (C)                 1,154.87      512.21                   1,667.08      0.54%
Community Commercial                        0.00      905.08                     905.08      0.29%
Neighborhood Commercial (CG)              465.25      193.57                     658.82      0.21%
Business Park (IO)                      1,967.67    3,286.67                   5,254.34      1.69%
Industrial (IL)                         1,267.91      244.03                   1,511.93      0.49%
Open Space (OS)                       17,241.26     5,502.04                 22,743.30       7.32%
OS-National Forest (OS-NF)           149,495.00       162.26                149,657.26      48.17%
OS-Bureau of Land                       3,427.17         0.00                3,427.174,      1.10%
Management (OS-BLM)                                                              506.75
Specific Plan (SP)                    14,540.04     2,545.65                 17,085.68       5.50%
Public Institutional (P)                4,129.48    1,489.82                5,619.3028       1.80%
                                                                                    .52
Non-classified Freeway                  2,952.35      533.59                   3,485.94      1.12%
Total                                276,953.01    33,713.41                310,666.42     100.00%
 June, 2011                          L-66

 City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                  Land Use
              Table L-3: Land Use Designation and Zoning Consistency Matrix
  Land Use Designation            Consistent County Zoning         Consistent City Zoning
Non-Urban/Rural Land
Non-Urban 1                    Light Agricultural (A-1)         Residential Estate (RE)
(County RL20)                  Heavy Agricultural (A-2)
Non-Urban 2                    Light Agricultural (A-1)         Residential Estate (RE)
(County RL10)                  Heavy Agricultural (A-2)
Non-Urban 3                    Light Agricultural (A-1)         Residential Estate (RE)
(County RL5)                   Heavy Agricultural (A-2)
Non-Urban 4                    Light Agricultural (A-1)         Residential Estate (RE)
(County RL2)                   Heavy Agricultural (A-2)
Non-Urban 5                    Light Agricultural (A-1)         Residential Very Low (RVL)
(County RL1)                   Heavy Agricultural (A-2)
                               Residential Agricultural (R-A)
Urban Residential
Urban Residential 1            Residential Agricultural (R-A)   Residential Low (RL)
(County H2)                    Single-Family Residence (R-1)
Urban Residential 2            Single-Family Residence (R-1)    Residential Suburban (RS)
(County H5)
Urban Residential 3            No corresponding zones           Residential Moderate (RM)
Urban Residential 4            Two-family Residence (R-2)       Residential Moderate (RM)
(County H18)                   Limited Multiple Residence (R-3)
Urban Residential 5 (UR5)      Limited Multiple Residence (R-3) Residential Medium High
(County H30)                   Unlimited Residence (R-4)        (RMH)
                                                                Residential High (RH)
Mixed Use
Mixed Use Neighborhood         No corresponding zones           Mixed Use Overlay (MU)
Mixed Use Corridor             No corresponding zones           Mixed Use Overlay (MU)
Mixed Use Urban Village        No corresponding zones           Mixed Use Overlay (MU)
Commercial
Regional Commercial            Unlimited Commercial (C-3)       Commercial Town Center
(County CM)                                                     (CTC)
                                                                Visitor-Serving/Resort (VSR)
Community Commercial           No corresponding zones           Community Commercial (CC)
Neighborhood Commercial        Restricted Business (C-1)        Commercial Neighborhood
(County CG)                    Neighborhood Business (C-2)      (CN)
Industrial
Business Park                  Commercial Manufacturing (CM) Business Park(BP)
(County IO)                    Scientific Research &            Commercial Office (CO)
                               Development (SR-D); Light
                               Manufacturing (M-1)
Industrial                     Light Manufacturing (M-1)        Industrial (I)
(County IL)                    Restricted Heavy Manufacturing Industrial Commercial (IC)
                               (M1.5); Heavy Manufacturing
                               (M-2)
Open Space
Open Space                     Open Space (O-S)                 Open Space (OS)
(County OS)
National Forest                Open Space (O-S)                 Open Space (OS)
(County OS-NF)
Bureau of Land                 Open Space (O-S)                 Open Space (OS)
                                                L-67                                June, 2011
 Land Use                                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
    Land Use Designation            Consistent County Zoning           Consistent City Zoning
Management
(County OS-BLM)
Other
Specific Plan                    Specific Plan (SP)                 Specific Plan (SP)
(County SP)
Public Facility                  Institutional (IT)                 All zones
(County P)
 M.       Reference to Other General Plan Elements
 In addition to the Land Use Map designation applied to each property within the planning area,
 other elements in the General Plan contain maps and descriptions of land that is subject to
 special consideration due to the presence of significant environmental resources or natural
 hazards. These elements should be consulted for information on any constraints that may affect
 the approved density or intensity of land uses for any particular parcel of land.
 The Safety Element identifies properties within the planning area that are subject to the
 following hazards that may affect development: seismic activity, unstable geologic and soils
 conditions, flooding and dam inundation, and fire hazards.
 The Conservation and Open Space Element identifies properties within the planning area that
 may include the following resources which may require protection as part of the development
 review process: soils and geological features, scenic views, aggregate and other mineral
 resources, sensitive biological species and habitat, water resources, cultural and historical
 resources, and open space.
 The Noise Element contains information on the locations of noise generators, and areas within
 the planning area that may be subject to noise levels exceeding recommended thresholds to
 maintain public health and safety.
 The Circulation Element indicates locations of existing and future transportation facilities that
 may be needed to support future development, or that may impact certain types of development
 if not mitigated through site design or other appropriate requirements.
 The Economic Development Element illustrates the community benefits to mixed used
 developments and promotes an increase of jobs in order to have a desirable jobs/housing
 balance that will result in fewer and shorter vehicular trips.
 The Housing Element identifies the broad range of housing types and their locations that are in
 zoning classifications consistent with the Land Use Element.
 In making any land use decision, all applicable maps, goals and policies should be reviewed
 and considered to ensure conformity with the entirety of the General Plan.
 June, 2011                           L-68
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                         Land Use
N.      Summary of Needs for Land Use Planning in the Santa Clarita Valley
Based on the discussion of issues as set forth in the background sections of the Land Use
Element, and on the projected population growth in the Santa Clarita Valley, the following needs
have been identified for land use planning which are addressed in the goals, policies, and Land
Use Map portions of this element.
    1. Manage growth in the Santa Clarita Valley to maintain livability, mobility, sustainability,
        and prosperity for all present and future residents.
    2. Ensure that the basic needs of residents and businesses are met and that public health,
        safety and welfare are protected through orderly and equitable designations of land uses
        throughout the Valley.
    3. Maintain the qualities that drew residents to the Valley, including open space and a
        small-town atmosphere, while accommodating growth at build-out of the planning area.
    4. Ensure consistency between County and City visions and plans for the Valley.
    5. Recognizing that the Santa Clarita Valley is a Valley of Villages, allow diversity within
        each neighborhood through appropriate land use designations and community design
        guidelines.
    6. Improve the jobs/housing balance in the Valley, promote businesses that bring higher-
        paying jobs, and provide opportunities for jobs closer to all residents of the Valley.
    7. Provide a wide range of retail, entertainment, and cultural opportunities to serve
        residents and visitors throughout the planning area.
    8. Retain and enhance an open space greenbelt around the Valley through designation of
        uses that discourage urban sprawl into foothill areas.
    9. Promote urban form, community design, and city beautification strategies that unify and
        enhance the Valley, increase quality of life, and provide a distinctive sense of place.
    10. Promote land use strategies that enhance public health and environmental quality.
    11. Improve traffic congestion and air quality by promoting mixed-use and transit-oriented
        development patterns, and planning for improved transit centers and facilities.
    12. Provide sufficient land designated for adequate housing affordable to all segments of the
        Valley’s population.
    13. Provide for the orderly phasing of infrastructure and public improvements to meet the
        needs of residents and businesses as development occurs, and require new
        development to provide the services needed to support growth.
    14. Ensure compatibility between intensive uses, including the Chiquita Canyon Landfill and
        the aggregate mining sites, and adjacent sensitive land uses.
    15. Provide incentives and opportunities to redevelop aging commercial and industrial areas.
                                                L-69                                     June, 2011

Land Use                                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
   16. Ensure that growth is supported by adequate natural resources, and that anticipated
       growth will not deplete or degrade these resources to unsustainable levels.
   17. Ensure that growth is supported by adequate community services, and work with all
       service providers to coordinate land use decisions so as to maintain adequate levels of
       service.
PART 2: LAND USE GOALS AND POLICIES
Urban Form
Goal LU 1: An interconnected Valley of Villages providing diverse lifestyles, surrounded by a
greenbelt of natural open space.
       Objective LU 1.1: Maintain an urban form for the Santa Clarita Valley that preserves an
       open space greenbelt around the developed portions of the Valley, protects significant
       resources from development, and directs growth to urbanized areas served with
       infrastructure.
               Policy LU 1.1.1: Where appropriate, protect mountains and foothills surrounding
               the Valley floor from urban development by designating these areas as Open
               Space or Non-Urban uses on the Land Use Map.
               Policy LU 1.1.2: On the Land Use Map, concentrate urban development within
               flatter portions of the Santa Clarita Valley floor in areas with limited
               environmental constraints and served with infrastructure.
               Policy LU 1.1.3: Discourage urban sprawl into rural areas by limiting non-
               contiguous, “leap-frog” development outside of areas designated for urban use.
               Policy LU 1.1.4: Preserve community character by maintaining natural features
               that act as natural boundaries between developed areas, including significant
               ridgelines, canyons, rivers and drainage courses, riparian areas, topographical
               features, habitat preserves, or other similar features, where appropriate.
               Policy LU 1.1.5: Increase infill development and re-use of underutilized sites
               within and adjacent to developed urban areas to achieve maximum benefit from
               existing infrastructure and minimize loss of open space, through redesignation of
               vacant sites for higher density and mixed use, where appropriate.
               Policy LU 1.1.6: Preserve the rural lifestyle in canyons and low-density, outlying
               areas of the Santa Clarita Valley, through designating these areas as Non-Urban
               on the Land Use Map, where appropriate.
               Policy LU 1.1.7: Preserve and protect important agricultural resources,
               including farmland and grazing land, through designating these areas as Open
               Space and Non-Urban on the Land Use Map, where appropriate.
June, 2011                          L-70

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Land Use
        Objective LU 1.2: Maintain the distinctive community character of villages and
        neighborhoods throughout the planning area by establishing uses, densities, and design
        guidelines appropriate to the particular needs and goals of each area, including but not
        limited to the following:
                Policy LU 1.2.1: In Newhall, provide opportunities for new business and housing
                by implementing the Downtown Newhall Specific Plan, provide incentives to
                promote infill development and re-use of underutilized sites, and continue to plan
                for the future development of North Newhall.
                Policy LU 1.2.2: In Valencia, promote business development, job creation, and
                expansion of regional commercial, civic, cultural, and entertainment uses, to
                create a vibrant Town Center serving as a community focal point for the entire
                Santa Clarita Valley.
                Policy LU 1.2.3: In Saugus, promote revitalization of older commercial areas;
                relieve traffic congestion; look for opportunities to minimize cut-through traffic;
                and enhance streetscapes with landscaping, lighting, benches and other fixtures.
                Policy LU 1.2.4: In Canyon Country, promote revitalization along Sierra
                Highway from Soledad Canyon Road to Vasquez Canyon Road by encouraging
                retail and service uses, and enhance on and off ramps along the Antelope Valley
                Freeway with landscape amenities and appropriate uses.
                Policy LU 1.2.5: In Sand Canyon, ensure compatibility of development with
                existing rural, equestrian lots and the adjacent National Forest land; provide
                additional recreational trail links; minimize impacts to the Santa Clara River from
                incompatible development; and maintain community character in accordance
                with the City’s Sand Canyon Special Standards District.
                Policy LU 1.2.6: In Placerita Canyon, ensure compatibility of development with
                existing rural, equestrian lots and the adjacent National Forest land; maintain
                community character in accordance with the City’s existing Placerita Canyon
                Special Standards District (PCSSD); provide an orderly transition between
                existing rural and low-density residential uses and proposed new development;
                and require the provision of needed infrastructure. . The City and the Placerita
                Canyon Property Owners Association shall work together to amend the PCSSD
                in the Unified Development Code (UDC) to provide additional certainty and
                expectations for the developed areas within the District and to create flexibility
                and continuity, subject to the provisions outlined above, for undeveloped
                properties in the District. These changes will include transitional density
                provisions, specific UDC rules and regulations that will clearly outline
                development codes within Placerita Canyon.
                Policy LU 1.2.7: On the Whittaker-Bermite site, continue to work with the
                property owner to facilitate master planning, remediation, and the economic re-
                use of the property to include roadway infrastructure and transit-oriented
                development around the Metrolink station.
                                                  L-71                                  June, 2011

Land Use                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                Policy LU 1.2.8: In Castaic, promote expansion of neighborhood commercial
                uses to serve local residents; address traffic congestion; and ensure compatibility
                between highway-oriented commercial uses and nearby residential uses; and
                maintain community character in accordance with the County’s Castaic Area
                Community Standards District.
                Policy LU 1.2.9: In Val Verde, protect the existing rural lifestyle and small town
                community character while providing residents with additional access to needed
                services; and ensure compatibility between existing residential areas and the
                nearby landfill; and maintain community character in accordance with the
                County’s Castaic Area Community Standards District.
                Policy LU 1.2.10: In Agua Dulce, recognize the scenic and environmental
                qualities of Vasquez Rocks in future planning; protect the existing rural lifestyle
                while providing opportunities to enhance the village center; and provide
                additional services to residents; and maintain community character in
                accordance with the County’s Agua Dulce Community Standards District.
                Policy LU 1.2.11: In Pico Canyon, recognize the historic significance of
                Mentryville in future planning; preserve the existing rural development pattern;
                and ensure compatibility of new development with the adjacent Significant
                Ecological Area and habitat.
                Policy LU 1.2.12: In the Fair Oaks community, facilitate location of commercial
                and community services in proximity to residences to serve local needs.
                Policy LU 1.2.13: Encourage use of the specific plan process to plan for
                cohesive, vibrant, pedestrian-oriented communities with mixed uses, access to
                public transit, and opportunities for living and working within the same
                community.
                Policy LU 1.2.14: Evaluate development fee schedules on an ongoing basis to
                determine fee incentives to attract development.
       Objective LU 1.3: Plan for density and intensity of development that respects and is
       reflective of the natural terrain.
                Policy LU 1.3.1: Encourage subdivision design techniques that reflect
                underlying physical topography or other unique physical features of the natural
                terrain.
                Policy LU 1.3.2: Substantially retain the integrity and natural grade elevations
                of significant natural ridgelines and prominent landforms that form the Valley's
                skyline backdrop.
                Policy LU 1.3.3: Discourage development on ridgelines and lands containing
                50% slopes so that these areas are maintained as natural open space.
                Policy LU 1.3.4: Encourage density transfers where appropriate to facilitate
                development in more suitable locations while retaining significant natural slopes
                and areas of environmental sensitivity, provided that urban densities (exceeding
                one dwelling unit per acre) are not permitted in rural areas.
June, 2011                           L-72

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                          Land Use
               Policy LU 1.3.5: Encourage flexible siting and design techniques within hillside
               areas in order to preserve steep slopes or other unique physical features,
               including clustering of residential units provided all residential lots meet the
               applicable minimum lot size requirements of the Land Use Element and the
               Zoning Ordinance, including the Community Special Standards Districts.
               Policy LU 1.3.6: Encourage retention of natural drainage patterns and the
               preservation of significant riparian areas, both of which are commonly located in
               hillside areas.
Mixed Land Uses
Goal LU 2: A mix of land uses to accommodate growth, supported by adequate resources and
maintaining community assets.
        Objective LU 2.1: Provide adequate, suitable sites for housing, employment, business,
        shopping, public facilities, public utility facilities, and community services to meet current
        needs and the anticipated needs of future growth.
               Policy LU 2.1.1: On the Land Use Map, designate a balance of land uses in
               appropriate amounts to meet future community needs, while ensuring that no use
               designation is over-represented in a manner that is not economically viable.
               Policy LU 2.1.2: On the Land Use Map, integrate land use designations in a
               manner that promotes healthy, walkable communities, by providing an
               appropriate mix of residential and service uses in proximity to one another.
               Policy LU 2.1.3: Provide a range of land use types and densities to reflect the
               special characteristics, lifestyles, and opportunities that differentiate various
               communities and villages in the Santa Clarita Valley, including urban, suburban,
               and rural living environments.
               Policy LU 2.1.4: Adopt a compatible set of land use designations between the
               County and City of Santa Clarita for land in the Santa Clarita Valley, to be
               implemented through standards and zones applied by each agency to ensure
               compatibility with the character of each area and with the goals of the County’s
               Area Plan and the City’s General Plan.
               Policy LU 2.1.5: Identify areas with hazardous conditions and ensure that uses
               in or adjacent to these areas pose minimal risk to public health or safety.
        Objective LU 2.2: Protect significant community resources from encroachment by
        incompatible uses, where feasible and appropriate.
               Policy LU 2.2.1: Identify areas of scenic or aesthetic value to the community,
               and minimize the designation of uses in these areas that would diminish their
               aesthetic quality.
               Policy LU 2.2.2: Identify sites and areas with historical or cultural value to the
               community, and ensure that uses in or adjacent to these areas will not impact
               their historical integrity.
                                                    L-73                                   June, 2011

Land Use                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
               Policy LU 2.2.3: Consistent with adopted plans, ensure that adequate open
               space is set aside and protected from development throughout the planning area
               in order to provide the benefits of watershed management, habitat preservation
               and connectivity, and recreational opportunities.
       Objective LU 2.3: Increase mixed-use development where appropriate to create more
       livable neighborhoods, walkable business districts, and to reduce vehicle trips, while
       ensuring land use compatibility, through mixed-use zoning:
               Policy LU 2.3.1: In a mixed-use development, residential densities at the higher
               end of the allowed range should be allowed only if the development incorporates
               a robust mix of non-residential uses.
               Policy LU 2.3.2: Either vertical or horizontal integration of uses shall be allowed
               in a mixed-use development, with an emphasis on tying together the uses with
               appropriate pedestrian linkages.
               Policy LU 2.3.3: Manufacturing, processing of goods and materials, and
               warehousing shall not be allowable uses in a mixed-use development although
               some light manufacturing and warehousing may be appropriate in second story
               units.
               Policy LU 2.3.4: Adequate public spaces and amenities shall be provided in a
               mixed-use development to support both commercial and residential uses,
               including but not limited to plazas, landscaped walkways, village greens, and
               greenbelts.
               Policy LU 2.3.5: Mixed-use developments shall be designed to create a
               pedestrian-scale environment through appropriate street and sidewalk widths,
               block lengths, relationship of buildings to streets, and use of public spaces.
               Policy LU 2.3.6: Provide parking alternatives in mixed-use developments,
               including subterranean parking and structured parking to limit the amount of
               surface area devoted to vehicle storage.
Healthy Neighborhoods
Goal LU 3: Healthy and safe neighborhoods for all residents.
       Objective LU 3.1: Provide for a diversity of housing types available to provide safe and
       suitable homes for all economic levels, household sizes, age groups and special needs
       groups within the community.
               Policy LU 3.1.1: On the Land Use Map, designate adequate land for residential
               use at various densities to provide a mix of housing opportunities for all
               segments of the population, including attached, detached, senior, and mixed-use
               housing types, which are consistent with community character and meet the
               region’s housing goals.
June, 2011                         L-74

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                      Land Use
               Policy LU 3.1.2: Provide a mix of housing types within neighborhoods that
               accommodate households with varied income levels.
               Policy LU 3.1.3: Promote opportunities for live-work units to accommodate
               residents with home-based businesses.
               Policy LU 3.1.4: Promote development of workforce housing to meet the needs
               of those employed in the Santa Clarita Valley.
               Policy LU 3.1.5: Promote development of housing that is affordable to
               residents, including households with incomes in the very low, low, and moderate
               income classifications, through provision of adequate sites on the Land Use Map,
               allowance for density bonuses and other development incentives.
               Policy LU 3.1.6: Promote development of housing suitable to residents with
               special needs, including but not limited to senior citizens and persons with
               disabilities.
               Policy LU 3.1.7: Promote development of housing for students attending local
               colleges, in consideration of access to campuses to the extent practicable.
        Objective LU 3.2: Promote walkable neighborhoods that provide safe access to
        community services and essential services.
               Policy LU 3.2.1: Require provision of adequate walkways in urban residential
               neighborhoods that provide safe and accessible connections to destinations such
               as schools, parks, and neighborhood commercial centers.
               Policy LU 3.2.2: In planning residential neighborhoods, include pedestrian
               linkages, landscaped parkways with sidewalks, and separated trails for
               pedestrians and bicycles, where appropriate and feasible.
        Objective LU 3.3: Ensure that the design of residential neighborhoods considers and
        includes measures to reduce impacts from natural or man-made hazards.
               Policy LU 3.3.1: Identify areas subject to hazards from seismic activity, unstable
               soils, excessive noise, unhealthful air quality, or flooding, and avoid designating
               residential uses in these areas unless adequately mitigated.
               Policy LU 3.3.2: In areas subject to wildland fire danger, ensure that land uses
               have adequate setbacks, fuel modification areas, and emergency access routes.
               Policy LU 3.3.3: Identify neighborhoods in which uses that pose a potential
               hazard to human health and safety may be over-concentrated, and address
               public safety through use of buffer areas, policies on siting decisions for such
               uses, changing land use designations, or other means as deemed appropriate.
               Policy LU 3.3.4: Evaluate service levels for law enforcement and fire protection
               as needed to ensure that adequate response times are maintained as new
               residential development is occupied.
                                               L-75                                    June, 2011
Land Use                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
               Policy LU 3.3.5: Through the development review process, ensure that all new
               residential development is provided with adequate emergency access and that
               subdivision and site designs permit ready access by public safety personnel.
               Policy LU 3.3.6: Ensure adequate street-lighting in all urban residential
               neighborhoods, as appropriate, for each community.
               Policy LU 3.3.7: Ensure adequate addressing in all residential neighborhoods
               for emergency response personnel.
               Policy LU 3.3.8: Within multiple family residential projects comprised of multiple
               buildings, ensure that project designs include crime prevention measures such
               as delineating public and private open space, designs for defensible space, easy
               surveillance by residents of all outdoor and indoor common areas, lack of dead
               end aisles or paths, and similar measures.
       Objective LU 3.4: Encourage creation of pleasant neighborhoods that provide a high
       quality of life for residents.
               Policy LU 3.4.1: Promote the inclusion of green spaces, neighborhood parks,
               and other gathering places that allow neighbors to meet one another and
               encourage “eyes on the street” for safety purposes.
               Policy LU 3.4.2: Ensure provision of street trees in urban residential areas
               where appropriate, to provide shade, comfort, and aesthetic enhancement.
               Policy LU 3.4.3: Provide appropriate levels of code enforcement to ensure
               maintenance of neighborhoods in a clean, healthy, and safe condition.
               Policy LU 3.4.4: Within higher density housing developments, ensure provision
               of adequate recreational and open space amenities to ensure a high quality living
               environment.
               Policy LU 3.4.5: Ensure compatibility between single family and multiple family
               residential developments through consideration of building height and massing,
               architectural treatment, connectivity, privacy, and other design considerations.
               Policy LU 3.4.6: Promote mixed-density residential neighborhoods that are
               consistent with community character, and avoid over-development of high
               density multiple family units in any particular location.
               Policy LU 3.4.7: Minimize the prominence of areas devoted to automobile
               parking and access in the design of residential neighborhoods.
               Policy LU 3.4.8: Require architectural design treatment along all sides of new
               housing to promote continuity of architectural scale and rhythm and avoid the
               appearance of blank walls (360 degree enhancement).
               Policy LU 3.4.9: Encourage street cross-sections that locate landscaped
               parkways between the curb and the sidewalk to create a visually pleasing
               streetscape and provide pedestrian protection.
June, 2011                            L-76

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                      Land Use
Economic Vitality
Goal LU 4: A diverse and healthy economy.
        Objective LU 4.1: Promote creation of strong regional and local economies.
               Policy LU 4.1.1: Promote expansion and enhancement of the Valencia Town
               Center to provide a focal point for cultural, civic, educational, and shopping
               activities serving the entire Santa Clarita Valley.
               Policy LU 4.1.2: Promote creation of village commercial centers throughout the
               Santa Clarita Valley to meet the local and convenience needs of residents.
               Policy LU 4.1.3: Direct business creation and expansion for larger companies
               within and adjacent to existing and planned business centers and major
               transportation corridors.
               Policy LU 4.1.4: Promote economic opportunity for all segments of the
               community, including small businesses and new businesses.
               Policy LU 4.1.5: Provide a clear and consistent planning and permitting process
               to encourage new development that conforms to the General Plan.
               Policy LU 4.1.6: Encourage the development of a range of child care services
               and facilities to serve the needs of working families, including public and private
               child care centers, infant care, and after-school care, through supportive zoning
               regulations and permitting procedures.
        Objective LU 4.2: Promote job creation, focusing on employment generators in the
        technical and professional sectors.
               Policy LU 4.2.1: Pursue business attraction and expansion programs for clean
               industries that provide job opportunities for local residents, particularly in the
               areas of film/entertainment, biotechnology, aerospace, and technology.
               Policy LU 4.2.2: Achieve a balanced ratio of jobs to housing through business
               expansion and economic development programs, with a goal of at least 1.5 jobs
               per household.
               Policy LU 4.2.3: Encourage businesses to locate in all appropriate areas of the
               community to encourage job creation in closer proximity to workforce housing.
               Policy LU 4.2.4: Coordinate with local colleges to promote job training programs
               for Santa Clarita Valley residents.
               Policy LU 4.2.5: Promote development of uses that create job opportunities for
               residents through the Santa Clarita Enterprise Zone and other business
               assistance programs as appropriate.
        Objective LU 4.3: Enhance older commercial and industrial areas.
                                                L-77                                   June, 2011
Land Use                                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
              Policy LU 4.3.1: Promote redevelopment in Old Town Newhall through
              construction of public improvements pursuant to the Downtown Newhall Specific
              Plan and future area planning efforts.
              Policy LU 4.3.2: Promote business development in Castaic and Val Verde to
              provide a greater range of goods and services to area residents.
              Policy LU 4.3.3: Promote revitalization of commercial uses along Sierra
              Highway between Soledad Canyon Road and Vasquez Canyon Road, to
              encourage businesses serving the Canyon Country neighborhoods and support
              services for the College of the Canyons east campus.
              Policy LU 4.3.4: Promote business development that upgrades and revitalizes
              older commercial corridors, including Lyons Avenue, Railroad Avenue/Newhall
              Avenue, Main Street and Soledad Canyon Road, in a manner that reflects each
              area’s character, architecture, and history.
              Policy LU 4.3.5: Coordinate with property owners and environmental agencies,
              and provide assistance as appropriate, to promote clean up and redevelopment
              of the Whittaker Bermite property as a business and employment center.
              Policy LU 4.3.6: Coordinate with property owners and environmental agencies,
              and provide assistance as appropriate, to promote clean up and remediation of
              oil fields west of State Route 14.
              Policy LU 4.3.7: Promote revitalization and reuse of the older industrial areas
              east of the railroad, adjacent to the intersection of Springbrook and Drayton
              Avenues and in the Honby area adjacent to the Santa Clara River.
       Objective LU 4.4: Expand infrastructure to attract and sustain new business.
              Policy LU 4.4.1: Promote extension of state-of-the-art communication facilities
              to serve commercial and industrial areas, including fiber optic cable,
              telecommunication facilities, and other technology as deemed appropriate.
              Policy LU 4.4.2: Improve flood control facilities along Sierra Highway north of
              Soledad Canyon Road to allow increased use of this corridor for business and
              employment uses.
              Policy LU 4.4.3: Evaluate the feasibility of connecting business activity centers
              throughout the Santa Clarita Valley with light rail, to provide increased mobility
              and access for customers and employees between the Valencia Town Center,
              Whittaker Bermite property, Newhall, Valencia Industrial Center, Magic Mountain
              and Entrada, Newhall Ranch, and other areas as deemed appropriate.
              Policy LU 4.4.4: Protect and enhance public utility facilities as necessary to
              maintain the safety, reliability, integrity, and security of essential public service
              systems for all Valley residents.
       Objective LU 4.5: Ensure creation of attractive and technology-friendly business
       environments to attract tenants and employees.
June, 2011                         L-78

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                           Land Use
                 Policy LU 4.5.1: Promote inclusion of employee amenities in the workplace,
                 including but not limited to outdoor seating and break areas, child care services,
                 wellness facilities, and facilities for bicycle commuters, including bike lockers and
                 showers where appropriate.
                 Policy LU 4.5.2: Encourage the provision of usable open space that is
                 accessible to employees and visitors, and discourage the provision of large areas
                 of water-consuming landscaping that are not usable or accessible.
                 Policy LU 4.5.3: Promote the inclusion of state-of-the-art technology within
                 business complexes for telecommunications, heating and cooling, water and
                 energy conservation, and other similar design features.
                 Policy LU 4.5.4: Encourage the provision of support services for employees
                 within business park areas, such as dining and personal services where
                 appropriate, to reduce vehicle trips and promote pedestrian-friendly work
                 environments.
Mobility
Goal LU 5: Enhanced mobility through alternative transportation choices and land use patterns.
        Objective LU 5.1: Provide for alternative travel modes linking neighborhoods,
        commercial districts, and job centers.
                 Policy LU 5.1.1:          Require safe, secure, clearly-delineated, adequately-
                 illuminated walkways and bicycle facilities in all commercial and business
                 centers.
                 Policy LU 5.1.2: Require connectivity between walkways and bikeways serving
                 neighborhoods and nearby commercial areas, schools, parks, and other
                 supporting services and facilities.
                 Policy LU 5.1.3: Ensure that adequate bus turnouts, served by walkways and
                 comfortable, safe, and convenient waiting facilities, are provided for transit users
                 within residential, shopping, and business developments.
        Objective LU 5.2: Coordinate land use designations with support services and public
        transit in order to encourage vehicle trip reduction.
                 Policy LU 5.2.1: Designate higher-density residential uses in areas served by
                 public transit and a full range of support services.
                 Policy LU 5.2.2: Provide for location of neighborhood commercial uses in
                 proximity to the neighborhoods they serve, to encourage cycling and walking to
                 local stores.
                 Policy LU 5.2.3: Promote location of non-polluting businesses providing
                 employment opportunities in proximity to neighborhoods, to encourage walking to
                 work.
                                                    L-79                                    June, 2011
Land Use                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
               Policy LU 5.2.4: Encourage transit-oriented development (TOD) through
               designation of land uses that allow compact, mixed-use development in proximity
               to rail stations and multi-modal transit facilities, in conformance with applicable
               policies.
               Policy LU 5.2.5: Encourage the mix of compatible uses in areas where, though
               not served by rail or transit, mixed uses will achieve more walkable
               neighborhoods and trip reduction, in conformance with applicable policies.
Community Appearance
Goal LU 6: A scenic and beautiful urban environment that builds on the community’s history
and natural setting.
       Objective LU 6.1: Maintain the natural beauty of the Santa Clarita Valley’s hillsides,
       significant ridgelines, canyons, oak woodlands, rivers and streams.
               Policy LU 6.1.1: Designate ridgelines throughout the planning area, and
               preserve these ridgelines from development by encouraging a minimum distance
               for grading and development from these ridgelines of 50 feet, or more, if
               determined preferable by the reviewing authority based on site conditions.
               Policy LU 6.1.2: On the Land Use Map, designate publicly owned portions of
               the Santa Clara River corridor and its major tributaries, as Open Space.
               Policy LU 6.1.3: Ensure that new development in hillside areas is designed to
               protect the scenic backdrop of foothills and canyons enjoyed by Santa Clarita
               Valley communities, through requiring compatible hillside management
               techniques that may include but are not limited to clustering of development;
               contouring and landform grading; revegetation with native plants; limited site
               disturbance; avoidance of tall retaining and build-up walls; use of stepped pads;
               and other techniques as deemed appropriate.
       Objective LU 6.2: Provide attractive public and open spaces in places visited by
       residents and visitors, where feasible and appropriate.
               Policy LU 6.2.1: Promote the inclusion of plazas, courtyards, seating areas,
               public art, and similar features within commercial centers, business parks, and
               civic facilities visited by the general public.
               Policy LU 6.2.2: Provide and enhance trail heads where appropriate with
               landscaping, seating, trash receptacles and information kiosks.
       Objective LU 6.3: Beautify streetscapes and gateways to the community.
               Policy LU 6.3.1: Promote planting of street trees throughout urban areas in the
               Santa Clarita Valley.
               Policy LU 6.3.2: Develop compatible landscape plans for major arterials
               traversing the Santa Clarita Valley, including landscaped medians and parkways,
               and implement these plans in both City and County areas, where feasible and
               appropriate based on right of way and other conditions.
June, 2011                            L-80

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Land Use
               Policy LU 6.3.3: Enhance major entrance points to the community, including on
               and off ramps from Interstate 5 and State Route 14; entrances along State Route
               126; and at the northern and southern entrance points on Sierra Highway, where
               feasible and appropriate.
               Policy LU 6.3.4: Require undergrounding of utility lines for new development
               where feasible, and plan for undergrounding of existing utility lines in conjunction
               with street improvement projects where economically feasible.
               Policy LU 6.3.5: Restrict the establishment of billboards within the planning
               area.
        Objective LU 6.4: Protect the Santa Clarita Valley’s significant historical and cultural
        resources in a scenic setting through appropriate land use designations.
               Policy LU 6.4.1: Maintain the historic buildings in Newhall, including the William
               Hart Regional Park buildings, the Tom Mix cottages at Heritage Junction, the
               American Theater, the Melody Ranch, and various other commercial and
               residential structures designated as local historic resources, through
               implementation of preservation measures in the Downtown Newhall Specific
               Plan.
               Policy LU 6.4.2: Enhance the area around historic Lang Station by requiring a
               Specific Plan for redevelopment of this area.
               Policy LU 6.4.3: Maintain cultural resources from pre-historical Native American
               habitation and historical settlement in the areas around Vasquez Rocks, Elsmere
               Canyon, and along the Santa Clara River, through designation of these areas as
               Open Space on the Land Use Map.
               Policy LU 6.4.4: Maintain the historic site of Mentryville by designating the site
               as Open Space on the Land Use Map.
               Policy LU 6.4.5: Maintain the historic area of the Rancho San Francisco
               Estancia through implementation of preservation measures in the Newhall Ranch
               Specific Plan.
               Policy LU 6.4.6: Through the environmental review and development review
               processes, evaluate impacts on historic and cultural sites from proposed
               development and require appropriate mitigation.
        Objective LU 6.5: Promote high quality development that enhances the urban
        environment and builds long-term value.
               Policy LU 6.5.1: Require use of high quality, durable, and natural-appearing
               building materials pursuant to applicable ordinances.
               Policy LU 6.5.2: Encourage the use of designs and architectural styles that
               incorporate classic and timeless architectural features.
                                                L-81                                    June, 2011

Land Use                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
              Policy LU 6.5.3: Require architectural enhancement and articulation on all sides
              of buildings (360 degree architecture), with special consideration at building
              entrances and corners, and along facades adjacent to major arterial streets.
              Policy LU 6.5.4: Evaluate new development in consideration of its context, to
              ensure that buildings create a coherent living environment, a cohesive urban
              fabric, and contribute to a sense of place consistent with the surrounding
              neighborhoods.
Environmentally Responsible Development
Goal LU 7: Environmentally responsible development through site planning, building design,
waste reduction, and responsible stewardship of resources.
       Objective LU 7.1: Achieve greater energy efficiency in building and site design.
              Policy LU 7.1.1: Require shade trees within parking lots and adjacent to
              buildings to reduce the heat island effect, in consideration of Fire Department fuel
              modification restrictions.
              Policy LU 7.1.2: Promote the use of solar panels and renewable energy
              sources in all projects.
              Policy LU 7.1.3: Encourage development of energy-efficient buildings, and
              discourage construction of new buildings for which energy efficiency cannot be
              demonstrated.
              Policy LU 7.1.4: Support the establishment of energy-efficient industries in the
              Santa Clarita Valley.
       Objective LU 7.2: Ensure an adequate water supply to meet the demands of growth.
              Policy LU 7.2.1: Monitor growth, and coordinate with water districts as needed
              to ensure that long-range needs for potable and reclaimed water will be met.
              Policy LU 7.2.2: If water supplies are reduced from projected levels due to
              drought, emergency, or other unanticipated events, take appropriate steps to
              limit, reduce, or otherwise modify growth permitted by the General Plan in
              consultation with water districts to ensure adequate long-term supply for existing
              businesses and residents.
              Policy LU 7.2.3: Require that all new development proposals demonstrate a
              sufficient and sustainable water supply prior to approval.
       Objective LU 7.3: Protect surface and ground water quality through design of
       development sites and drainage improvements.
              Policy LU 7.3.1: Promote the use of permeable paving materials to allow
              infiltration of surface water into the water table.
June, 2011                          L-82
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                        Land Use
                Policy LU 7.3.2: Maintain stormwater runoff onsite by directing drainage into
                rain gardens, natural landscaped swales, rain barrels, permeable areas, and use
                of drainage areas as design elements, where feasible and reasonable.
                Policy LU 7.3.3: Seek methods to decrease impermeable site area where
                reasonable and feasible, in order to reduce stormwater runoff and increase
                groundwater infiltration, including use of shared parking and other means as
                appropriate.
                Policy LU 7.3.4: Implement best management practices for erosion control
                throughout the construction and development process.
                Policy LU 7.3.5: Limit development within flood-prone areas to minimize down-
                stream impacts.
        Objective LU 7.4: Promote water conservation through building and site design.
                Policy LU 7.4.1: Require the use of drought tolerant landscaping, native
                California plant materials, and evapotranspiration (smart) irrigation systems.
                Policy LU 7.4.2: Require the use of low-flow fixtures in all non-residential
                development and residential development with five or more dwelling units, which
                may include but are not limited to water conserving shower heads, toilets,
                waterless urinals and motion-sensor faucets, and encourage use of such fixtures
                in building retrofits as appropriate.
        Objective LU 7.5: Promote waste reduction through site and building design.
                Policy LU 7.5.1: Ensure that all new development provides adequate space for
                recycling receptacles and bins on site.
                Policy LU 7.5.2: Promote the use of recycled building materials.
        Objective LU 7.6: Protect natural habitats through site design where reasonable and
        feasible.
                Policy LU 7.6.1: Limit outdoor lighting levels to the minimum needed for safety
                and security, and encourage lower lighting levels when businesses are closed.
                Policy LU 7.6.2: Preserve habitat connectivity in site planning where feasible,
                and discourage the creation of open space islands surrounded by paving.
                Policy LU 7.6.3: Protect wildlife corridors through site design and appropriate
                land use designations, including mapped corridors and other corridors that may
                be identified through biological surveys.
                Policy LU 7.6.4: Encourage site designs that protect oak trees, hillsides, and
                biological resources through creative solutions.
        Objective LU 7.7: Protect significant mineral resources, natural gas storage facilities,
        and petroleum extraction facilities from encroachment by incompatible uses.
                                                  L-83                                   June, 2011
Land Use                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                Policy LU 7.7.1: Maintain a suitable distance and/or provide buffering to
                separate aggregate mining and processing activities from nearby residential uses
                and other uses with sensitive receptors to noise and airborne emissions.
                Policy LU 7.7.2: Avoid designating land uses in areas with significant mineral
                resources or utility facilities that would preclude the future extraction and use of
                those resources and facilities.
                Policy LU-7.3.6: Support emerging methods and technologies for the onsite
                capture, treatment, and infiltration of stormwater and greywater, and amend the
                City Code to allow these methods and technologies when they are proven to be
                safe and feasible.
                Policy LU 7.7.3: Encourage the operators of existing surface mines to consider
                an end use site restoration plan that will result in land use conversions to aide in
                implementing the jobs-housing balance policies, economic vitality goals and
                policies, and which will reinforce the image of the Santa Clarita Valley as an eco-
                conscious community.
        Objective LU 7.8: Protect significant woodlands, heritage oak trees, and other
        biological resources from the impacts of development.
                Policy LU 7.8.1: Adopt and implement consistent policies for protection of oak
                woodlands and oak trees throughout the planning area.
                Policy LU 7.8.2: Protect all designated Significant Ecological Areas (SEA’s)
                from incompatible development.
Environmental Justice
Goal LU 8: Equitable and convenient access to social, cultural, educational, civic, medical, and
recreational facilities and opportunities for all residents.
        Objective LU 8.1: Work with service providers to plan for adequate community facilities
        and services to meet the needs of present and future residents.
                Policy LU 8.1.1: Coordinate plans for new residential development with affected
                school districts to ensure adequate mitigation of impacts on school facilities;
                provision of facilities and programs to promote academic excellence for Santa
                Clarita Valley students; coordination on joint use of facilities and transportation;
                and long-range planning.
                Policy LU 8.1.2: Implement a master plan for trails throughout the Santa Clarita
                Valley to serve all residents.
                Policy LU 8.1.3: Implement a master plan for parks, with special focus on
                provision of additional playfields for youth sports in locations accessible to
                underserved neighborhoods.
June, 2011                           L-84

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                      Land Use
               Policy LU 8.1.4: Ensure that an adequate and diverse supply of child care
               facilities and services is available to parents who live and/or work in the Santa
               Clarita Valley, by promoting child care facilities in commercial and residential
               areas subject to the applicable zoning requirements
               Policy LU 8.1.5: Coordinate with the Los Angeles County Library System to
               assist in expanding library services as needed to meet the needs of the
               community.
               Policy LU 8.1.6: Coordinate with the Arts Alliance and other similar entities to
               promote access to cultural events and facilities for all residents.
               Policy LU 8.1.7: Work with medical service providers to facilitate preservation
               and enhancement of health services, including the Santa Clarita Valley’s trauma
               center, provided applications are in conformance with applicable General Plan
               policies and environmental requirements.
               Policy LU 8.1.8: Work with social service agencies providing assistance to
               homeless persons to develop and maintain a suitable shelter in the Santa Clarita
               Valley.
               Policy LU 8.1.9: Assist persons and households with temporary housing needs
               by promoting transitional housing facilities for victims of domestic violence in
               multiple-family residential land use designations, subject to applicable zoning
               requirements.
               Policy LU 8.1.10: Coordinate with agencies that provide services to seniors and
               the elderly to expand senior facilities, which may include a new senior center.
               Policy LU 8.1.11: Work with existing utilities, agencies and renewable energy
               companies to remove barriers to renewable energy production.
               Policy LU 8.1.12: The City, County and the school districts shall cooperate to
               identify appropriate land to construct new school facilities throughout the
               planning area. Annual information and update meetings between the planning
               agencies and the districts are encouraged.
               Policy LU 8.1.13: In meeting state law for mitigation, there may be times when
               additional resources are required in order for the district to fully
               provide necessary services. Accordingly, Developers are encouraged to reach
               full mitigation agreements with the appropriate school districts impacted by their
               proposed project. Mitigation may include, but might not be limited to,
               modifications to existing school sites.
               Policy LU 8.1.14: Developers of infill projects shall be aware of the potential
               cumulative effect that these smaller projects have on schools. Pre and post
               construction, infill projects shall be monitored to evaluate student generation
               rates.
                                                L-85                                   June, 2011

Land Use                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
               Policy LU 8.1.15: Proposed school sites shall be sufficiently sized, pre-identified
               and on California Department of Education and Department of Toxic Substances
               Control approvable land. Further site design considerations shall include
               appropriate pedestrian and bicycle access.
       Objective LU 8.2: Ensure equal access to community services and facilities by all
       residents.
               Policy LU 8.2.1: In making locational decisions for siting new community
               facilities, consider ease of access for all users (vehicular, pedestrian, and transit).
               Policy LU 8.2.2: Identify neighborhoods that are underserved by public facilities
               and community services, and plan for equitable distribution of these facilities.
       Objective LU 8.3: Promote equitable development and utilization of land.
               Policy LU 8.3.1: Require fair and equitable treatment in considering, adopting,
               implementing, and enforcing development regulations and policies, including but
               not limited to providing equal opportunity for public input and considering impacts
               from development approvals on all segments of the population.
Public Facilities
Goal LU 9: Adequate public facilities and services, provided in a timely manner and in
appropriate locations to serve existing and future residents and businesses.
       Objective LU 9.1: Coordinate land use planning with provision of adequate public
       services and facilities to support development.
               Policy LU 9.1.1: Ensure construction of adequate infrastructure to meet the
               needs of new development prior to occupancy.
               Policy LU 9.1.2: Coordinate review of development projects with other agencies
               and special districts providing utilities and other services.
               Policy LU 9.1.3: Protect major utility transmission corridors, pumping stations,
               reservoirs, booster stations, and other similar facilities from encroachment by
               incompatible uses, while allowing non-intrusive uses such as plant nurseries,
               greenbelts and recreational trails.
               Policy LU 9.1.4: Develop and apply compatible standards within City and
               County areas for design and maintenance of utility infrastructure, in consideration
               of the character of each community.
               Policy LU 9.1.5: Work with the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department to
               expand law enforcement facilities to meet the needs of the Santa Clarita Valley’s
               growing population.
               Policy LU 9.1.6: Coordinate with appropriate agencies and organizations to
               ensure that landfill expansion needs are met while minimizing adverse impacts to
               Valley residents.
June, 2011                          L-86

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                        Land Use
                Policy LU 9.1.7: Provide for location of additional waste transfer stations and
                other facilities to promote recycling and reuse of materials within Industrial
                designations on the Land Use Map, subject to applicable zoning requirements.
        Objective LU 9.2:       Coordination of City and County sewer master planning and sewer
        mitigation to support future development and avoid fiscal impacts to local government or
        the existing community.
                Policy LU 9.2.1:       Ensure that the cost of extending new sewer infrastructure
                is fully borne by the new development that is served, and is not passed on to the
                existing community.
                Policy LU 9.2.2:       Require that all new development mitigates its impact on
                existing sewer capacity by upgrading facilities when warranted or payment of a
                fee to allow construction of new facilities when needed.
                Policy LU 9.2.3:       Develop a common City/County capacity-based threshold
                to determine when new development will be required to construct upsized
                downstream sewer facilities.
                Policy LU 9.2.4:       Facilitate the efficient construction of sewer infrastructure
                by sizing facilities to accommodate anticipated future sewer flows within the
                sewershed.
                Policy LU 9.2.5:       Cooperate with the development community to allow
                reimbursement for the cost of constructed sewer facilities with a capacity that
                exceeds what would be required to mitigate a project’s own sewer impact.
                Policy LU 9.2.6:       Coordinate to ensure that new development projects have
                agreed to mitigate both City and County sewer impacts prior to project approval.
                Policy LU 9.2.7:       Ensure that properties which benefit from increased
                density or intensity of development resulting from a General Plan Amendments
                fully mitigate their increased sewer impact at the time that development or
                redevelopment occurs on their properties.
                                                 L-87                                   June, 2011

Land Use                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                PART 3:        IMPLEMENTATION OF THE LAND USE ELEMENT
The City of Santa Clarita will implement the goals, objectives and policies of the Land Use
Element of the Santa Clarita Valley General Plan through the following actions.
    1. Revise the City’s Development Code and other development related ordinances as
        needed to ensure consistency with the updated General Plan.
    2. Through the review process for new development entitlements, require all new
        development to be consistent with maps, goals and policies of the General Plan.
    3. Update master plans for drainage, streets, trails, parks, and other City infrastructure and
        facilities in conformance with the General Plan.
    4. Revise the City’s Capital Improvement Program as needed to incorporate needed
        capital projects identified in General Plan update.
    5. Conduct a yearly review of the Capital Improvement Program (CIP) by the Planning
        Commission to determine consistency of the annual CIP with all elements of the
        General Plan.
    6. Conduct an annual review of the General Plan and file a report with the California Office
        of Planning and Research and Department of Community Development pursuant to
        Government Code Section 65400(a)(2).
    7. Ensure that any acquisition of real property for public use is consistent with the General
        Plan, pursuant to Government Code Section 65402.
    8. In cooperation with the County of Los Angeles, develop and adopt consistent policies
        and guidelines for hillside development and ridgeline protection within the Santa Clarita
        Valley.
    9. In cooperation with the County of Los Angeles, develop and adopt consistent policies
        and guidelines for streetscape beautification, enhancement of Valley gateways,
        enhancement of regional trail facilities, transit benches and shelters, and other similar
        features that will create a distinctive community identity for the Santa Clarita Valley.
    10. In cooperation with the County of Los Angeles, develop and implement consistent
        policies for protection of oak woodlands and significant trees throughout the planning
        area.
    11. In cooperation with the County of Los Angeles, coordinate review of major development
        projects such as specific plans and projects that may have regional impacts, in order to
        ensure consistency of such projects with the mutual objectives of the General Plan.
    12. In cooperation with the County of Los Angeles, review any proposed General Plan
        Amendments that may have regional effects to ensure compliance with applicable
        mutually adopted goals and objectives.
    13. Monitor effectiveness of the General Plan in achieving the goals of the community
        regarding land use, and initiate amendments thereto as needed to meet changing
        conditions, needs, and objectives.
June, 2011                           L-88

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                         Economic Development
                             ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
                                             JUNE, 2011
I.       INTRODUCTION
The Santa Clarita Valley has long been recognized as one of Southern California’s most sought-
after residential communities. For years, the area was synonymous with family-friendly
development tracts, small businesses, and was commonly referred to as the “community
adjacent to Magic Mountain,” which served as a foundational identifier and today is still an iconic
symbol of the area.
Recognized as one of the nation’s top cities in which to live (CNN Money Magazine, 2006),
Santa Clarita’s emergence as an economic powerhouse is attributable to several factors, such
as: visionary private and public sector leadership; strong linkages between education and
industry; and the increasing number of large employers expanding within or relocating to the
area.
This Economic Development Element examines the many factors critical to the Santa Clarita
Valley’s continued success as one of Southern California’s top communities for business
development.
The City of Santa Clarita and the adjacent unincorporated communities in Los Angeles County
are focused on fostering a unique work-life balance for Santa Clarita Valley residents.
Specifically the City of Santa Clarita has focused on three primary goals relating to economic
development in the Santa Clarita Valley, including: 1) establishing a jobs/housing balance
through quality employment opportunities for residents; 2) building an economic base for all
communities through increased sales tax generation; and 3) developing economic wealth in the
Santa Clarita Valley by attracting external monies to the economy.
This Element addresses key goals of these communities as they relate to the economic
prosperity of the Santa Clarita Valley. It looks at the area’s strengths, the programs and
organizations fueling the Santa Clarita Valley’s economic growth and success, and the
opportunities and challenges unique to the burgeoning Valley.
The primary objectives of the Economic Development Element are to:
• Provide an overview of the past, existing, and future economic conditions and challenges in
    Santa Clarita;
• Emphasize the importance of community collaborations, information sharing, and data
    collection as they relate to identifying and working within current and future economic trends
    in the Santa Clarita Valley and Los Angeles County region;
• Give direction for business attraction efforts within the City of Santa Clarita’s targeted
    industry sectors;
• Provide direction with regard to land use, redevelopment, and planning efforts as they relate
    to the economic wellbeing and development of Santa Clarita; and
• Underscore the use and importance of economic development programs and initiatives,
    both state and local, in business attraction and retention efforts.
                                                  E-1                                   June 2011

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                          Economic Development
The Economic Development Element is consistent with the other elements contained in One
Valley One Vision.
Circulation Element: The Economic Development Element promotes an increase of jobs in
order to have a desirable jobs/housing balance that will result in fewer and shorter vehicular
trips.
Noise Element: Promoting uses that will result in fewer vehicular trips will reduce ambient noise
levels and results in the Economic Development Element being consistent with the Noise
Element.
Land Use Element: The Economic Development Element illustrates the community benefits of
mixed-use developments and emphasis the proper balance of residential and non-residential
developments. Mixed-use projects and their characteristics are covered at length in the Land
Use Element.
Housing Element: The Economic Development Element encourages vibrant employment
centers and jobs throughout the City that will result in income levels that will allow employees to
live in the City at many of the broad range of housing types identified in the Housing Element.
Open Space/Conservation Element: The Economic Development Element identifies cultural
and recreational events and opportunities that support the goals and objectives of the Open
Space/Conservation Element.
Safety Element: Goals and programs in the Economic Development Element are consistent
with the Safety Element.
II.      ECONOMIC BACKGROUND
The Santa Clarita Valley has many unique attributes. This formerly small town community was
once home to a variety of agricultural fields and orchards, yet now boasts some of the biggest
names in business, thriving retail centers, destination dining and attractions, and bustling transit
systems.
The story of the Santa Clarita Valley began about the time of the California Gold Rush. Henry
Mayo Newhall of Saugus, Massachusetts was 24 and already a successful auctioneer when, in
1849, he joined thousands who rushed to California to find gold. Unsuccessful in the gold fields,
his talents as an auctioneer and later involvement in San Francisco's first railroad paid off. Mr.
Newhall invested his earnings in ranches throughout California. With his death in 1882, Newhall
left his five sons six California ranches totaling 143,000 acres. The brothers incorporated their
inheritance as The Newhall Land and Farming Company on July 1, 1883.
June 2011                                        E-2
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                        Economic Development
In the late 1950s, California's growth rate and the Los Angeles economy were booming. Urban
development began moving northward into the Santa Clarita Valley. About this time members
of the Newhall family chose to build a “new town” – a balanced community named Valencia.
The Valencia Master Plan was drafted in the early 1960s with the creative guidance of
renowned urban planner Victor Gruen and the Los Angeles County planning director. The
Master Plan was reviewed by the Los Angeles County Regional Planning Commission in 1965
and included the development of the future Westfield Valencia Town Center and “Magic
Mountain,” which today remains one of Southern California’s premier theme parks. The park
opened in 1971, providing jobs for area residents, while also attracting regional visitors to the
area.
Small business continued to define the Santa Clarita Valley, with Newhall and Valencia serving
as key business centers. Most residents traveled out of the Valley for work, into employment
centers like Burbank, downtown Los Angeles, and the San Fernando Valley.
In the coming decades, the Valencia Master Plan took shape, with the development of Town
Center Drive and the Valencia Industrial Center. These areas provided new office space at a
competitive rate for Los Angeles-based businesses looking to expand in the market. The Santa
Clarita Valley provided a wide variety of housing types for workers, which was becoming
increasingly difficult to find.
Educational institutions fueled the continued development of the Santa Clarita Valley as well,
attracting intellectuals from across the nation. College of the Canyons, renowned arts college
California Institute of the Arts, and The Master’s College added to the appeal of the transitioning
community.
In 1987, the City of Santa Clarita was formed, as a large number of business, residential, and
political leaders sought control of the community. The Santa Clarita Valley was home to a
variety of passionate leaders who sought to make the community the best it could be for
residents and business owners.           These activists took action through business-based
organizations like the Santa Clarita Valley Chamber of Commerce, which today remains one of
the largest and most active chambers in California. The communities of Valencia, Saugus,
Newhall, and Canyon Country joined to become the City of Santa Clarita, currently the fourth
largest city in Los Angeles County.
As Santa Clarita grew, so did the infrastructure. Visionary developers like Newhall Land
recognized the business potential of the community and began laying the foundation for one of
Los Angeles County’s largest centers for commerce and industry. Two of Santa Clarita’s largest
business areas include the Valencia Gateway and the Centre Pointe Business Park, which
includes Class A office space.
                                                 E-3                                    June 2011

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                         Economic Development
Valencia Gateway
Valencia Gateway is the largest master planned center for business, technology, and industry in
the County of Los Angeles. Encompassing more than 4,700 acres, 22.5 million square feet of
building space, 1,400 companies, and 41,500 employees, Valencia Gateway includes the
following seven business parks:
•    Valencia Industrial Center
•    Valencia Commerce Center
•    Rye Canyon Business Park
•    Valencia Corporate Center
•    Gateway Corporate Point
•    Town Center Drive
•    Highridge Business Park
The prime location of these areas make the Valencia Gateway a sought-after place to do
business in the Santa Clarita Valley, with flagship brands like Princess Cruises, Cunard,
Westfield, MannKind Corporation, Advanced Bionics and hundreds of other successful
companies occupying spaces in this area.
Centre Pointe Business Park
Centre Pointe Business Park, a 240-acre master planned business is the eighth existing master
planned business park in Santa Clarita. At buildout, Centre Pointe Business Park could provide
more than 4.5 million square feet, 180 companies and 7,000 employees.
As the City of Santa Clarita continues to expand the area’s diverse base of business, these
employment centers will serve as key attractors and choice places in which to do business.
III.      CURRENT ECONOMIC CLIMATE
Economic Recession
In December 2007, the United States was officially deemed as being in a recession. Experts
from across the globe watched as the world’s superpower lost signature industries to other
countries, jobs, and domestic and international consumer confidence. Categorized by many as
the worst recession since World War II, America, and now much of the world, is battling with the
effects of the housing market bust, the deterioration of the credit and banking industries, stock
market losses, and staggering unemployment rates.
While signs of recovery began to take shape in late 2009, many economists anticipate the
national recession will continue will into 2011 and possibly beyond.
•    Los Angeles County/Southern California Region
     The Santa Clarita Valley, like so many other communities across the country, is finding
     successes and challenges amidst the national recession. Located less than 30 minutes
     from Bob Hope Airport in North Los Angeles County, the Santa Clarita Valley is a major
     component of the Los Angeles landscape.
     According to the Los Angeles Economic Development Corporation (LAEDC), Los Angeles
     County will experience the effects of the United States recession through 2009, and well into
     2010 and beyond. The California budget crisis could result in a loss of more than $300
     million in funding to Los Angeles County alone in FY 09/10, eliminating projects and
June 2011                                        E-4

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                       Economic Development
    programming. On a City level, the state’s budget woes could result in more than a $4 million
    budget decrease in FY 09/10, as legislators aim to fix the projected $42 billion deficit
    projected. A total of 100,000 jobs were possibly shed in Los Angeles County by the end of
    2009 according to LAEDC.
•   Santa Clarita Valley
    The Santa Clarita Valley is better positioned for post-recession recovery than most
    communities in California and across the United States. While the area was not immune to
    the challenges resulting from the national recession, Santa Clarita experienced less severe
    downturns than other Southern California cities like Palmdale, Lancaster, Long Beach, Los
    Angeles, Thousand Oaks, Ventura, and Santa Ana, according to a Brookings report release
    in June 2009.
    Residential real estate is an area of concern for the Santa Clarita Valley. Median home
    prices for single-family units dropped from $433,500 in September 2008 to $410,000 in
    September 2009. Sales of single-family homes decreased 9 percent between September
    2008 and September 2009 and condominium sales decline 27 percent during that time
    period.
    While net absorption of industrial space was negative 6,000 square feet in the third quarter
    of 2009, the area's office space experienced a positive net absorption of 62,600 square feet,
    making Santa Clarita one of the only markets in the region to experience positive net
    absorption for office space in the third quarter of 2009.
    Sales tax revenue was down 20 percent in second quarter 2009, and projections for the
    remainder of the year include decreases due to the weakening retail market. Sales tax
    projections remain conservative through the end of 2009 and into 2010, with economists
    forecasting a slow recovery in 2010 and beyond.
    According to the California Economic Development Department, the Santa Clarita Valley
    was fortunate to boast an unemployment rate of seven point nine percent for September
    2009, one of the lowest in the Los Angeles area, and below the State's 12.0 percent. It is
    important to note the current unemployment rate is still double the area’s historic average of
    about three percent. Unemployment rates for September 2009 were as follows:
    o   California State 12.0%;
    o   Los Angeles County 12.7%;
    o   Glendale 11.1%;
    o   Lancaster 17.1%;
    o   Los Angeles 14.0%;
    o   Palmdale 15.7%;
    o   Pasadena 9.7%; and
    o   Santa Clarita 7.9%.
    In April 2009, the City of Santa Clarita City Council approved a 21-Point Business Plan for
    Progress business stimulus plan. The comprehensive plan directed City staff to implement
    new programs and aggressively pursue and use Federal stimulus dollars in the local
    community, resulting in an overall investment of more than $18 million in new programs and
    incentives aimed at boosting the Santa Clarita Valley economy.
                                                  E-5                                   June 2011

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                            Economic Development
Economic Base of the City in Targeted Sectors
The City of Santa Clarita has targeted four main industry clusters for expansion in Santa Clarita
including – Entertainment, Aerospace, Biomedical, and Technology. These industry sectors
were identified in the Alfred Gobar Associates 2005 Labor Market Study. While a continued
effort to target these industries to Santa Clarita is a key strategy, it is understood that today’s
world is rapidly changing. As such, an effort to continually refine the process by which we
support these industries and the reeducation tools available will be continually analyzed and
modified to support the economic goals of Santa Clarita.
Entertainment
The Santa Clarita Valley is one of Hollywood’s most filmed communities. In the early 1900s, the
silver screen’s most popular movie stars filmed in Santa Clarita, including Charlie Chaplin and
Tom Mix. Singing cowboy Gene Autry built Melody Ranch Motion Picture Studio in Placerita
Canyon, while William S. Hart built his mansion atop a hillside in Newhall. Today, the Santa
Clarita Valley is home to more than 20 soundstages, 10 movie ranches, hundreds of businesses
specializing in film-related work, and boasts a talented workforce of nearly 7,000 professionals
who work in the film and entertainment industry. The Santa Clarita Valley sees an average of
3+ film productions filming on location everyday, and is a favored “home” to network
programming from studios like CBS, Nickelodeon, Disney, HBO, and ABC Family. Each year
location filming alone results in millions in economic benefit to the local economy, with a
projected $20+ million in Fiscal Year ‘08-‘09 to Santa Clarita Valley businesses.
In 2002, the City of Santa Clarita formed its own Film Office, coordinating all permitting for
location filming within the City’s limits. While the City is limited by jurisdiction to regulate filming
only within its boundaries, the Film Office takes a holistic approach to attraction and retention of
filming, promoting the entire Santa Clarita Valley as an ideal place to work.
In 2009, as part of the City of Santa Clarita’s City Council approved 21-Point Business Plan for
Progress, the City instituted the Los Angeles area’s first Film Incentive Program (FIP), providing
subsidized permit fees and a Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT) rebate for film companies using
City hotels. The program was designed to capitalize on the momentum created by the State of
California’s $100 million incentive aimed at feature film and television production, and is
expected to help support the existing film business in the Santa Clarita Valley, while attracting
media attention and potentially increased programming.
Another boost to the area’s reputation of being a film friendly community, Disney/ABC studios
announced that they applied to L.A. County to develop “Studios at the Ranch,” a 56-acre, state-
of-the-art sound studio project. This project is expected to create over 2,800 new jobs and have
an economic impact of over $533 million.
Aerospace
The Los Angeles region is still home to a thriving piece of the aerospace industry with several
large companies doing business in the Santa Clarita Valley. Major employers such as
Aerospace Dynamics, ITT Aerospace Technologies, Donaldson’s Aerospace and Defense
Group, and Woodward HRT, formerly HR Textron, are based in Santa Clarita and enjoy the
quality of life and unique business and educational partnership the community affords. The
aerospace enterprises located in Santa Clarita supply products for both defense and
commercial aerospace projects and are highly competitive in receiving government contracts.
This includes both general manufacturing as well as highly sophisticated advanced
manufacturing. These companies work hand in hand with College of the Canyons to train new
employees, building the Santa Clarita Valley’s skilled workforce from the ground up.
June 2011                                         E-6

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                         Economic Development
Biomedical
MannKind Corporation found a home in Santa Clarita more than a decade ago, and in the years
following, several big-name companies have followed suit, relocating company headquarters to
the Valley. The Santa Clarita Valley is home to more than 1,100 biotechnology jobs, with more
on the way, as companies like Mann Biomedical, Advanced Bionics, Quest Diagnostics, Boston
Scientific, BioNess, Celestis, and others relocate to or expand within the area. The enterprises
located in Santa Clarita engage in development as well as device manufacturing. The
businesses tend to be more heavily oriented towards implantable device and instrument
manufacturing versus the wet lab “biotech” type facilities.
Technology
Santa Clarita is focused on training its local workforce for technology jobs through programs like
the i3 Advanced Technology Incubator Program at College of the Canyons, which provides
entrepreneurs with the resources and tools to successfully build and launch technology-based
companies. Santa Clarita has proven to be a strong business community for this sector, with
companies like Advanced Motorsports Technology, Neotech Products, Transparent Products,
True Position Technologies, and Stellar Micro Electronics operating offices or corporate
headquarters in the Santa Clarita Valley.
Based on survey responses found in the Alfred Gobar Associates Labor Market Study, nearly
18 percent of the active workforce (or about 22,300 workers) are currently employed within the
four target industries.
Developing Quality Jobs
According to a 2005 published Labor Market Study by Alfred Gobar Associates, total
employment in the Santa Clarita Valley has increased by an average 3,800 jobs per year since
2000. (See Exhibit ED 1 below). However, as the economy weakened between 2007 and
2009, job growth slowed throughout the Santa Clarita Valley. By 2008, approximately 950 new
wage and salary jobs were added to the Santa Clarita economy, representing +1.1 percent
growth according to First American Title’s 2009 Real Estate and Economic Outlook.
Even with the slower growth, Santa Clarita’s pace is still one of the fastest areas compared to
other California regions. Furthermore, job growth in North Los Angeles County still exceeds the
rate of job growth in greater Los Angeles County, which experienced negative growth in 2008.
Northern Los Angeles County labor markets have grown at a faster rate than Los Angeles
County every year since 1997.
                                                 E-7                                    June 2011

City of Santa Clarita General Plan Economic Development
                                                Exhibit ED 1: Indexed Employment Growth
June 2011                                                          E-8
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                         Economic Development
Building Santa Clarita’s Local Business Community
According to the 2005 Labor Market Study by Alfred Gobar Associates, more than 53 percent of
all workers, or approximately 65,800 residents, leave the Santa Clarita Valley on a daily basis to
commute to work. This suggests that Santa Clarita’s attraction as an emerging employment
center not only draws from the local labor force population but also attracts workers from out of
the area. A 2004 labor market study of the Antelope Valley region revealed roughly 9,000
workers residing in this sub-region commute to jobs in the Santa Clarita area. As the Santa
Clarita Valley’s business attraction continues to grow and more high-paying, high-level jobs
become available, it is expected some of these jobs will be absorbed by the local workforce, as
well as workers commuting from neighboring communities. These workers will seek out
employment in the Santa Clarita Valley because similar type positions may not be available in
their region.
            Exhibit ED 2: Travel Time for Target Industry Workers vs. All Workers
According to the Labor Market Study, nearly 22 percent of the Santa Clarita workforce, or about
27,000 workers, are very likely to change jobs to reduce time spent traveling to work. These
workers constitute a very substantial pool of local workers with a strong likelihood of pursuing
jobs offered by businesses relocating or expanding in the area.
The City of Santa Clarita is focused on attracting an increasing number of high paying, high
quality jobs to the Santa Clarita Valley, thereby supporting opportunities for residents to work
close to home. To that end, the City should continue pursuing businesses in the Southern
California region to either expand within or relocate to the Santa Clarita Valley. Specifically, the
City should focus on attracting businesses in the four targeted sectors, as well as lifestyle,
manufacturing, tourism, retail, and green industries among others, to help build a strong
economic base and increased job opportunities. Exhibit ED 3 below shows key feeder cities for
business potentially relocating to the Santa Clarita Valley.
                                                 E-9                                   June 2011

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                        Economic Development
             Exhibit ED 3: Origin City for Businesses Relocating to Santa Clarita
Workforce
Nearly 38 percent of the workforce in the City of Santa Clarita is employed in the services
sector. An additional 25 percent of the City’s workforce is employed in retail trade followed by
nine percent in manufacturing, eight percent in construction, seven percent in finance/insurance,
and real estate industries, and six percent in wholesale trade.
Twenty six percent of the City of Santa Clarita’s workforce is concentrated in professional or
specialized positions while another 21 percent are in administrative and support positions, 14
percent are in marketing or sales, and 11 percent are in executive roles. One-third, or 32
percent, of Santa Clarita Valley’s manufacturing workforce is employed in aerospace with an
additional 18 percent in computers and electronics and 14 percent in biomedical manufacturing.
See Exhibit ED 4 below.
According to the 2005 Labor Market Study, about one-fourth of all resident workers are engaged
in their respective industry activity as “Professionals” or “Specialists” (teachers, engineers,
chemists, physicians, computer analysts, clergy, artists, etc.). Approximately one-fifth of
resident workers are employed in “Executive” or “Managerial” positions (chief administrators,
directors, division heads, managers, etc.). Overall, about 42 percent of resident workers occupy
moderate- to high-skill positions directly related to the performance objectives of a given
company or agency.
                         Exhibit ED 4: 2005 Worker Occupation Skills
June 2011                                       E-10

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                   Economic Development
The active workforce living in the Santa Clarita area is highly educated. More than 50 percent
of all workers have completed a college education. Active workers with no more than a high
school education account for 20 percent of the workforce. A high level of educational
achievement, including a college degree, is evident across the entire workforce, with 56 percent
of the area’s full time workers (82 percent of the population works full-time) and 53 percent of
part-time workers (18 percent of the population works part-time) boasting higher education.
Source: Alfred Gobar Associates 2005 Labor Market Study.
Major Employers in the Santa Clarita Valley
The 2005 Labor Market Study by Alfred Gobar Associates indicated that Santa Clarita’s local
economy is primarily a service-based economy with 41 percent of the businesses in the service
sector. An additional 21 percent of businesses are in retail trade and 10 percent each are in the
finance, insurance, and real estate sector as well as construction.
The businesses located in Santa Clarita can be categorized as small businesses with 59
percent employing less than five employees. Businesses between five and nine employees
account for 19 percent of all businesses and only five percent employ in excess of 50
employees.
The table below details the major employers in the Santa Clarita Valley, including the type of
business and the number of employees.
                              Major Employers in Santa Clarita Valley
                  Company                            Type of Business                                Employees
 Six Flags Magic Mountain                Theme Park                                                3,689
 William S. Hart Union School District   Public High & Junior High School District 2,455
 Princess Cruises                        Vacation Cruise Line Services                             2,100
 Saugus Union School District            Public Elementary School District                         2,010
 U.S. Postal Service                     U.S. Postal Service                                       1,790
 College of the Canyons                  Community College                                         1,678
 Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial
                                         Healthcare Services                                       1,212
 Hospital
 Woodward HRT (formerly HR Textron)      Aerospace Manufacturer                                    845
 Newhall School District                 Public Elementary School District                         836
 The Master's College                    Christian Liberal Arts College                            755
 Specialty Laboratories                  Medical Research & Development                            725
 City of Santa Clarita                   Government Agency                                         695
 Arvato Digital Services                 Business Services                                         586
 California Institute of the Arts        Private Art School                                        500
 Aerospace Dynamics                      Aerospace Structural Components                           420
 Fanfare Media Works                     International Printing & Publishing                       407
 Advanced Bionics                        Medical Device Manufacturing                              375
                                                     Source: Santa Clarita Valley – Real Estate and Economic Outlook
Cost of Doing Business in the City of Santa Clarita
The following data was derived from the 2007 “Cost of Doing Business” report based on an
independent study of 402 cities across the United States by the Kosmont-Rose Institute, as
                                               E-11                                                     June 2011

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                           Economic Development
shown in Exhibit ED 5. The cost ratings were developed in order to compare different
communities based analysis of fees, taxes, and economic incentives and programs.
Santa Clarita is ranked as Average Cost ($$$) compared to the cities of Los Angeles and
Pasadena, which are both ranked as Very High Cost ($$$$$).
            Exhibit ED 5: Kosmont-Rose Institute Cost of Doing Business Survey
                                                                      The 2007 Cost of Doing Business
                                                                      Survey rates each city as:
                                                                      Very Low Cost ($)
                                                                      Low Cost ($$)
                                                                      Average Cost ($$$)
                                                                      High Cost ($$$$)
                                                                      Very High Cost ($$$$$).
                                                                      The 2007 Survey identified;
                                                                      80 very low cost ($) cities;
                                                                      80 low cost ($$) cities;
                                                                      82 average cost ($$$) cities;
                                                                      80 high cost ($$$$) cities; and
                                                                      80 very high cost ($$$$$) cities.
IV.     OVERVIEW OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT TRENDS
Santa Clarita is poised for positive, prosperous business development in the decades ahead.
As one of Los Angeles County’s largest and growing cities (source: State Department of
Finance), Santa Clarita will be a major factor in business development. The following are brief
summations of the economic principles the City of Santa Clarita considers when developing
economic development policies and procedures.
Business Competition
Today’s business environment has become increasingly competitive, with manufacturing and
technology based companies and jobs leaving California for other cities, states, and countries at
a higher rate. Increased global competition has made doing business in California and
specifically Los Angeles County nearly unprofitable in some instances. In order to maintain the
industries currently in the region, the City of Santa Clarita continues to offer business incentives,
be it state tax incentive programs like the Enterprise Zone and streamlined permitting
processes, to an unparalleled and well-trained workforce.
Employment & Projected Needs
Employment in the Santa Clarita Valley is forecast to decline by 1.1 percent in 2009. Between
2010 and 2013, job growth is projected to average 2.6 percent per year in the Santa Clarita
Valley. The employment forecast called for a loss of 950 jobs in 2009, followed by the annual
average creation of 2,300 new wage and salary jobs in the Santa Clarita Valley between 2010
and 2013. With an expanding population over the next five years, a larger skill set will
characterize the Santa Clarita Valley workforce, continuing to make the area more attractive to
June 2011                                        E-12

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                        Economic Development
potential employers. There are few impediments that would inhibit healthy job growth over the
next several years. One of those potential impediments has been the slowdown of housing
production. As the housing market improves after 2009, it is expected that population growth
will accelerate along with job growth. (Source: First American Title 2009 Real Estate and
Economic Outlook)
Between 2006 and 2014, the City of Santa Clarita is required by the State of California to
provide land use designations that could accommodate 10,000 new homes, or approximately
30,000 new residents. With the goal of developing two jobs for every household (see
jobs/housing balance in Section V), the City endeavors to attract 20,000 new jobs to the area in
the next five years to meet projected growth estimates.
Development Process
The City of Santa Clarita recognizes the development permit process can be cumbersome. The
City of Santa Clarita sought the opinions and recommendations of developers, brokers, and
investors in the Santa Clarita Valley and Los Angeles area to identify potential issues as they
relate to the City’s development process. The City is currently looking at ways to make this
process more easily understood, streamlined, and customer service oriented, including the
addition of a business development liaison, implementation of an online permit submission and
review process, and fee review. These efforts should be done in such a way that all City codes
are met, while addressing the concerns of developers and business owners wherever possible,
thereby making Santa Clarita a good place to do business.
Economic Growth
The City of Santa Clarita is continuing to experience population growth, about 0.6 percent in
2008 according to the State Department of Finance. This is much slower growth than in
previous years, but the City of Santa Clarita must continue to attract high-paying, high quality
jobs to the area to support the growth of the City’s population. As discussed in Section IlI
(Current Economic Climate), many of the City’s residents are traveling to neighboring cities for
work, because there are not enough jobs available in the City matching the skills of residents.
To this end, the City of Santa Clarita must focus on creating a quality jobs/housing balance,
attracting companies in the targeted industry sectors to ensure the needs of the community and
its residents are met.
Education
Developing an educated workforce is a high priority for the City of Santa Clarita. City leaders
recognize this process begins early, with a significant investment in the public school system.
Santa Clarita is proudly one of Southern California’s most sought-after communities because of
its quality educational offerings, with schools ranking among the top 10 percent in California
based on the California Assessment Program. Santa Clarita is comprised of the William S. Hart
Union School District, Newhall School District, Sulphur Springs School District, and Saugus
Union School District, all of which boasts Blue Ribbon and California Distinguished schools.
The City of Santa Clarita is also home to three prestigious secondary learning universities,
including the world-renowned California Institute of the Arts, founded in 1961 by Walt and Roy
Disney as the nation’s first art institute granting undergraduate and graduate degrees in both the
visual and performing arts. The Santa Clarita Valley also houses The Master’s College, a faith-
based institution offering an inter-denominational Christian education inclusive of
comprehensive instruction in the liberal arts tradition. College of the Canyons, one of the
premier community colleges in the California offering Associate degrees, certificate and career
prep programs in over 100 disciplines is also located in Santa Clarita. College of the Canyons
                                                  E-13                                 June 2011

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                            Economic Development
also hosts The University Center, offering access to bachelor, master, and doctoral degrees
from both public and private universities in a new, state of the art facility located on the Valencia
campus.
Government
The City of Santa Clarita, since incorporation in 1987, has embraced a pro-business philosophy
of “what is good for business is good for Santa Clarita.” This has differentiated the City from
many others in the Los Angeles region, as many of the City’s policies were designed with a
balanced approach, looking at the unique needs of the private sector, residents, and
government regulations. The City was at the forefront of the “pro-business” trend and was
named the Most Business Friendly City is Los Angeles County in 2008. The City is working to
maintain its position as one of the most business-friendly communities in California.
Infrastructure
Santa Clarita is an ideal business center, with ease of access into and out of Los Angeles
County, Ventura County, and the Antelope Valley. Interstate 5 provides the main points of
access from the Los Angeles region, while State Route 14 serves as the main arterial from the
Antelope Valley. The City of Santa Clarita considers infrastructure improvements to be one of
the most important investments within the community, with multi-million dollar projects like the
Cross Valley Connector designed to ease traffic flow from east to west throughout the City. The
City of Santa Clarita will and should continue to look at infrastructure projects supporting ease of
traffic flow both throughout the Santa Clarita Valley and into and out of the Los Angeles,
Ventura, and Antelope Valley regions.
V.       ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT STRATEGIES, PRACTICES, AND POLICIES
Jobs/Housing Balance
The jobs/housing balance is the relationship between the number of jobs a community offers
compared to the number of housing units needed to support those jobs. The Santa Clarita
Valley has been housing rich for decades, meaning the number of housing units available
exceeded the number of jobs available to residents.
The mid-year 2005 jobs-housing (household) ratio, according to the Alfred Gobar Labor Market
Study, in the Santa Clarita area is estimated at approximately 1.04 wage and salary jobs per
household.
As a result, more than half of the residents in the Santa Clarita Valley currently commute
outside the area for employment, resulting in increased air pollution, congested highways,
streets and freeways, and decreased quality of life for residents. This also means there are not
enough jobs available to residents in the fields in which they are trained/educated.
The City of Santa Clarita seeks to enhance the quality of life enjoyed by residents and has an
aggressive goal to achieve a jobs/housing balance of 2:1, meaning it seeks to approve and
support projects that create two jobs for every new household, providing opportunities for
residents to work closer to home.
In addition to focusing on the jobs/housing balance within the City limits, the City of Santa
Clarita must also continue to work with the County of Los Angeles to monitor the approval of
housing developments just outside the City limits in unincorporated Los Angeles County. These
developments play a critical role in the balance of jobs in the Santa Clarita Valley, and as a
June 2011                                       E-14

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                         Economic Development
community it is important to be mindful that development in these areas should also include
business attraction to support the resident population. If this is not monitored, the Santa Clarita
Valley will continue to see a disproportionate jobs/housing imbalance.
More importantly, the City of Santa Clarita is focused on attracting the kind of companies suited
for the Santa Clarita Valley’s workforce, meaning jobs in the four targeted industry sectors and
those outlined in this Element.
One of the City of Santa Clarita’s biggest goals in pursuing the jobs/housing balance is to attract
more high-paying, high-quality jobs and develop new high-paying, high-quality positions. This
means working with businesses and companies already based in the area to expand and bring
new jobs to Santa Clarita, relocation of companies to the City, and support of business start ups
looking to launch a new company in the area.
To help accomplish this goal, the City of Santa Clarita will focus on the area’s targeted industry
clusters, which include aerospace, technology, biomedical, and film/entertainment. The
industries already have a strong base of business in the area and the Valley boasts trained and
qualified professionals ready to meet the needs of these unique industries. In addition to
attracting businesses in the targeted industries, the area would benefit from additional business
parks in the area, such as the Gate-King Industrial Park, a fully entitled project, planned for
Sierra Highway and Newhall Avenue. A majority of the business parks in the Santa Clarita
Valley are located in Valencia or on the west side, a fact attributable to the master planning of
Valencia by the Newhall Land and Farming Company.
In addition to reducing the number of Valley residents commuting daily out of the area for
employment, reduction in intra-Valley commuting times is also desired. This will require that a
range of housing types, as well as a range of employment opportunities are located within each
of the villages throughout the Santa Clarita Valley, providing residents the ability to live in
proximity to their workplace. In an ideal jobs/housing balance, worker commute time is less than
30 minutes, and jobs are easily accessible via existing public transportation or within walking
distance. This helps to reduce congestion and commute times, improve air quality in the Santa
Clarita Valley, and enhance the quality of life.
Workforce Development
The City of Santa Clarita should continue to work with local educational institutions, employers,
real estate developers and others to review changes in Santa Clarita’s workforce needs and
anticipate changes occurring in employment demands. Together with these groups the City can
promote job training, skill enhancement, and education meeting the needs of jobs and careers
available within the Santa Clarita Valley.
Development Objectives
Available land and space, close proximity to Los Angeles, and burgeoning business and
residential communities make the Santa Clarita Valley a first choice for jobs-producing
development in Los Angeles County.
The City should seek out a balanced mix of businesses in its attraction efforts, including but not
limited to, commercial, retail, cultural, entertainment, and service offerings. In order to build a
sustainable community for not only now, but for the future, the City of Santa Clarita must be
forward thinking when looking at proposed developments.
                                                 E-15                                   June 2011

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                         Economic Development
Specifically, the City of Santa Clarita will continue to evaluate each development proposal on its
individual merits, thereby allowing flexibility for economic generating and jobs-producing uses.
This means:
• Seeking multi-story, clustered business parks and centers akin to those found in the
    Valencia Town Center area;
• Encouraging multi-story, mixed use developments through the City of Santa Clarita’s
    communities, including Saugus, Newhall, Canyon Country, and Valencia as appropriate;
• Allowing development standards and policies that accommodate multiple economic activities
    in business and industrial park areas;
• Encouraging business opportunities throughout all facets of the community, supporting
    burgeoning villages of industry throughout the Santa Clarita Valley; and
• Applying non-traditional height, design, and planning standards for appropriate projects and
    uses that generate significant impact to the economy.
• Encouraging increased density in nonresidential projects in appropriate locations to increase
    quality jobs and achieve the desired jobs-housing balance.
Retail Growth and Attraction
Since 1987, the City of Santa Clarita has experienced significant growth in the retail market.
The City of Santa Clarita consistently ranks among one of the top 25 retail markets in California
according to the California Retail Survey, and is a top choice for retailers looking to reach a
high-income, highly-educated segment of the Southern California population.
The Santa Clarita Valley is ripe with retail opportunities, and includes several developed retail
centers with leasing opportunities. Most significant is the recent expansion of the Westfield
Valencia Town Center, which includes the addition of more than 180,000 square feet of new
retail space. Bridgeport Marketplace at Newhall Ranch Road and McBean Parkway, Centre
Pointe Business Park off Soledad Canyon Road, and the Plaza at Golden Valley Ranch, which
is accessible off State Route 14, offer competitive leasing rates and visibility for retailers.
The City of Santa Clarita’s retail attraction efforts will continue to be a focus in the years to
come. Residents and businesses have requested several key brands for Santa Clarita,
including but not limited to Nordstrom, Cheesecake Factory, Marmalade Cafe, Coach, Bebe,
and more. One significant point to be made is these retailers require an increase in the number
of large companies occupying Class A type office space, thereby supporting the daily demand
for these businesses, before they will locate in Santa Clarita. Santa Clarita is successful in
delivering a strong dinner crowd for restaurants, but some big-name restaurants are hesitant to
expand in the Santa Clarita Valley without an increased number of companies boasting an
employee base in excess of 500 executives who use their services during lunch time.
Class A Office Space
Class A office space is typically referred to as the highest quality office space available in an
area. Characteristics defining Class A space include newer buildings in premium locations,
qualities amenities, unmatched architecture and design appeal, and convenient customer
access. These types of commercial developments are highly sought-after and typically attract
tenants concerned about the aesthetics of the space. Class A is often located in dense
development areas, and is in high demand. In 2007, the City of Santa Clarita saw the addition
of nearly 400,000 square feet of Class A office space, with more than 60,000 square feet in the
development process.
June 2011                                         E-16

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                         Economic Development
In early 2009, office vacancy rates were about 18.2 percent in the Santa Clarita Valley
according to CoStar.
The City of Santa Clarita seeks to increase the amount of Class A office space available in all
communities within the Santa Clarita Valley. Development of this type of office space is highly
concentrated in Valencia, but should be expanded within the areas of Canyon Country, Newhall,
and Saugus, supporting the City’s goals of building a valley of villages and meeting an ideal
jobs/housing balance for Santa Clarita.
Embracing a Business Friendly Approach
Businesses thrive in business friendly communities. The City of Santa Clarita is one of
Southern California’s most successful and sought-after cities, consistently recognized regionally
and nationally as a best-choice place to live and work. Recognitions include:
•   Los Angeles County’s Most Business Friendly City, Los Angeles Economic Development
    Corporation;
•   Best Economic Development Program in the State of CA, California Association of Local
    Economic Developers;
•   Best Place to Live in California, CNN Money Magazine;
•   One of the Top 25 City Retail Markets in California, California Retail Survey; and
•   One of the Best Economies in Los Angeles County, Union Bank.
The City of Santa Clarita should continue to embrace business-friendly policies that allow
companies to thrive, while embracing a high quality of life for residents, including quality
employment opportunities. This includes review and consideration of expedited permitting when
appropriate and available, assistance with business programs to help companies looking to
expand in the Santa Clarita Valley, instituting an ombudsman or business liaison, and looking at
bottom-line business driven incentives like a use tax incentive to save companies money.
The City of Santa Clarita, as directed in the 21-Point Business Plan for Progress, is looking at a
streamlined and more efficient permitting process. This includes the use of new technologies
allowing developers, builders, and business owners to submit, access updates, and receive
approved building plans and more via an online system and eliminating any unnecessary costly
printed copies. This initiative serves to reinforce Santa Clarita’s business-friendly approach and
refinements in traditional processes should continually be considered where appropriate.
Building a Valley of Villages
The “Valley of Villages” concept is one of the major themes adopted as part of the One Valley,
One Vision plan.
The City of Santa Clarita will implement this concept in Old Town Newhall, as part of the
Downtown Newhall Specific Plan. The goal is to create a mix of uses that result in activities
throughout the day. This combination will provide opportunities to sustain a village or mixed-use
neighborhood from public transportation and shopping to entertainment, parks, recreation,
employment, and a range of housing types.
                                                 E-17                                    June 2011

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                          Economic Development
The City of Santa Clarita is currently focusing on developing villages in (1) Old Town Newhall,
(2) at Whittaker Bermite, a thousand-acre brownfield site adjacent to the Santa Clarita Metrolink
station, (3) on the east side of the Santa Clarita Valley, (4) as part of Santa Clarita’s Westfield
Town Center and (5) near State Route 14 and Lost Canyon Road with the proposed Vista
Canyon Ranch project. In the County of Los Angeles a multi-village concept development was
approved with the Newhall Ranch Specific Plan.
•   Whittaker Bermite
    Redevelopment of the Whittaker Bermite property, a 988-acre former industrial site now
    undergoing both soil and groundwater clean-up, will transform the heart of the Santa Clarita
    Valley. It is not often a community has the opportunity to create a new vision for its
    geographic core that will include “economic engine” land uses serving the Valley, needed
    infrastructure connections, and opportunities for open space and recreational amenities.
    Redevelopment of the Whittaker Bermite property as a large, centrally located employment
    hub will help improve the Valley’s jobs/housing balance and be instrumental in achieving the
    goal of two jobs for every new housing unit. The future planning of an area of this size is an
    exciting endeavor that will require high community input and participation throughout the
    process. Four General Plan roadways are planned to criss-cross this property, providing
    residents with greater connectivity to the Valley’s employment centers. The Soledad
    Metrolink station is currently situated along the northernmost portion of this site, creating a
    ripe opportunity for the development of a transit-oriented, mixed-use activity center. The
    adjacent 228-acre City property, as well as the former Saugus Speedway along Soledad
    Canyon Road, offer additional development opportunities that will strength and compliment
    the land planning efforts on Whittaker Bermite.
    The City seeks to locate uses on this site that are unique to the Valley and will serve not
    only the Valley’s population, but draw interest from the greater Southern California region.
    Future uses that may be considered for this site include: a bio-medical park; tourism/sporting
    arenas; outdoor amphitheater; entertainment industry uses such as a movie ranch or
    studios; hospital/medical campus; and a higher educational campus or facilities, among
    others. This site also presents opportunities for active recreational facilities to serve the
    Valley population as well as passive open space and a trail network along the site’s canyons
    and ridgelines.
•   City Center: The City of Santa Clarita is already working with community partners, including
    Los Angeles County and Westfield Valencia Town Center, to explore development of a new
    multi-jurisdictional City Center. The concept is a more urbanized, mixed-use, vertical
    environment providing for a mix of civic, office, retail, and housing uses.
•   Vista Canyon Ranch Village: The proposed Vista Canyon design brings together all the
    elements to create a vibrant town center village for Canyon Country and the Santa Clarita
    Valley’s east side.       In contrast to sprawling, disconnected residential tracts and
    miscellaneous retail centers, the design embraces sound community planning principals to
    meet current and future needs. The land use plan creates a cohesive, sustainable village by
    integrating four primary components – a town center, a corporate campus, a Metrolink
    Station, and a trail system – with retail, entertainment, open space, recreation, and
    residential neighborhoods offering a variety of housing types.
•   Newhall Ranch Specific Plan: Planned as a single community consisting of five distinct
    lifestyle villages, Newhall Ranch is destined to be one of the largest master-planned
June 2011                                       E-18

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                        Economic Development
     communities in Los Angeles County. Encompassing 19 square miles, Newhall Ranch will
     take shape as a self-contained community in a natural, open setting. The Specific Plan
     allows for the development of up to 20,885 housing units and 5.5 million square feet of
     commercial, industrial and office space. In addition, over half of the site, or approximately
     6,000 acres, will be preserved as open space.
Vl. REDEVELOPMENT
Redevelopment, as defined by the State of California, is the process authorized under California
law allowing local government entities to identify deteriorated and blighted areas in their
jurisdictions in need of revitalization. The goal of redevelopment is to encourage and attract
private sector investment that otherwise would not occur. Businesses are often hesitant about
investing in a blighted area because of the associated risk and costs, which can outweigh the
benefits. Redevelopment serves as a catalyst for private investment, demonstrating a
community’s dedication to seeing reinvigorating these areas and infusing them with the
infrastructure and resources needed to once again become vibrant economic forces within the
community.
The Newhall Redevelopment Agency was created by the City in November 1989 to undertake
redevelopment activities that remove physically and economically blighted conditions plaguing
economic growth. Redevelopment can create jobs and expand business opportunities, provide
housing for families most in need, help reduce crime, improve infrastructure and public works,
and lead the cleanup of environmentally-threatened and rundown areas.
Downtown Newhall Specific Plan
The Santa Clarita Redevelopment Agency approved the Downtown Newhall Specific Plan
(DNSP) to transform Old Town Newhall into a thriving, mixed-use, pedestrian-oriented urban
village with a series of economic engines. The DNSP consists of a 20-block downtown served
by Metrolink commuter rail, a commercial corridor in downtown, two flanking neighborhoods,
and an industrial district. Upon buildout, the DNSP will include up to 712 new residential units
and nearly 300,000 square feet of new commercial space.
The DNSP was adopted by the City Council in December 2005, as a strategic planning tool to
revitalize Old Town Newhall. The concept of the DNSP originally began in the mid 1990’s
through a coordinated effort initiated by the Redevelopment Agency (Agency). The Agency
began to look at the future potential of the historic downtown core of the Santa Clarita Valley
and identified redevelopment as an essential mechanism for establishing a renaissance of the
area.
The DNSP is designed to provide various strategies for infill development for the neighborhoods
adjacent to the downtown area to the east and the west. It also identifies and further
substantiates the need for the Redevelopment Agency to be actively involved in the planning
process necessary to maintain the appropriate amount of affordable housing in the DNSP area.
It covers a 50-block area and contains two residential zones and commercial zones that
encourage mixed-use development along major corridors.
Ultimately, the DNSP promotes a pedestrian friendly and livable community that embraces the
history, culture, and unique characteristics that exemplify the true nature of Old Town Newhall.
One of the primary goals of the DNSP is also to encourage development opportunities that will
help create the synergy and revitalization for the Old Town Newhall area that the community
has envisioned for years.
                                               E-19                                     June 2011

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                          Economic Development
North Newhall Area
The North Newhall Area (NNA) is an approximate 200-acre assemblage of land generally
bounded by the Metropolitan Water District (MWD) right-of-way on the east, Newhall Creek on
the south and west, and a significant ridgeline south of Via Princessa on the north. The
northern approximate 100 acres of this NNA is undeveloped with a hillside to the north and oak
trees and Placerita Creek. The commercial corridor along the west side of Railroad Avenue
consists of mix of retail and commercial uses. The southern approximate 100 acres of this area
is primarily developed with existing single-family ranch style homes of varying sizes. A
commercial center with a wide mix of industrial and retail uses is located at the entrance to the
NNA adjacent to 13th Street.
Given the site’s characteristics, its proximity to Downtown Newhall and to the Jan Heidt
Metrolink Station location, and its surrounding and diverse communities, the NNA would be
subject to a broader and more comprehensive planning approach. The NNA would serve as a
community that will provide an economic stimulus to the adjacent Old Town Newhall area, will
improve traffic circulation in the area, and will consider the sensitive uses in the adjacent areas.
The NNA would be a mixed-use neighborhood that includes up to 775 residential units and up to
450,000 square feet of commercial space and open space areas. Development would preserve
and improve upon the existing quality of life, provide tools to revitalize the underutilized
commercial areas, offer various housing types, encourage development that is transit-oriented,
walkable and bike friendly, and promote sustainability.
VlI. PROGRAMS & INITIATIVES SUPPORTING ECONOMIC GROWTH
Santa Clarita Valley Enterprise Zone
The Santa Clarita Valley Enterprise Zone is a geographic area providing tax incentives to
businesses located in the City of Santa Clarita as well as unincorporated Los Angeles County.
The Enterprise Zone covers commercial, business, and industrial zoned land in the Santa
Clarita Valley. See Exhibit ED 6 (Proposed Map Attached). The City of Santa Clarita Enterprise
Zone received final designation as an Enterprise Zone on July 1, 2007. In September 2010, the
City of Santa Clarita in partnership with the County of Los Angeles applied for a new larger and
expanded Enterprise Zone. The new Santa Clarita Valley Enterprise Zone received conditional
designation from the State of California in late 2010. Qualified businesses can realize savings
through the Enterprise Zone program in the following areas: hiring tax credits; sales and use tax
credits; business expense deductions; net interest deductions for lenders; and income tax
credits for employees.
Since its inception, the Enterprise Zone program in Santa Clarita has proven very effective. In
its first three years in existence 3,556 jobs were created or retained as part of the
program. Additionally, Santa Clarita businesses have generated tax savings of more than $133
million cumulatively from July 2007 to March 2010. If a business qualifies, the zone can virtually
eliminate a business’ state income tax obligation. The Enterprise Zone is another key tool for
the Santa Clarita Valley’s attraction and expansion efforts, helping combat the high costs of
doing business in the state.
June 2011                                        E-20

City of Santa Clarita General Plan Economic Development
                                                        E-21 DRAFT September, 2010
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                        Economic Development
Santa Clarita Worksource Center
The Santa Clarita Worksource Center’s focus is to provide a workforce development system
bringing job seekers and employers together in one place. All services are provided to
employers and job seekers at no cost through the Federal Workforce Investment Act (WIA) and
the City of Santa Clarita in partnership with Goodwill Southern California, the Employment
Development Department (EDD), the County of Los Angeles Community and Senior Services,
College of the Canyons, and the Department of Rehabilitation.
The City of Santa Clarita is working to enhance the program in the coming years, using the
Worksource Center as both a business attraction and retention tool. The City will do this by:
enhancing its partnership with College of the Canyons (COC) Economic Development Division;
potentially relocating the Worksource Center to the COC, Valencia campus; exploring the
creation of a separate Workforce Investment Board (WIB) for the Northern Los Angeles County
cities of Santa Clarita, Palmdale, and Lancaster; and increasing efficiency and customer
service.
Recycling Market Development Zone (RMDZ)
The City of Santa Clarita is one of the 40 Recycling Market Development Zones in the state of
California. The RMDZ program combines recycling with economic development to fuel new
business development, help existing companies expand, create jobs, and divert waste from
landfills. This program provides profitable incentives to businesses that manufacture products
using materials that would normally end up in landfills. Those incentives include attractive loans,
technical assistance, and free product marketing.
Use Tax Incentive
The City of Santa Clarita began offering a Use Tax Incentive in 2009, as directed by the City
Council as part of the 21-Point Business Plan for Progress. The Use Tax Incentive Program
was designed by the City to incentivize business expansion and increase investment in our
community. The incentive to participate in this program is attractive. A portion of each dollar of
use tax designated by your business and received by the City of Santa Clarita is eligible to be
rebated back to the participating business through one of the following - a business expansion
credit or a cash rebate.
Business Programs at College of the Canyons
• Small Business Development Center
     The Small Business Development Center (SBDC), hosted by College of the Canyons
     (COC), launched in January 2006. Serving the Antelope Valley, San Fernando Valley, and
     Santa Clarita Valley, the SBDC helps prospective and existing small business owners in
     northeast Los Angeles County start, retain, or expand their business. The organization
     provides workshops, one-on-one counseling, and other resources to the business
     community, and is part of a regional network of seven SBDC centers serving business in
     Santa Barbara, Ventura, and Los Angeles counties.
     Services available include business counseling, business plan development, accounting and
     bookkeeping, marketing and sales, and technology education. Assistance is also available
     with access to capital, state and federal government contracting and more.
                                            E-22                        DRAFT September, 2010

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                           Economic Development
•   Center for Applied Competitive Technologies
    The Center for Applied Competitive Technology (CACT) at COC serves manufacturers and
    technology companies with customized training and technical support. The state-supported
    program is dedicated to helping improve performance goals in the industry and is an
    attraction tool for Santa Clarita. The CACT at COC includes workforce training programs,
    demonstration of new manufacturing equipment and technologies, and access to federal,
    state, and local resources. This program can help companies achieve greater operational
    efficiency, enhancing productivity, and increasing organizational performance.
•   Employee Training Institute
    The Employee Training Institute (ETI) has provided customized training for regional
    businesses since 1988 and consistently serves over 300 companies annually. Through the
    ETI, the College of the Canyons has secured ten consecutive contracts with the State of
    California Employee Training Panel, which provides the funding for this program. ETI also
    works with regional Workforce Investment Boards to provide training for displaced workers
    in biotechnology and has hosted an At-Risk Youth program which featured boot camp style
    courses in manufacturing technology.
•   I3 Advanced Technology Incubator
    The I3 Advanced Technology Incubator Program at COC provides technology-based
    entrepreneurs with the resources necessary to launch and grow successful businesses. It
    serves as a tool for investors to finance and propel high-growth ventures. The program
    currently offers capital efficiency for both the entrepreneur and investor and benefits include:
    a state-of-the-art facility fully furnished and wired facility with full access; shared support
    services and office equipment; free mentoring and access to services from experienced
    professionals; student interns; and introductions to investors.
    This program and so many others available through the college support Santa Clarita’s
    targeted industry sectors and are unique to the region. They serve as a business attraction
    tool for many entrepreneurial companies.
VIlI. COLLABORATIONS WITH PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS ORGANIZATIONS
Doing business in the Santa Clarita Valley is becoming increasingly streamlined. A variety of
professional business organizations exist in the community to help companies navigate local
business policies, state legislation, and to help companies owners network and acclimate within
Santa Clarita’s distinctive business environment. These organizations continue to play an
integral role in shaping the economic prosperity and direction of the Santa Clarita Valley.
Building Industry Association
The Building Industry Association of Southern California, Inc. (BIA/SC) is a nonprofit trade
association representing nearly 1,900 member companies employing 125,000 persons who are
engaged in all aspects of building homes and communities throughout Southern California.
Santa Clarita Valley Chamber of Commerce
The Santa Clarita Valley Chamber of Commerce has promoted and supported local businesses
since 1923. The goals of the chamber include encouraging growth of members and targeted
industries, assisting new companies locating to the Santa Clarita Valley, and serving as a
representative for all business legislation affecting members.
                                                  E-23                                   June 2011

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                          Economic Development
The Chamber also organized an Economic Development Committee in 2009 to retain and
nurture existing businesses, capture more local dollars, attract targeted industries, draw more
outside money into the region, promote the concept of economic development, and enhance the
quality of life in the Santa Clarita Valley.
Valley Industrial Association (VIA)
The Valley Industrial Association of Santa Clarita represents business interests throughout the
Santa Clarita Valley, providing members with opportunities to collaborate on a range of
business issues. In addition to being a legislative advocate, VIA serves as a one-stop shop for
relevant business information, supports local educational initiatives, and provides networking
opportunities.
Santa Clarita Valley Auto Dealers Association
The Valencia Auto Center, located off Valencia Boulevard and Creekside Road, is the largest
auto mall in North Los Angeles County, with sales of more than $1 billion in 2007. It is home to
more than 15 dealership and 25 brands. The Auto Dealers Association cooperatively markets
the Santa Clarita Valley’s offerings among the Southern California region, and is one of the
biggest generators of sales tax in the area. In the coming years, the City of Santa Clarita is
scheduled to invest into a streetscape improvement project to dramatically enhance the
environment on Creekside Road, adding new landscaping, crosswalks, wayfinding signage and
lighting elements to make the area more visually appealing and pedestrian-friendly.
Santa Clarita Valley Economic Alliance
The Santa Clarita Valley Economic Alliance (SCVEA) strives to enhance the business friendly
environment in today's competitive economic climate by improving the overall public-private
business experience. SCVEA provides assistance in the following key areas: interpreting
building codes; expediting the permitting and licensing process; streamlining and accelerating
the public/private process; addressing environmental, manufacturing, warehousing, office and
technology issues; site/facility location and planning; providing economic information, industry
statistics, tax structures, job training and industry support resources; and providing demographic
information, including community profiles and labor market information.
Santa Clarita Valley Economic Development Corporation
In April 2009, the City of Santa Clarita City Council approved a 21-Point Business Plan for
Progress, designed to address the many challenges facing the Santa Clarita Valley economy
resulting from the U.S. recession. One of the points in the plan included the possible formation
of the area’s first Economic Development Corporation. Developed in concert with other like-
minded business entities, included those referenced above, the City of Santa Clarita Economic
Development Division would work hand-in-hand with these entities to develop the Santa Clarita
Valley Economic Development Corporation.
Goals of the organization may include studies of the local economy including trending and
forecasting, as well as attraction of targeted businesses in the identified key sectors.
Santa Clarita Valley Tourism Bureau
The Santa Clarita Valley Tourism Bureau is comprised of more than 30 public, private, and non-
profit businesses dedicated to cooperatively marketing the area to visitors. The goals of the
Bureau include development of marketing materials, collaborative advertising campaigns in key
markets, and supporting like-minded tourism businesses through networking and professional
development opportunities.
June 2011                                        E-24

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                        Economic Development
The City of Santa Clarita should continue to work in coordination with these groups to market
and promote the area’s resources and attributes, encouraging further expansion of the City’s
economic base. This includes identifying joint collaborations and initiatives and collectively
working toward common goals.
These may include, but are not limited to the following:
• Development of an Economic Development Corporation;
• Formation of Business Improvement Districts;
• Formation of Tourism Marketing Districts;
• Third-party Economic Impact Surveys, Business and Retail Surveys, or Market Analysis
     Surveys to gauge business attraction efforts; and
• Collaborative business pitches and solicitations to companies in targeted industry sectors.
lX. EMPHASIS ON TOURISM & CULTURE SUPPORTING WEALTH CREATION
Quality of life is one of the Santa Clarita Valley’s biggest attributes. Companies chose to
relocate to the area, not only because of affordability, housing and proximity to Los Angeles, but
because of the Santa Clarita Valley’s quality school system, recreational opportunities,
distinctive culture and tourism assets.
In 1971 when the Newhall Land & Farming Company first opened Magic Mountain, tourism
became a growing industry in the Santa Clarita Valley. In the years following the park’s
opening, hotels began to develop as an increasing number of regional and statewide travelers
took an interest in the park.
Today, tourism is one of the Santa Clarita Valley’s growing industries. Six Flags Magic
Mountain and Hurricane Harbor remain the largest attractions, but a robust calendar of regional,
national, and international events have put the area on the map as a must-see destination for
Los Angeles area visitors.
Six Flags Magic Mountain & Hurricane Harbor
Magic Mountain was built by Newhall Land & Farming Company to attract new homebuyers to
the Santa Clarita Valley. When the park opened on May 29, 1971, there were 500 employees
and 33 attractions. Today, at the height of the summer season, Six Flags Magic Mountain
employs more than 3,000 people and boasts more than 100 rides and attractions for the entire
family.
Since its inception, the theme park has successfully written itself into the country’s vibrant
theme park history using state-of-the-art thrill ride innovation to earn recognition as the finest
thrill ride park in the world. As the City of Santa Clarita grew and developed, so did the
landmark theme park. Six Flags Hurricane Harbor opened next door to Magic Mountain in 1995
and provides water adventures for families each summer. With the addition of the water park,
the two parks were the first multi-gated entertainment destination in Southern California.
                                               E-25                                    June 2011

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                          Economic Development
Six Flags Magic Mountain continues to be one of the Six Flags company's most profitable parks,
attracting more than three million visitors each year. Six Flags is committed to the continuous
investment in Magic Mountain, with capital improvement projects and new ride openings
scheduled through the parks’ 40th anniversary celebration in 2011. Six Flags Magic Mountain is
also the largest generator of hotel room stays in the Santa Clarita Valley. Therefore the area’s
peak tourism season follows the park’s peak season, with high season/high occupancy during
Magic Mountain’s daily operations schedule, mid-March (spring break) through Labor Day, and
low season occurring from November through early March.
City of Santa Clarita’s Transient Occupancy Tax (TOT)
When visitors stay at hotels, they pay a transient occupancy tax (TOT). The City of Santa
Clarita hotels currently have a TOT of 10 percent, while the Santa Clarita Valley hotels outside
of the City limits have a TOT rate of 12 percent. Revenue generated by City hotels annually
from TOT is approximately $2 million.
The following are a few hotels statistics for the Santa Clarita Valley.
•    As of March 2009, there are a total of 1,809 hotel rooms in the Santa Clarita Valley that are
     included in hotel data reports with additional rooms proposed.
•    A total of 882 rooms, or 49 percent, are located within the City limits and the remaining 927
     rooms or 51 percent are outside the City limits.
•    By zip code in the Santa Clarita Valley, 43 percent (or 780 rooms) are in zip code 91355
     (City of Santa Clarita), followed by 33 percent (or 601 rooms) in 91381 (Stevenson Ranch
     area), 10 percent (or 174 rooms) in 91384 (Castaic area), 8 percent (or 152 rooms) outside
     the City of Santa Clarita in zip code 91355, and 6 percent (or 102 rooms) in 91351 (City of
     Santa Clarita).
Hotels located within the City of Santa Clarita include: Hyatt Regency Valencia, Holiday Inn
Express Hotel & Suites, Embassy Suites, Best Western, Courtyard by Marriott, Super 8, and
Travelodge.
Hotels located in the unincorporated area of the Santa Clarita Valley include: Hilton Garden Inn,
La Quinta Inn & Suites, Extended Stay, Residence Inn, Hampton Inn, Comfort Suites, Fairfield
Inn, Rodeway Inn, and Days Inn.
Since 2006, the Santa Clarita Valley’s hotel room inventory has increased by 27 percent, with
408 new rooms from the opening of La Quinta Inn & Suites, Courtyard by Marriott, and
Embassy Suites. A new Sheraton Hotel has been proposed at the corner of McBean Parkway
and Valencia Boulevard. Santa Clarita Valley remains one of the Los Angeles region’s top ten
performing hotel markets, with 82 percent occupancy in 2005, 84 percent in 2006, 74 percent in
2007 and 69 percent in 2008 according to PKF Consulting. The Santa Clarita Valley continues
to rank above the State average and above several other Los Angeles area markets.
Calendar of Events
The Santa Clarita Valley is home to a variety of cultural and sports-related events attracting
large audiences from key regional and national markets. The goal of these events is to expose
visitors to a memorable experience they cannot find elsewhere, while encouraging visitor
spending at local businesses. The following events are regional in scope and draw visitors from
outside the Santa Clarita Valley.
June 2011                                        E-26

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                         Economic Development
•   Amgen Tour of California: The largest cycling event in America, the Amgen Tour of
    California is a Tour de France-style cycling road race challenging the world’s top
    professional cycling teams to compete along a demanding 750+ mile course from north to
    south. This event attracts more than 1.6 million spectators each year, with more than
    100,000 in the Santa Clarita Valley, with the debut of Lance Armstrong in 2009. In the
    Santa Clarita Valley, the event’s economic impact is estimated at approximately $2 million in
    benefit to local businesses.
•   Cowboy Festival: Each spring, the City of Santa Clarita presents the annual Cowboy
    Festival, an event blending the Santa Clarita Valley film and Western heritage together with
    the allure of cultural tourism. Set at Melody Ranch Motion Picture Studio, the event attracts
    an estimated 10,000+ visitors each year and garners regional and national media attention.
•   Pet Expo: Launched in 2009, this event attracted more than 3,000 regional pet enthusiasts
    to College of the Canyons. Celebrity Dog Whisperer Cesar Millan, who is based in the
    Santa Clarita Valley, helped promote the event.
•   City of Santa Clarita Festival of the Arts: The City of Santa Clarita Festival of the Arts is
    designed to celebrate the art of street painting, while enjoying non-traditional forms of art,
    live music and dance, and hands-on opportunities to create art. The multi-cultural event
    takes place in Old Town Newhall and primarily attracts a regional crowd of 3,000-4,000
    persons and is growing in popularity.
•   Wine Festival: Santa Clarita is home to several wine lounge businesses and since 2005 has
    been home to several premier wine festivals, attracting thousands of Southern California
    visitors to the Santa Clarita Valley.
•   Santa Clarita Marathon: The City of Santa Clarita hosts an annual Santa Clarita Marathon,
    an official qualifying race for the Boston Marathon. The event features a full marathon, a
    half marathon, a 5K Run/Walk, and a Kid K run and attracts nearly 3,000 athletes annually
    while reinforcing Santa Clarita’s healthy living/lifestyle philosophy.
As the City of Santa Clarita, in partnership with private organizations and the County of Los
Angeles, continues to position the area as a visitor destination, entities must continue to attract
targeted events. These may include a food and wine festival, art events in coordination with
CalArts, or other cultural offerings as identified as unique to the Santa Clarita Valley. To help
support attraction of these offerings, the City of Santa Clarita must:
•   Develop a process to evaluate proposed tourism-based events and levels of City support;
•   Look at formation of a Tourism Business Improvement District to help fund support of these
    types of tourism events; and
•   Align the City of Santa Clarita with choice events that underscore the philosophy, values,
    and ideals of the Santa Clarita community.
Performing Arts
The Santa Clarita Valley is home to a robust artist community, which includes live theater, a
performing arts center at College of the Canyons, arts galleries, and one of a kind exhibits and
artist showcases at CalArts.
                                                 E-27                                   June 2011

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                        Economic Development
    • The Canyon Theatre Guild feature 10 productions annually and welcomes more than
       40,000 visitors to its theatre in Old Town Newhall.
    • The Repertory East Playhouse, an intimate 81-seat theater, offers improvisation, live
       theater, and a variety of shows, including Shakespeare in the Park in the heart of Old
       Town Newhall.
    • The Santa Clarita Performing Arts Center at College of the Canyons features a variety of
       professional, college, and community performers. The 926-seat theater regularly
       features music, dance, theater, and comedy performances for all audiences.
    • The College of the Canyons Art Gallery curates a variety of exhibits annually and is
       committed to serving the college community and the community at large. The Gallery
       features art from contemporary, traditional, and expressionistic artists worldwide and has
       been in operation since 1997, with the opening of a new Fine and Media Arts Building.
Arts Commission
In 2009, the City of Santa Clarita created the City’s first Arts Commission to provide leadership,
vision, and commitment to cultural arts development in the City. This 5-member commission is
comprised of art-minded individuals and is responsible for advising the City Council, City
Manager, and City staff on arts matters including public art and art programs and events
throughout the community.
Castaic Lake
Operated by the County of Los Angeles Department of Parks and Recreation, Castaic Lake is a
state water reservoir located just north of Santa Clarita. Along with providing fresh water to
local communities, Castaic Lake remains dedicated to providing the public with a wide range of
recreational opportunities. The upper lake is home to many different recreation activities, and is
the primary facility for motorized watercraft. Boaters have a chance to experience 2,235 acres of
explorable waterways and coves, and fisherman can test the 29 miles of shoreline. Visitors can
also enjoy barbecue & picnic along the shores of the lake.
Town Center Drive
Town Center Drive includes many principles of new urbanism featuring a pedestrian friendly
corridor with access to a wide range of uses. Multiple residential housing types combined with
commercial office, retail, restaurant, recreation and entertainment are located within a quarter
mile of each other and create a live, work and play environment.
Also situated on Town Center Drive is the Hyatt Regency Valencia and Santa Clarita
Conference Center. The Santa Clarita Conference Center, which includes a 6,000 square-foot
Grand Ballroom, is the largest meeting facility in the Santa Clarita Valley. Adaptable to any size
meeting, the Grand Ballroom divides into five separate function spaces for simultaneous events.
The hotel also offers an Executive Board Room and ample outdoor gardens for luncheons,
receptions and weddings.
The arts, recreation, and distinctive attractions and events continue to fuel California’s tourism
industry. Santa Clarita’s tourism industry is no different. The City of Santa Clarita, in
coordination with the identified community groups, must continue to attract the high-caliber of
amenities, attractions, and offerings visitors expect from a world-class destination. The City of
Santa Clarita should be discriminating when considering tourism businesses, attractions, and
June 2011                                       E-28

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                          Economic Development
events and should develop a consistent method and procedure for review of new offerings. This
should include an event and attraction advisory committee and application and review process
for special events and privately funded events looking for funding and City support.
For example, the City of Santa Clarita must look at whether the event or attraction is new,
whether the concept is in line with the City’s policy of embracing outdoor recreation, sports-
tourism, family-friendly events, the quintessential California lifestyle Santa Clarita embodies,
and whether it reinforces Santa Clarita’s goals of making the community an ideal place to work,
live, and play. Events meeting criteria in the past include the Amgen Tour of California, AT&T
Champions Classic, Bella Via, and the Loose Goose Wine Festival. Attractions and business
includes Six Flags, Westfield Valencia Town Center, Mountasia Family Fun Center and Saugus
Speedway.
X. SUMMARY OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PLANNING ISSUES
Based on existing conditions and projected growth as described throughout this document, the
major economic development strategies are summarized below.
       1.   Engage in activities that will establish an appropriate jobs/housing balance.
       2.   Attract and promote businesses that provide high-quality, high-paying jobs for local
            residents.
       3.   Target the four main industry clusters currently identified and, as needed, refine the
            process to support these industries.
       4.   Develop and participate in programs that assist local businesses thrive, such as the
            Enterprise Zone, Recycling Market Development Zone, and Use Tax Incentive
            Program.
       5.   Build an economic base for all communities through increased sales tax generation.
       6.   Continue collaborative relationships with key economic development agencies.
       7.   Partner with local education institutions, employers, and others to evaluate the
            workforce training needs and provide timely opportunities for development of the
            local workforce.
       8.   Develop economic wealth by attracting external monies to Santa Clarita.
       9.   Provide a wide range of retail, entertainment, and cultural opportunities to serve
            residents and visitors throughout Santa Clarita.
       10.  Attract and support cultural and sports-related events that attract large audiences
            from regional and national markets and promote Santa Clarita as a tourist
            destination.
                                                  E-29                                  June 2011

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                    Circulation
                                    CIRCULATION ELEMENT
                                           June, 2011
PART 1: BACKGROUND AND CIRCULATION ISSUES
A.       Purpose and Intent of the Circulation Element
The Santa Clarita Valley’s circulation system provides vital connections linking neighborhoods,
services, and employment centers throughout the community and the region. A comprehensive
transportation network of roadways, multi-use trails and bike paths, bus transit, and commuter
rail provides mobility options to Valley residents and businesses. Planning for the ultimate
location and capacity of circulation improvements will also enhance economic strength and
quality of life in the Valley.
The Circulation Element plans for the continued development of efficient, cost-effective and
comprehensive transportation systems that are consistent with regional plans, local needs, and
the Valley’s community character. The Circulation Element complements and supports the
Land Use Element, insofar as a cohesive land use pattern cannot be achieved without adequate
circulation. The Circulation Element identifies and promotes a variety of techniques for
improving mobility that go beyond planning for construction of new streets and highways.
These techniques include: development of alternative travel modes and support facilities;
increased efficiency and capacity of existing systems through management strategies; and
coordination of land use planning with transportation planning by promoting concentrated,
mixed-use development near transit facilities.
B.       Background
The California Government Code describes conditions and data that must be researched,
analyzed, and discussed in a Circulation Element. Section 65302(b) states that the general
plan shall include the general location and extent of existing and proposed major thoroughfares,
transportation routes, terminals and other local public utilities and facilities. The City and
County are also required to coordinate the Circulation Element provisions with regional
transportation plans, as set forth in Government Code Sections 65103(f) and 65080. Regional
plans affecting the Santa Clarita Valley include those of the California Department of
Transportation (Caltrans); the Regional Mobility Plan prepared by the Southern California
Association of Governments (SCAG); the Los Angeles Metropolitan Transportation Authority’s
(MTA or Metro) Congestion Management Program and bikeway strategic plan; Santa Clarita
Transit’s Transportation Development Plan (TDP); and Los Angeles County’s Airport Land Use
Plan. The Circulation Element has been developed in conformance with these regional
transportation programs.
The proposed street and highway network is based on projected development permitted by the
Land Use Element. Policies have been included requiring coordination of land use and
circulation planning in order to reduce vehicle trips by mixing land uses, locating higher
densities within proximity of public transit, and providing greater access and connectivity for
non-motorized travel modes. In addition, implementation of the Circulation Element will assist
the City and County in achieving their land use goals for job creation, because the economic
viability of new commercial and industrial development throughout the Valley will be improved
with better access. The Circulation Element is also consistent with other elements of the
General Plan and Area Plan. Projected noise levels as contained in the Noise Element are
                                                C-1                                   June 2011

Circulation                                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
based upon traffic volumes estimated for the Circulation Element. By planning for a smooth-
flowing transportation system, the potential of shorter trip lengths, and alternative travel modes,
the Circulation Element encourages reduction of vehicle emissions as envisioned by the
Conservation and Open Space Element. Trails and bikeways are addressed in the Circulation
Element as well as in the Conservation and Open Space Element. Policies to ensure that the
circulation system is safe, such as provision of emergency access and maintenance of
evacuation routes, are consistent with provisions of the Safety Element. The provision of an
adequate circulation system to support and encourage commercial and industrial development
is consistent with the Economic Development Element. Finally, the provision of an adequate
circulation system to support residential development is consistent with the Housing Element.
The Circulation Element has been developed based on analysis of existing conditions in the
Valley, future development in both City and County areas, and anticipated growth. A variety of
data were used to quantify and characterize existing and future projected traffic volumes and
conditions along roadway links and at key intersections. A traffic model was developed to
distribute and analyze projected trips based on development projections. Based on this
information, recommendations were formulated for the roadway designations shown on the
Circulation Map, and for goals, policies and programs included in the Circulation Element.
C.       Fundamental Concepts for Circulation Planning
To provide greater clarity on circulation issues and needs affecting the street and highway
system, several key terms are discussed in this section.
Access and Mobility
The Valley’s system of streets and highways consists of a range of transportation facilities that
serve two basic functions for motorists: mobility and land access. Mobility means providing the
facilities for motorists to travel between points of activity, and access means providing for
entrance and egress to a particular land parcel or development site at the final destination. A
circulation network is composed of facilities that emphasize the mobility or access functions to
different degrees. For example, freeways provide limited access but good mobility between
access points, while local neighborhood streets provide access to every residence but a low
degree of mobility, due to slow speeds and frequent stops. The streets and highways in the
Valley have been classified as follows, based on differing degrees of mobility and access:
     •   Freeways. Freeways provide mobility with very limited access. Generally, federal
         guidelines call for at least one mile of separation between freeway access ramps. Within
         the Santa Clarita Valley, Interstate 5 (I-5, or the Golden State Freeway) and State Route
         14 (SR-14, or the Antelope Valley Freeway) are classified as freeways; both are under
         the jurisdiction of Caltrans for maintenance and traffic control.
June 2011                                  C-2

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                          Circulation
    •   Expressways. Expressways refer to State routes that provide a high degree of mobility
        and limited access, but do not meet the design standards for freeways. Access to
        expressways can be either by grade separated crossings or by at-grade intersections
        and state guidelines call for at least one mile of separation between signalized
        intersections. Within the planning area, State Route 126 west of I-5 is classified as an
        expressway.
    •   Arterial streets (Highways). Arterials provide a high degree of mobility as major traffic
        carriers with access to collectors and some local streets. These roadways are referred
        to as Highways in the County Highway Plan, a component of the Countywide General
        Plan, and in the City of Santa Clarita General Plan. Arterials are typically the widest
        streets in terms of right-of-way and pavement width, and they generally have the highest
        speed limits. Arterials may be further classified as major or secondary, based on their
        width and capacity.
    •   Collector streets. Collectors connect local streets with arterials and also provide access
        to adjacent land uses, thus balancing mobility with access. While a collector street is not
        as wide as an arterial, it is often wider than local streets in terms of right-of-way and lane
        width.
    •   Local streets. Local streets are intended to provide access to adjacent land uses
        exclusively, and are not designed or intended to carry through-traffic or allow for high
        speeds. Typically, residential streets within neighborhoods are designed as local
        streets.
Roadway systems are designed with different types of streets to balance mobility and access
needs in an efficient manner. The different functions of various roadways require specific
methods of analysis and design, because each street type must meet different traffic capacity
and access requirements. While it might be considered desirable to provide both access and
mobility on all roadways, most residents would not like their local neighborhood streets to be
designed to carry large volumes of through traffic. Conversely, congestion problems occur
when a street designed to provide mobility is expected to provide for access as well. Local
streets typically require numerous driveways to move vehicles off the street and onto adjacent
properties. When too many access points are provided on a street intended for mobility, friction
and conflicts occur between those vehicles needing access and other vehicles using the facility
for mobility. Therefore, the designation of streets for different uses has both a functional and
economic value, and must be considered in developing a viable circulation plan.
Capacity and Connectivity
In evaluating and planning for a functional circulation system, both capacity and connectivity
must also be considered. Capacity refers to the ability of the street system, including roadways
and intersections, to adequately serve the traffic demand. It is a measure of how well the
mobility needs of the Valley are met. Connectivity is defined as a measure of how well various
parts of the Valley are linked, and how easy it is to move between different parts of the Valley.
A poorly connected transportation system can make even nearby destinations functionally far
apart. Conversely, a well-connected system can ease travel between destinations by
shortening on-the-ground distances. The street arrangement with the greatest connectivity is a
grid pattern, which provides many intersections and routes. Subdivision patterns that contain
                                                   C-3                                      June 2011

Circulation                                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
numerous cul-de-sacs and looped streets provide low connectivity, increasing dependence on
the automobile to reach destinations that may be relatively nearby “as the crow flies.” One of
the defining features of urban sprawl is lack of connectivity, which requires more driving time to
reach destinations.
Within the Santa Clarita Valley, connectivity of the street network is interrupted by topographic
constraints, including rolling terrain, canyons, and the Santa Clara River. In addition, the
prevalent subdivision pattern, comprised of local cul-de-sac streets with limited connectivity,
acts to funnel all traffic onto collector and arterial streets. As a result, regional traffic is
concentrated on a limited number of arterial streets. Projects such as completion of the Via
Princessa gap closure, and plans to create a new north-south connection through the center of
the Valley (Santa Clarita Parkway), are examples of projects intended to increase connectivity.
The capacity of a roadway is affected by several factors, including the street’s width, the number
of cross streets, the amount of green time given to the street at each signal (signal timing), the
presence or absence of on-street parking, the number of turn lanes at each intersection, and the
number of driveways. Intersection capacity depends on the lane configuration, meaning the
number of through lanes and turn lanes, their width and alignment, and the signal timing. Daily
capacity analysis is a general measure of a street’s ability to carry traffic; this indicator is
typically used to identify roadways which are nearing or exceeding their capacity, and which
should be the subject of further peak hour analysis. Traffic operations are usually described by
a roadway’s or intersection’s level of service during peak traffic hours.
Planners and traffic engineers are faced with competing demands when designing street
patterns. In order to increase traffic flow and reduce congestion, they need to increase roadway
capacity and limit access; however, in order to increase connectivity and public safety, they
need to slow traffic down to allow for turn movements, bikeways, and pedestrian crossings. The
design solutions to these challenges are complex, but many potential problems can be solved
by creating mixed-use communities that provide alternative travel modes between homes,
employment, schools, shopping, and services.
Level of Service
The level of service (LOS) designation of a roadway or intersection indicates whether the
capacity is adequate to handle the volume of traffic using the facility. The LOS provided by
street segments and intersections are dependent upon traffic volumes, number of lanes,
whether the roadway is divided, the number of access points (driveways and cross streets)
along the roadway, and the lane configuration at intersections. LOS is a term used to describe
prevailing conditions and their effect on traffic. It is a qualitative measure which describes
operational conditions within a traffic stream, generally in terms of such factors as travel speed,
travel time, traffic interruptions, freedom to maneuver, safety, driving comfort, and convenience.
The LOS is represented alphabetically, with LOS A representing the least impacted roadway,
and LOS E representing a roadway operating at the maximum capacity. LOS F represents long
queues of traffic and unstable flows, and is generally considered to be unsatisfactory (see Table
C-1).
Although level of service is an important factor in transportation planning, it is not the only or
even the most important criterion used in all cases. Depending on the area being planned,
other factors may be considered as having priority over expedited movement of vehicles. For
example, in pedestrian-oriented commercial areas, high-speed vehicle movements could be
June 2011                                 C-4

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Circulation
detrimental to the desired character of development, and traffic-calming measures may be used
to slow vehicle speeds. In all portions of the planning area, traffic LOS must be weighed against
other community priorities such as quality of life and environmental resource protection, in order
to achieve a balanced approach to transportation and land use planning.
Peak Hour and Average Daily Traffic Volumes
Average Daily Traffic (ADT) is a measurement of the average number of vehicles that travel a
segment of roadway during a 24-hour period. The ADT is a useful benchmark for determining
roadway capacities, and is typically used for long-range planning analysis. Peak hour
information, which is the highest volume of traffic to pass over a road in a one-hour period,
allows for a more detailed method of evaluating traffic conditions along roadways and
intersections, and is used whenever operational analysis is required.
                   Table C-1: Level of Service Standards for Urban Streets
     Level of Service
                                            Description of Traffic Conditions
           (LOS)
                         LOS “A” describes primarily free-flow operations at average travel
                         speeds, usually about 90 percent of the Free Flow Speed (FFS) for
             A           the given street class. Vehicles are completely unimpeded in their
                         ability to maneuver within the traffic stream. Control delay at
                         signalized intersections is normal.
                         LOS “B” describes reasonably unimpeded operations at average
                         travel speeds, usually about 70 percent of the FFS for the street
             B           class.    Vehicles are completely unimpeded in their ability to
                         maneuver with the traffic stream. Control delay at signalized
                         intersections is minimal.
                         LOS “C” describes stable operations; however, ability to maneuver
                         and change lanes in midblock locations may be more restricted that
             C           at LOS “B,” and longer queues, adverse signal coordination, or both
                         may contribute to lower average travel speeds of about 50 percent of
                         the FFS for the street class.
                         LOS “D” borders on a range in which small increases in flow may
                         cause substantial increases in delay and decreases in travel speed.
             D           LOS “D” may be due to adverse signal progression, inappropriate
                         signal timing, high volumes, or a combination of these factors.
                         Average travel speeds are about 40 percent of FFS.
                         LOS “E” is characterized by significant delays and average travel
                         speeds of 33 percent or less of the FFS. Such operations are
             E           caused by a combination of adverse progression, high signal density,
                         high volumes, extensive delays at critical intersections, and
                         inappropriate signal timing.
                         LOS “F” is characterized by urban street flow at extremely low
                         speeds, typically one-third to one-fourth of the FFS. Intersection
             F
                         congestion is likely at critical signalized locations, with high delays,
                         high volumes, and extensive queuing.
                                                 C-5                                     June 2011

Circulation                                                      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Intersection Capacity
The level of service along urban streets is typically dependent on the quality of traffic flow at the
intersections along that roadway. Usually bottlenecks and delays start at intersections rather
than on the roadway between them. Level of service at intersections is based on factors such
as delay time or volume to capacity ratios, with specific methods of analysis utilized for
signalized and un-signalized intersections.
Air Quality and Safety Issues
In addition to vehicular mobility and access issues, the Circulation Element addresses broader
issues of public health and safety as they relate to the circulation network. The greatest source
of air pollutants in the Valley is generated from transportation (mobile sources). Because of its
geographical location and meteorological conditions, the Santa Clarita Valley records some of
the highest ozone readings in the South Coast Air Basin. Although ozone concentrations are
generated largely from pollutants transported from outside the Valley, locally generated air
pollutants are also an issue for Valley residents due to increased automobile traffic associated
with growth. Localized carbon monoxide concentrations are found at congested intersections,
especially in winter. Concentrations of fine airborne particulates also result from locally
generated emissions, such as increased truck traffic.
Land use patterns and the density of development directly affect the amount of air pollution that
is generated from mobile sources within a community. Land uses that are segregated increase
the number of motor vehicle trips and associated air pollutant emissions, because it is
inconvenient or impossible to walk or bicycle between destinations or public transit is not
available. Communities in which the ratio of jobs to housing units is not balanced result in
additional vehicle miles traveled by commuters who must drive to employment centers. When
communities are designed to mix residential with commercial, business, and employment uses,
the trip length and frequency of motor vehicle use can be reduced. Goals and policies included
the Land Use, Conservation, and Circulation Elements have been coordinated to address the
related issues of traffic, land use patterns, and air quality.
A recent book on the impacts of urban sprawl highlights the enormous toll that automobile
accidents and pedestrian fatalities take on public health, stating that “Automobiles claim more
than 40,000 lives each year in the United States. Automobile crashes are the leading cause of
death among people from one year to 24 years old, cause about 3.4 million nonfatal injuries
each year, and cost an estimated $200 billion annually.”1 Designing a roadway system that
protects public safety is of paramount importance, and this issue is addressed in the goals and
policies of the Circulation Element. The issue of safety for bicyclists and pedestrians is also a
primary concern for developing a healthy and safe circulation system for the Valley, and the
maps and policies of the Circulation Element have been prepared to address safe pedestrian
routes and bikeways.
1
  Frumkin, Howard, Lawrence Frank, Richard Jackson. Urban Sprawl and Public Health: Designing,
Planning and Building for Healthy Communities. Washington, Island Press, 2005, page 110.
June 2011                                 C-6

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                     Circulation
D.      Congestion Management Program
The Congestion Management Program (CMP) was enacted by the California Legislature in
1989 to improve traffic congestion in urban areas. The program became effective with the
passage of Proposition 111 in 1990, which also increased the State gas tax. Funds generated
by Proposition 111 are available to cities and counties for regional road improvements, provided
these agencies are in compliance with CMP requirements. The intent of the legislation was to
link transportation, land use, and air quality decisions by addressing the impact of local growth
on the regional transportation system. State statute requires that a congestion management
program be developed, adopted, and updated biennially for every county that includes an
urbanized area, which shall include every city and county government within that county.
Therefore, the City of Santa Clarita and County of Los Angeles must comply with CMP
requirements in developing a circulation plan for the Santa Clarita Valley.
Under the legislation, regional agencies are designated within each county to prepare and
administer the Congestion Management Program for agencies within that county. Each local
planning agency included in the CMP has the following responsibilities:
    •   Assisting in monitoring the roadways designated within the CMP system;
    •   Adopting and implementing a trip reduction and travel demand ordinance;
    •   Analyzing the impacts of local land use decisions on the regional transportation system;
        and
    •   Preparing annual deficiency plans for portions of the CMP system where level of service
        standards are not maintained.
In Los Angeles County, the CMP agency is the Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation
Authority (MTA or Metro). Metro has the responsibility to review compliance with the CMP by
agencies under its jurisdiction. For any agency out of compliance, after receiving notice and
after a correction period, a portion of state gas tax funds may be withheld if compliance is not
achieved. In addition, compliance with the CMP is necessary to preserve eligibility for state and
federal funding for transportation projects.
Metro adopted the County’s first Congestion Management Program in 1992, and completed its
most recent update in 2004. The statute requires that all state highways and principal arterials
be included within the CMP roadway system. Within the Santa Clarita Valley, the following
roadways are designated as CMP roadways:
    •   Interstate 5 (Golden State Freeway);
    •   State Route 14 (Antelope Valley Freeway);
    •   Sierra Highway from Newhall Avenue (formerly San Fernando Road) to State Route 14
        at Red Rover Mine Road;
    •   Magic Mountain Parkway from Interstate 5 to Railroad Avenue (formerly San Fernando
        Road);
                                                 C-7                                   June 2011

Circulation                                                      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
     •   Railroad Avenue/Newhall Avenue (formerly San Fernando Road) from Magic Mountain
         Parkway to State Route 14; and
     •   State Route 126 west of Interstate 5.
The 2004 CMP noted that both Interstate 5 and the Antelope Valley Freeway within the planning
area demonstrate traditional commute patterns, with congestion flowing into Los Angeles and
the San Fernando Valley in the morning and a reverse flow in the afternoon. The CMP
indicates that all CMP roadways in the Santa Clarita Valley except SR-14 operate at a level of
service D or better during a.m. and p.m. peak hours. Portions of the Antelope Valley Freeway
are reported to operate at LOS E during a.m. and p.m. peak hours. However, the 2004 CMP
indicates that both Interstate 5 and SR-14 traffic conditions have improved since the first CMP
was completed in 1991, due to the completion of widening projects on these routes.
Preparation of a General Plan update constitutes a project that must be evaluated for CMP
compliance. If a new General Plan is found to further impact traffic conditions on CMP
roadways, mitigations may be required. The Los Angeles County CMP allows a local
jurisdiction to define acceptable levels of service up to LOS E.
The 2004 CMP adopted by Metro found that, while 46 of the County’s cities experienced very
limited growth in the planning period, most of the County’s growth has occurred in 10
jurisdictions, of which the Santa Clarita Valley is ranked fourth in terms of growth. Sixteen
percent of the county’s growth occurred in the San Fernando Valley and North County areas,
including residential, commercial, and office growth sectors.
Various strategies are available to local jurisdictions to mitigate CMP traffic impacts, including
constructing new roadway improvements, managing traffic flow through signal improvements
and trip reduction measures, and land use strategies such as locating higher density uses in
proximity to public transit. The 2004 CMP found that only three percent of the total mobility
benefit throughout the County was a result of land use measures used by local agencies. In the
Santa Clarita Valley, the City and County have an opportunity, with the One Valley One Visiion
(OVOV) planning effort to increase the coordination of land use planning with transportation
improvements in order to increase mobility benefits.
The traffic analysis conducted for the OVOV planning effort addressed these issues, and its
conclusions are presented in the traffic report. Based on the traffic model, all roadway
segments within the planning area that are designated as CMP roadways will operate at LOS E
or better at buildout of the City’s General Plan and the County’s Area Plan. Therefore, the
Circulation Element is consistent with the Congestion Management Plan, as required by State
law.
E. Existing Roadway System within the Santa Clarita Valley
Regional Access
Regional access to the Santa Clarita Valley is provided by two primary freeway corridors:
Interstate 5 (I-5, or the Golden State Freeway) traverses the planning area in a northwesterly
direction and is delineated with eight travel lanes; and State Route 14 (SR-14, or the Antelope
Valley Freeway) traverses the planning area in a northeasterly direction and accommodates
between four and 10 travel lanes. I-5 provides an important link between the southern and
northern portions of the United States, and also serves as a vital link for commuter traffic
June 2011                                C-8

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                        Circulation
between Santa Clarita communities and Los Angeles. SR-14 is also used by a significant
amount of commuter traffic, as well as providing a regional link between the Los Angeles basin
and the high desert communities of Palmdale and Lancaster. I-5 and SR-14 converge in the
Newhall Pass, located south of the southerly planning area boundary. Newhall Pass has
traditionally been one of the most congested regional corridors in Southern California and is in
need of additional capacity improvements.
Secondary regional access is provided to motorists in the western portion of the planning area
via State Route 126 (SR-126), which extends from the City of Ventura east to I-5. East of I-5,
SR-126 was once designated along portions of Magic Mountain Parkway and San Fernando
Road (now known as Railroad Avenue and Newhall Avenue) between I-5 and SR-14; however,
these roadways were turned over to the City in 2002 and no longer serve as a State highway
alignment.
Streets and Highways
Streets and highways within the planning area have been classified into the following
categories, based on their function and design:
    •   Major Highways are arterials with at least six travel lanes for high mobility, designed with
        limited vehicular access to driveways and cross streets. The typical road section
        includes a raised landscaped median with left turn pockets at intersections. When fully
        improved and operating at LOS E, major highways can accommodate approximately
        54,000 vehicles per day. Street sections may include striped, on-street bike lanes or
        separated bike paths.
    •   Secondary Highways are arterials with an ultimate design section of four travel lanes,
        designed for high mobility and with limited vehicular access from driveways and cross
        streets. The typical road section includes a median with left turn pockets provided at
        intersections. Secondary highways are designed to service both through traffic, and to
        collect traffic from collector and local streets. When fully improved and operating at LOS
        E, secondary highways can accommodate approximately 36,000 vehicles per day.
    •   Limited Secondary Highways are arterials with more limited mobility and greater access,
        with an ultimate roadway design section of two travel lanes and with partial control of
        vehicular and pedestrian access to the roadway from driveways, cross streets, and
        crosswalks. The roadway is usually undivided and may accommodate limited parking
        activity and left turn pockets at major intersections. These streets are designed to
        accommodate moderate volumes of traffic and provide local access to major and
        secondary highways. When fully improved and operating at LOS E, these streets can
        accommodate approximately 18,000 vehicles per day.
    •   Collector Streets are roadways which have an ultimate roadway design section of two
        travel lanes with limited vehicular access to the roadway from driveways and cross
        streets. The roadway is usually undivided and does not always accommodate left turn
        pockets at intersections. Collector streets are designed to provide both access and
        limited mobility, servicing local traffic from residential, commercial, and industrial uses
        and providing access to the arterial roadway system. Collector streets are not depicted
        on the adopted Highway Plan. When fully improved and operating at LOS E, collectors
        can accommodate approximately 15,000 vehicles per day.
                                                    C-9                                   June 2011

Circulation                                                      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
    •   Local streets are streets designed for full access and limited mobility, and may include
        residential streets, private streets, service roads, and public alleys. For the purposes of
        circulation planning at the General Plan level, local streets are not included on the
        adopted Highway Plan. However, policies have been included in the Circulation
        Element to ensure that local streets contribute to healthy, safe neighborhoods.
Arterial Highways and Collectors in the Santa Clarita Valley
Arterial highways traversing the Santa Clarita Valley provide connections between communities
and to outlying areas. Bouquet Canyon Road connects the Santa Clarita Valley to the Antelope
Valley through the Angeles National Forest. Sierra Highway, which generally parallels the SR-
14 corridor, also provides connection to the Antelope Valley as well as a non-freeway
connection between the Santa Clarita Valley and the Los Angeles Basin, through the Newhall
Pass. The combination of Valencia Boulevard and Soledad Canyon Road currently provides
the primary east-west connection between I-5 and SR-14 through the Santa Clarita Valley.
Soledad Canyon Road also provides the primary non-freeway connection between the City of
Santa Clarita and the communities of Agua Dulce and Acton. Escondido Canyon Road, Crown
Valley Road, and Santiago Road also serve the Acton community and provide north-south
connections between Soledad Canyon Road and SR-14. Agua Dulce Canyon Road, which
connects Soledad Canyon Road to Sierra Highway, is the main north-south facility in the Agua
Dulce community. Escondido Canyon Road, running east and west, also connects the
communities of Acton and Agua Dulce.
Other canyon routes connect the Santa Clarita Valley to the Antelope Valley, including Lake
Hughes Road and San Francisquito Canyon Road. Sand Canyon Road and Placerita Canyon
Road connect the Santa Clarita Valley to the northeast San Fernando Valley communities of
Sunland and Tujunga, via their connection with Little Tujunga Road through the Angeles
National Forest.
The City recently renamed San Fernando Road as Railroad Avenue between Magic Mountain
Parkway and Lyons Avenue. Between Lyons Avenue and Newhall Avenue, through downtown
Newhall, San Fernando Road was renamed as Main Street. Between Newhall Avenue and its
terminus at SR-14, San Fernando Road was renamed to Newhall Avenue and was restriped to
increase roadway capacity from four lanes to six, which significantly improved traffic circulation
through the intersection at Newhall Avenue and Sierra Highway. In downtown Newhall,
between Lyons Avenue and Pine Street, Main Street was restriped from four travel lanes to two
lanes with on-street parking as part of the Downtown Newhall Specific Plan improvements in
2007. To accommodate north-south through traffic in this area, Railroad Avenue in downtown
Newhall was expanded to accommodate four travel lanes.
Other major new roadways, planned to increase both connectivity and capacity of the arterial
system, were included in the prior Circulation Element and are also included in this update,
including the following arterial roadway segments:
    •   The Via Princessa gap closure between its current westerly terminus near Oak Ridge
        Drive and its current easterly terminus near Isabella Parkway;
    •   The extension of Magic Mountain Parkway from the intersection of Bouquet Canyon
        Road/Railroad Avenue south to Via Princessa;
    •   Santa Clarita Parkway, a new north-south arterial that extends from SR-14 at Placerita
        Canyon Road to Bouquet Canyon Road;
June 2011                                 C-10

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                        Circulation
     •   Long Canyon Road, a new north-south arterial in the west side of the valley, extends
         from SR-126 to a westerly extension of Valencia Boulevard;
     •   Dockweiler Drive from Railroad Avenue to Sierra Highway; and
A complete list of planned new roadways and roadway extensions as depicted in the Highway
Plan is provided in Table C-3.
Based on existing conditions traffic data collected for approximately 100 selected major
segments of County and City roadway network throughout the Santa Clarita Valley, all links
studied are currently operating at LOS E or better except for the following:
     •   Soledad Canyon Road between Bouquet Canyon Road and Commuter Way;
     •   Whites Canyon Road between Soledad Canyon Road and Pleasantdale Street;
     •   Lyons Avenue between Orchard Village Road and Newhall Avenue; and
     •   Newhall Avenue between Lyons Avenue and Main Street.
The existing deficiencies noted above are being addressed by this Circulation Element update
through a combination of measures, such as the completion of future roadways as identified in
the Highway Plan, development of alternative travel modes and support facilities, increased
efficiency of existing systems through management strategies, and coordination of land use
planning with transportation planning by promoting concentrated, mixed-use development near
transit facilities. The traffic model developed for the One Valley One Vision (OVOV) planning
effort was used to evaluate projected traffic conditions for both the existing and proposed City
General Plan and County Area Plan Circulation Elements at build-out of the land uses
envisioned by both documents. This analysis concluded that build-out under the existing City
General Plan and County Area Plan Circulation Elements and Land Use Elements would result
in worse traffic congestion than under the City General Plan and County Area Plan Circulation
Elements developed through the OVOV planning effort, because more roadway segments
would operate at unacceptable levels of service under the prior plans than under the updated
plans. Further information on this analysis is contained in the traffic study.
Cross-Valley Connector
In order to provide greater connectivity and capacity for east-west traffic across the Santa
Clarita Valley, the City and County have worked in partnership to complete the Cross-Valley
Connector. This 8.5-mile system of arterial road, bridges, and intersections provides a
seamless connection between Newhall Ranch Road and Golden Valley Road, and a direct
connection between the I-5/SR-126 junction and the SR-14/Golden Valley Road interchange. In
addition to serving auto and truck traffic in the Valley with an ultimate width of six to eight travel
lanes, the Cross-Valley Connector was designed to include a Class 1 bike path adjacent to the
roadway and a landscaped median. The Cross-Valley Connector is projected to substantially
reduce traffic volumes on Soledad Canyon Road and other major arterials in the City once
completed to ultimate width.
                                                 C-11                                     June 2011

Circulation                                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Major Roadway Improvements Recently Completed or Underway
The construction for the Cross Valley Connector was the “gap closure”, construction of a one-
mile segment linking I-5/SR-126 with Copper Hill Drive/Rye Canyon Road. Completed in 2007,
this portion of the roadway provides multi-modal access to the area’s largest employment
centers (1,000 companies and 50,000 jobs).
In a cooperative effort between Newhall Land, Caltrans, Metro, the County and the City,
expansion of the interchange of I-5 and Magic Mountain Parkway began in 2007 and is was
completed in 2009. The project reduced traffic congestion by widening the freeway on- and off-
ramps and Magic Mountain Parkway.
The Hasley Canyon Road interchange at I-5 was reconstructed in a cooperative effort between
the County, Caltrans, Metro, and Newhall Land. Construction began in 2007 and is was
completed in 2009. The project significantly improves traffic conditions at the interchange and
includes constructing a new bridge over the I-5 freeway, building modern roundabouts on the
east and west sides of the freeway, and providing additional ramps for freeway access.
Construction of new bridges along Sierra Highway over the railroad between Canyon Park
Boulevard and Flying Tiger Drive was initiated in 2007 and completed in 2009. This project
replaced the northbound bridge and rehabilitated the southbound bridge on Sierra Highway, and
eliminated the gap between the two bridges. The new bridge will provide wider traffic lanes and
shared lanes for bicycles and pedestrians.
A new bridge over the Santa Clara River as part of the Cross-Valley Connector was completed
in 2010. This bridge provides a seamless connection between Golden Valley Road and
Newhall Ranch Road.
Peak Hour Traffic Conditions
The Santa Clarita Valley experiences typical suburban traffic patterns, which are characterized
by traffic volumes that peak during the AM and PM commute periods. Based on existing
conditions traffic data and traffic model forecast data for 23 key intersections within the Valley,
the current AM and PM peak hour conditions will continue to worsen over time absent any
changes to the current circulation system. This Circulation Element update addresses the
existing and potential future deficiencies through a combination of land use and transportation
planning, as noted in prior sections.
Transportation Management System
The City has completed the first stage of an Intelligent Transportation Management System
(ITMS) project. Through the use of real-time video and other traffic-related information, ITMS
interconnects 172 traffic signals to the Traffic Operation Center located at City Hall. There, City
staff can adjust signal problems, minimize congestion and provide additional capacity on
alternate routes in case of an accident or other incidents. Staff can quickly be alerted to
situations that require the dispatch of a maintenance crew or law enforcement personnel.
Subsequent stages of the project will increase the number of roadways and intersections
included in the system, with the ultimate goal of including all signalized intersections within the
Santa Clarita Valley.
June 2011                                C-12

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Circulation
The County Department of Public Works is in the process of evaluating communications devices
to enable traffic signals in the unincorporated areas of the Valley to be monitored and controlled
from their Traffic Management Center in Alhambra. This traffic signal control system provides
for continuous monitoring of conditions and will provide once-per-second monitoring of traffic
signals. The system enables traffic signal timing to be controlled and coordinated from the
Traffic Management Center.
The County’s Information Exchange Network (IEN) is an advanced traffic management system
and network capable of sharing information and control of various traffic control systems and
field devices between agencies. The IEN is currently being deployed Countywide and will
improve regional traffic flow through the exchange of traffic signal data among multiple
agencies. The County and City are currently connecting the City’s traffic control system to the
IEN, which will allow for a coordinated response to traffic congestion and incidents.
In addition, the City and County have been implementing signal timing along major arterials,
using signal synchronization to coordinate signals with each other in an effort to improve vehicle
progression and reduce traffic congestion. The City retimes and synchronizes approximately
one-third of its traffic signals every year, which means that all traffic signals are evaluated and
retimed within a three-year period.
Neighborhood Traffic Management
As traffic volumes and congestion increase on arterial roadways, some drivers attempt to
reduce travel times by traveling alternate routes using local neighborhood streets. This
neighborhood intrusion by “cut-through” traffic has become a concern in some residential areas.
The City takes action when necessary to minimize intrusion of regional cut-through traffic in
residential neighborhoods through traffic management and traffic calming strategies, including
the use of circles, chokers, and diverters. The County has an established neighborhood traffic
management program to make neighborhoods safer for pedestrians, bicyclists, residents and
the motoring public.
Street Maintenance
The City Public Works Department currently manages a $5 million annual program for overlay
and slurry-seal of streets. Approximately seven miles of street pavement per year is maintained
under this program. Private streets are required to be maintained by property owners or
homeowners associations.
Some portions of the planning area require additional street maintenance due to substandard
street sections. In particular, older and more rural canyon areas were developed with
substandard streets and lack curbs and gutters for drainage, and sidewalks. As a result,
stormwater runoff undermines the pavement, and maintenance costs are increased. Road
improvements will be required to upgrade street systems in these areas.
                                                 C-13                                    June 2011

Circulation                                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
F. Methodology for Traffic Analysis
The following steps were followed in developing the roadway component of the Circulation
Element:
     1. Documentation of existing conditions and assembling the data base;
     2. Update of the City/County traffic model for the Santa Clarita Valley used to forecast
         future usage of existing and planned circulation routes;
     3. Identification of problems, opportunities and issues on the roadway network;
     4. Testing and evaluation of alternative improvement plans; and
     5. Selection and refinement of the recommended circulation plan.
The Santa Clarita Valley’s existing roadway network is illustrated on Exhibit C-1. Average daily
traffic volumes for arterials within the Valley were obtained through traffic counts, to assess
existing levels of service. Both capacity and connectivity of the network were evaluated.
The traffic engineers utilized a computerized traffic demand model, the Santa Clarita Valley
Consolidated Traffic Model (SCVCTM), which is jointly maintained by the City of Santa Clarita
and the County of Los Angeles, to analyze the roadway system and develop a circulation plan.
For modeling purposes, the planning area is divided into 455 traffic analysis zones (TAZ’s). The
model used a software program comparable to the regional modeling done by the Southern
California Association of Governments (SCAG) and the County’s Congestion Management
Program, in order to assure consistency with regional plans.
Traffic analysis with a traffic demand model involves four general steps: 1) specification of the
roadway network; 2) calculation of vehicle trip generation amounts for uses within each TAZ; 3)
distribution of these vehicle trips to destination points; and 4) assignment of vehicle trips to
specific roadway segments. Based on this analysis, the model indicates whether planned
roadway widths will be adequate to handle projected traffic volumes, and where capacity
problems will occur. The process requires a model that has been calibrated to existing
conditions, and the SCVCTM underwent a comprehensive update and recalibration in 2004.
With this calibrated model, the traffic engineers performed several different model runs based
on various assumptions. The model was run to predict traffic volumes at build-out of the land
uses permitted by the City and County’s Land Use Element.
Based on the traffic model analysis, the traffic engineers identified several needed
improvements to the street and highway system. Traffic issues identified through the public
input process were also considered and evaluated. These traffic issues and needs have been
addressed in the Circulation Plan and the goals and policies section of the element.
Once the traffic model was completed and run, it became necessary to make certain
adjustments to the Land Use Plan and the road network to achieve acceptable levels of service
at General Plan build-out for most roadways. In some cases, adjustments were made to the
ultimate right-of-way for specific roadway links. The final recommended Highway Plan is shown
on Exhibit C-2, and is discussed in further detail in Section G.
June 2011                                C-14

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                    Circulation
G. Recommendations for Street and Highway System
Level of Service Standard
The Countywide General Plan does not specify an acceptable level of service for the purpose of
long-range planning; however, in conformance with the Congestion Management Program, the
preferred maximum acceptable level of service on arterial roads (i.e., major, secondary, and
limited secondary highways) within the planning area is LOS E. The City strives to achieve LOS
D or better on highways to the extent feasible given right-of-way and physical constraints, while
recognizing that in higher density urban areas there is generally a tradeoff between vehicle LOS
and other factors such as pedestrian mobility; therefore, a Level of Service F may be necessary
at limited locations to implement the General Plan. In residential neighborhoods, the City and
County desire conditions of LOS C or better.
                                              C-15                                    June 2011
Circulation      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
June 2011   C-16
City of Santa Clarita General Plan Circulation
                                               C-17 June 2011
Circulation                                                      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Revised Roadway Designations
Designations of the following roadway segments were recommended to be reclassified as a
result of the traffic analysis:
    1. Lake Hughes Road from Ridge Route Road to Angeles National Forest Boundary –
        Reclassify from a major highway to a limited secondary highway.
    2. Vasquez Canyon Road from Bouquet Canyon Road to Sierra Highway – Reclassify from
        a secondary highway to a limited secondary highway.
    3. Sand Canyon Road from the Northern Santa Clarita City boundary to Sierra Highway –
        Reclassify from a major highway to a secondary highway along existing alignment.
    4. Shadow Pines Boulevard/Tick Canyon Road from Grandifloras Road to Davenport Road
        – Reclassify from a secondary highway to a limited secondary highway.
    5. Bouquet Canyon Road from Plum Canyon Road to Vasquez Canyon Road – Reclassify
        from a major highway to a secondary highway.
    6. Skyline Ranch Road from Plum Canyon Road to Sierra Highway – Reclassify planned
        major highway to a limited secondary highway.
    7. Valencia Boulevard/Potrero Canyon Road from the Newhall Ranch/Stevenson Ranch
        boundary to the planned Long Canyon Road – Reclassify planned secondary highway to
        a major highway.
    8. Long Canyon Road from the planned Santa Clara River Bridge to the planned Valencia
        Boulevard/Potrero Canyon Road – Reclassify planned secondary highway to a major
        highway.
    9. Pico Canyon Road from the Newhall Ranch/Stevenson Ranch boundary to Valencia
        Boulevard – Reclassify planned secondary highway to a major highway.
    10. Jakes Way from Canyon Park Boulevard to the planned Lost Canyon Road extension –
        add classification for the existing roadway as a limited secondary highway.
    11. McBean Parkway from Copper Hill Drive to San Francisquito Canyon Road – Reclassify
        planned secondary highway to a limited secondary highway.
    12. San Fransisquito Canyon Road from the planned extension of McBean Parkway to the
        Angeles National Forest – Reclassify from a secondary highway to a limited secondary
        highway.
    13. Lost Canyon Road from Jakes Way to Sand Canyon Road – Reclassify planned major
        highway to a secondary highway.
The following roadway segments were recommended to be removed from the Highway Plan as
a result of the traffic analysis:
    1. 16th Street from Newhall Avenue to Railroad Avenue – Remove planned secondary
        highway.
    2. Sloan Canyon Road from Hillcrest Parkway to Mandolin Canyon Road – Remove
        planned limited secondary highway.
    3. Castaic Road from Parker Road to Newhall Ranch Road – Remove planned secondary
        highway.
    4. Biscailuz Drive from The Old Road to the previously planned extension of Castaic Road
        – Remove planned secondary highway.
    5. Landmark Village (VTTM 53108) Spine Road – Remove planned secondary highway.
    6. “A” Street (Mallory Drive) from Poe Parkway to Valencia Boulevard – Remove planned
        secondary highway.
    7. Poe Parkway from Stevenson Ranch Parkway to Valencia Boulevard – Remove
        secondary (existing and planned) highway.
June 2011                                 C-18

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                 Circulation
    8. Cruzan Mesa Road from Whites Canyon Road to Sierra Highway – Remove planned
        limited secondary highway.
The following roadway alignments were recommended to be realigned as a result of the traffic
analysis:
    1. Sand Canyon Road from the Northern Santa Clarita City boundary to Sierra Highway –
        Realign planned secondary highway along the existing driven roadway.
    2. Long Canyon Road/Potrero Canyon Road/Valencia Boulevard at planned intersection –
        Realign to make Long Canyon Road/Valencia Boulevard the continuous roadway.
    3. Chiquito Canyon Road/Long Canyon Road at State Route 126 – Revise alignments to
        create a continuous north/south roadway.
    4. Whites Canyon Road from Plum Canyon Road to Vasquez Canyon Road – Revise
        alignment to connect from Plum Canyon Road to Sierra Highway (as the proposed
        Skyline Ranch Road).
Table C-2 indicates the designation of all General Plan roadways within the planning area. It
should be noted that local and collector streets are not included on the Highway Plan, which
contains only major and secondary highways, expressways, and parkways.
                  Table C-2: Highway Plan Roadways in the Planning Area
      Roadway
                                         Roadway Segments in Planning Area
    Classification
    Expressways          SR-126
  Major Highways         Avenue Scott (from Rye Canyon to Avenue Tibbitts)
                         Avenue Tibbitts
                         Bouquet Canyon Road (from Plum Canyon Road to Magic Mountain
                         Parkway)
                         Castaic Road (from Lake Hughes Road to Parker Road)
                         Commerce Center Drive
                         Copper Hill Drive (from Newhall Ranch Road to Seco Canyon Road)
                         Golden Valley Road (from Newhall Ranch Road to SR-14 freeway)
                         Hasley Canyon Road (from Commerce Center Drive to I-5 freeway)
                         Lake Hughes Road (from The Old Road to Ridge Route Road)
                         Long Canyon Road (from SR-126 to Valencia Boulevard)
                         Lost Canyon Road (from Jakes Way to Via Princessa)
                         Lyons Avenue
                         Magic Mountain Parkway (from Commerce Center Drive to Via
                         Princessa)
                         McBean Parkway (from I-5 freeway to Copper Hill Drive)
                         Newhall Avenue (from Railroad Avenue to SR-14 freeway)
                         Newhall Ranch Road
                         Orchard Village Road
                         Parker Road (from The Old Road to Castaic Road)
                         Pico Canyon Road
                         Plum Canyon Road
                         Railroad Avenue (from Magic Mountain Parkway to Lyons Avenue)
                         Rye Canyon Road
                         Sand Canyon Road (from Soledad Canyon Road to Lost Canyon Road)
                                               C-19                                June 2011

Circulation                                             City of Santa Clarita General Plan
      Roadway
                                    Roadway Segments in Planning Area
    Classification
                   Santa Clarita Parkway (from Bouquet Canyon Road to Sierra Highway)
                   Sierra Highway
                   Soledad Canyon Road
                   Stevenson Ranch Parkway
                   The Old Road (from Hasley Canyon Road to Lyons Avenue)
                   The Old Road (from Calgrove Boulevard to Sierra Highway)
                   Valencia Boulevard
                   Via Princessa (from Wiley Canyon Road to Lost Canyon Road)
                   Whites Canyon Road
                   Wiley Canyon Road (from Lyons Avenue to Via Princessa)
     Secondary     16th Street (from Orchard Village Road to Newhall Avenue)
      Highways     Agua Dulce Canyon Road
                   Avenue Scott (from Avenue Tibbitts to McBean Parkway)
                   Bouquet Canyon Road (from Plum Canyon Road to Angeles National
                   Forest boundary)
                   Calgrove Boulevard
                   Canyon Park Boulevard
                   Copper Hill Drive (from Seco Canyon Road to Bouquet Canyon Road)
                   Davenport Road
                   Decoro Drive
                   Dickason Drive
                   Dockweiler Drive
                   Escondido Canyon Road
                   Golden Valley Road (from Newhall Ranch Road to Plum Canyon Road)
                   Golden Valley Road (from SR-14 freeway to Via Princessa)
                   Haskell Canyon Road (from Copper Hill Drive to Bouquet Canyon
                   Road)
                   Hasley Canyon Road (from Del Valle Road to Commerce Center Drive)
                   Hillcrest Parkway
                   Long Canyon Road (from Chiquito Canyon Road to SR-126)
                   Lost Canyon Road (from Jakes Way to Sand Canyon Road)
                   Magic Mountain Parkway (from Long Canyon Road to Commerce
                   Center Drive)
                   Newhall Avenue (from 16th Street to Railroad Avenue)
                   Placerita Canyon Road (from Sierra Highway to Sand Canyon Road)
                   Potrero Canyon Road
                   Railroad Avenue (from Lyons Avenue to Newhall Avenue)
                   Ridge Route Road (from approximately ¾ mile north of Northlake Hills
                   elementary school to Castaic Road)
                   Rockwell Canyon Road
                   Sand Canyon Road (from Sierra Highway to Soledad Canyon Road)
                   Seco Canyon (from Copper Hill Drive to Bouquet Canyon Road)
                   Shadow Pines Boulevard
                   Sloan Canyon Road (from The Old Road to Quail Valley Road)
                   The Old Road (from Oak Valley Road to Hasley Canyon Road)
                   The Old Road (from Pico Canyon Road to Calgrove Boulevard)
                   Tourney Road
                   Valley Street
June 2011                          C-20

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                  Circulation
      Roadway
                                         Roadway Segments in Planning Area
    Classification
                         Via Princessa (from Lost Canyon Road to Golden Valley Road)
                         Wiley Canyon Road (from Lyons Avenue to Calgrove Boulevard)
 Limited Secondary       Bouquet Canyon (from Angeles National Forest Boundary to Elizabeth
      Highways           Lake Road)
                         Chiquito Canyon Road (from Del Valle Road to Long Canyon Road)
                         Del Valle Road (from Chiquito Canyon Road to Hasley Canyon Road)
                         Hasley Canyon Road (from Sloan Canyon Road to Del Valle Road)
                         Jakes Way
                         Lake Hughes Road (from Ridge Route Road to Pine Canyon Road)
                         Lost Canyon Road (from Sand Canyon Road to Oak Springs Canyon
                         Road)
                         McBean Parkway (from San Francisquito Canyon Road to Copper Hill
                         Drive)
                         Ridge Route Road (from Templin Highway to approximately ¾ mile
                         north of Northlake Hills elementary school)
                         San Francisquito Canyon Road (from McBean Parkway to Elizabeth
                         Lake Road)
                         Sand Canyon Road (from Lost Canyon Road to Little Tujunga Canyon
                         Road)
                         Seco Canyon (from Discovery Ridge Drive to Copper Hill Drive)
                         Skyline Ranch Road
                         Sloan Canyon Road (from Hillcrest Parkway to Hasley Canyon Road)
                         Sloan Canyon Road (from Quail Valley Road to Tract 46443)
                         Tick Canyon Road
                         Tournament Road
                         Vasquez Canyon Road
      Parkways           Henry Mayo Drive (from Commerce Center Drive to The Old Road)
A complete listing of the future roadway improvements needed to implement the recommended
Highway Plan is provided in Table C-3.
         Table C-3: Roadway Improvements Needed For Build-Out of Highway Plan
        Roadway/Segment                       Improvement                  Comments
   Agua Dulce Canyon Road
    Between Sierra Highway and       Widen roadway from 2 lanes
    Escondido Canyon Road            to a 4 lane Secondary
                                     Highway
    Between Escondido Canyon         Construct new 4 lane            Gap closure segment
    Road and Davenport Road          Secondary Highway
    Between Davenport Road and Widen roadway from 2 lanes
    Soledad Canyon Road              to a 4 lane Secondary
                                     Highway
          Avenue Scott
    Between Rye Canyon Road          Re-stripe roadway from 4
    and Avenue Tibbitts              lanes to 6 lanes
                                                C-21                                June 2011

Circulation                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan
        Roadway/Segment                   Improvement                     Comments
         Avenue Tibbitts
    Between Avenue Scott and     Re-stripe roadway from 4
    Avenue Hopkins               lanes to 6 lanes
    Between Avenue Hopkins and   Construct new 6 lane Major       Includes new bridge over
    Magic Mountain Parkway       Highway                          the Santa Clara River
     Bouquet Canyon Road
    Between Angeles National     Widen roadway from 2 lanes       Includes realignment in
    Forest and Plum Canyon       to a 4 lane Secondary            the Copper Hill Drive
    Road                         Highway                          area
    Between Plum Canyon and      Re-stripe roadway from 4         Will lose the existing
    future Santa Clarita Parkway lanes to 6 lanes                 Class II bike lane due to
                                                                  re-striping
    Between future Santa Clarita Re-stripe roadway from 5         Will lose the existing
    Parkway and Seco Canyon      lanes to 6 lanes                 Class II bike lane due to
    Road                                                          re-striping
    Between Seco Canyon Road     Widen roadway from 6 lanes       Includes bridge widening
    and Espuella Drive           to an 8 lane Major Highway
    Between Soledad Canyon       Re-stripe roadway from 4
    Road and Magic Mountain      lanes to 6 lanes
    Parkway
           Castaic Road
    Between Lake Hughes Road     Re-stripe roadway from 4
    and Ridge Route Road         lanes to 6 lanes
     Commerce Center Drive
    Between Henry Mayo Drive     Construct new 6 lane Major       Includes new bridge over
    and Magic Mountain Parkway   Highway                          the Santa Clara River
         Copper Hill Drive
    Between Avenida Rancho       Re-stripe roadway from 4
    Tesoro and San Francisquito  lanes to 6 lanes
    Creek Bridge
    Between San Francisquito     Widen roadway from 4 lanes       Includes widening bridge
    Creek Bridge and McBean      to a 6 lane Major Highway        over the San
    Parkway                                                       Francisquito Creek
         Davenport Road
    Between Sierra Highway and   Widen roadway from 2 lanes
    Agua Dulce Canyon Road       to a 4 lane Secondary
                                 Highway
         Dockweiler Drive
    Between Railroad Avenue      Construct new 4 lane
    and Leonard Tree Lane        Secondary Highway
    Between Leonard Tree Lane    Re-stripe roadway from 2         Will lose the existing on-
    and Sierra Highway           lanes to 4 lanes                 street parking due to re-
                                                                  striping
    Escondido Canyon Road
    East of Agua Dulce Canyon    Widen roadway from 2 lanes
    Road                         to a 4 lane Secondary
                                 Highway
June 2011                           C-22
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                             Circulation
        Roadway/Segment                     Improvement               Comments
       Golden Valley Road
    Between Plum Canyon Road       Re-stripe roadway from 2
    and Dorothy Street             lanes to 4 lanes
    Between Dorothy Street and     Construct new 4 lane
    Newhall Ranch Road             Secondary Highway
    Between Newhall Ranch          Construct new 6 lane Major Includes new bridge over
    Road and Valley Center Drive   Highway                    the Santa Clara River
    Between Valley Center Drive    Re-stripe roadway from 4
    and Center Pointe Parkway      lanes to 6 lanes
    Between Centre Pointe          Widen roadway from 4 lanes
    Parkway and Sierra Highway     to a 6 lane Major Highway
      Haskell Canyon Road
    Between Copper Hill Drive      Re-stripe roadway from 2
    and Grovepark                  lanes to 4 lanes
    Drive/Ridgegrove Drive
         Henry Mayo Drive
    Between Commerce Center        Widen roadway from 2 lanes
    Drive and The Old Road         to a 4 lane Parkway
        Lake Hughes Road
    Between I-5 freeway and        Re-stripe roadway from 4
    Castaic Road                   lanes to 6 lanes
  Long Canyon Road (future)
    Between Chiquito Canyon        Construct new 4 lane
    Road and SR-126                Secondary Highway
    Between SR-126 and             Construct new 6 lane Major Includes new bridge over
    Valencia Boulevard             Highway                    the Santa Clara River
        Lost Canyon Road
    Between Sand Canyon Road       Widen roadway from 2 lanes
    and La Veda Avenue             to a 4 lane Secondary
                                   Highway
    Between La Veda Avenue         Construct new 4 lane
    and Jakes Way                  Secondary Highway
    Between Jakes Way and          Construct new 6 lane Major
    railroad bridge                Highway
    Between railroad bridge and    Re-stripe roadway from 4
    Via Princessa                  lanes to 6 lanes
          Lyons Avenue
    Between Wiley Canyon Road      Re-stripe roadway from 4   Will lose the existing on-
    and Railroad Avenue            lanes to 6 lanes           street parking due to re-
                                                              striping
                                             C-23                              June 2011
Circulation                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan
       Roadway/Segment                    Improvement                     Comments
    Magic Mountain Parkway
     Between Long Canyon Road    Construct new 4 lane
     and Commerce Center Drive   Secondary Highway
     Between Commerce Center     Construct new 6 lane Major
     Drive and Westridge         Highway
     Parkway
     Between Westridge Parkway   Construct new 8 lane Major
     and Six Flags Magic         Highway
     Mountain
     Between Six Flags Magic     Widen roadway from 4 lanes
     Mountain and I-5 freeway    to an 8 lane Major Highway
     Between I-5 freeway and     Re-stripe roadway from 6
     Auto Center Drive           lanes to 8 lanes
     Between Auto Center Drive   Widen roadway from 4 lanes
     and Valencia Boulevard      to an 8 lane Major Highway
     Between Valencia Boulevard  Re-stripe roadway from 4
     and Railroad Avenue         lanes to 6 lanes
     Between Railroad Avenue     Construct new 6 lane Major
     and Via Princessa           Highway
         McBean Parkway
     Between San Francisquito    Construct new 2 lane Limited
     Canyon Road and Copper      Secondary Highway
     Hill Drive
     Between Avenue Scott and    Widen roadway from 6 lanes       Includes widening bridge
     Creekside Road              to an 8 lane Major Highway       over the Santa Clara
                                                                  River
     Between Magic Mountain      Re-stripe roadway from 7
     Parkway and Valencia        lanes to 8 lanes
      Newhall Ranch Road
     Between Avenue Tibbitts and Widen roadway from 6 lanes       Includes widening bridge
     McBean Parkway              to an 8 lane Major Highway       over the San
                                                                  Francisquito Creek
     Between McBean Parkway      Re-stripe roadway from 7
     and Bouquet Canyon Road     lanes to 8 lanes
     Between Bouquet Canyon      Re-stripe roadway from 4
     Road and Santa Clarita      lanes to 6 lanes
     Parkway
     Between Santa Clarita       Construct new 6 lane Major
     Parkway and Golden Valley   Highway
     Road
          Newhall Avenue
     Between 16th Street and     Re-stripe roadway     from   2 Will lose the existing on-
     Railroad Avenue             lanes to 4 lanes                 street parking due to re-
                                                                  striping
June 2011                           C-24
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                           Circulation
        Roadway/Segment                     Improvement              Comments
           The Old Road
     North of Lake Hughes Road     Re-stripe roadway from 2
                                   lanes to 4 lanes
     Between Lake Hughes Road      Widen roadway from 2 lanes
     and Sedona Way                to a 4 lane Secondary
                                   Highway
     Between Hasley Canyon         Widen roadway from 4 lanes
     Road and I-5 SB Ramps at      to a 6 lane Major Highway
     Rye Canyon Road
     Between I-5 SB Ramps at       Re-stripe roadway from 4
     Rye Canyon Road and Rye       lanes to 6 lanes
     Canyon Road
     Between Rye Canyon Road       Widen roadway from 4 lanes Includes widening bridge
     and Magic Mountain            to a 6 lane Major Highway  over the Santa Clara
     Parkway                                                  River
     Between McBean Parkway        Re-stripe roadway from 4
     and Lyons Avenue              lanes to 6 lanes
     Between Sagecrest Circle      Widen roadway from 2 lanes
     (South) and Calgrove          to a 4 lane Secondary
     Boulevard                     Highway
     Between Calgrove Boulevard    Widen roadway from 4 lanes
     and Sierra Highway            to a 6 lane Major Highway
      Orchard Village Road
     Between McBean Parkway        Widen roadway from 4 lanes
     and Lyons Avenue              to a 6 lane Major Highway
            Parker Road
     Between The Old Road and      Widen roadway from 2 lanes
     I-5 freeway                   to a 6 lane Major Highway
        Pico Canyon Road
     Between Valencia Boulevard    Construct new 6 lane Major
     and Whispering Oaks Road      Highway
     Between Whispering Oaks       Re-stripe roadway from 4
     Road and I-5 freeway          lanes to 6 lanes
     Placerita Canyon Road
     Between SR-14 freeway and     Widen roadway from 2 lanes
     Sand Canyon Road              to a 4 lane Secondary
                                   Highway
       Plum Canyon Road
     Between Bouquet Canyon        Re-stripe roadway from 4
     Road and Golden Valley        lanes to 6 lanes
     Road
 Potrero Canyon Road (future)
     Between SR-126 and Long       Construct new 4 lane       Includes new bridge over
     Canyon Road                   Secondary Highway          the Santa Clara River
         Railroad Avenue
     Between Magic Mountain        Re-stripe roadway from 4
     Parkway and Lyons Avenue      lanes to 6 lanes
                                             C-25                             June 2011
Circulation                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan
       Roadway/Segment                   Improvement                      Comments
       Ridge Route Road
    Between I-5 freeway and     Widen roadway from 2 lanes
    Castaic Road                to a 6 lane Major Highway
       Sand Canyon Road
    Between Sierra Highway and  Widen roadway from 2 lanes
    Soledad Canyon Road         to a 4 lane Secondary
                                Highway
    Between SR-14 freeway and   Widen roadway from 2 lanes        Includes widening bridge
    Lost Canyon Road            to a 6 lane Major Highway         over the Santa Clara
                                                                  River
 Santa Clarita Parkway (future)
    Between Bouquet Canyon      Construct new 6 lane Major        Includes new bridge over
    Road and Sierra Highway     Highway                           the Santa Clara River
Shadow Pines Blvd./Tick
Canyon Rd.
    Between Grandifloras Road   Construct new 2 lane Limited
    and Davenport Road          Secondary Highway
Sierra Highway
    East of Agua Dulce Canyon   Widen roadway from 2 lanes
    Road                        to a 6 lane Major Highway
    Between Agua Dulce          Widen roadway from 2 lanes
    Canyon Road and Vasquez     to a 6 lane Major Highway
    Canyon Road
    Between Vasquez Canyon      Widen roadway from 4 lanes
    and Soledad Canyon          to a 6 lane Major Highway
    Between Via Princessa and   Re-stripe roadway from 4
    Newhall Avenue              lanes to 6 lanes
    Between Newhall Avenue      Widen roadway from 4 lanes
    and The Old Road            to a 6 lane Major Highway
  Skyline Ranch Road (future)
    Between Whites Canyon       Construct new 4 lane
    Road and Sierra Highway     Secondary Highway
Sloan Canyon Road
    Between The Old Road and    Widen roadway from 2 lanes
    Parker Road                 to a 4 lane Secondary
                                Highway
    Between Parker Road and     Re-stripe roadway from 2
    Quail Valley Road           lanes to 4 lanes
    Between Hillcrest Parkway   Construct new 2 lane Limited
    and Hasley Canyon Road      Secondary Highway
Soledad Canyon Road
    Between River Circle and    Re-stripe roadway from 4          Will lose the existing
    SR-14 freeway               lanes to 6 lanes                  Class II bike lane due to
                                                                  re-striping
    East of SR-14 freeway       Widen roadway from 2 lanes
                                to a 6 lane Major Highway
June 2011                          C-26
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                   Circulation
        Roadway/Segment                     Improvement                     Comments
   Stevenson Ranch Parkway
     Between The Old Road and      Re-stripe roadway from 4         Will lose the existing
     Pico Canyon Road              lanes to 6 lanes                 Class II bike lane due to
                                                                    re-striping
       Valencia Boulevard
     Between Long Canyon Road      Construct new 6 lane Major
     and existing Valencia         Highway
     Boulevard terminus just west
     of Boulder Crest Drive
     Between I-5 freeway and       Reconstruct roadway from 7
     McBean Parkway                lanes to an 8 lane Major
                                   Highway
           Via Princessa
     Between existing Via          Construct new 6 lane Major       Gap closure segment
     Princessa terminus just east  Highway
     of Claibourne Court and
     existing Via Princessa
     terminus just west of
     Sheldon Avenue
     Between Sheldon Avenue        Widen roadway from 2 lanes
     and Rainbow Glen Drive        to a 6 lane Major Highway
     Between Rainbow Glen          Re-stripe roadway from 4
     Drive and Whites Canyon       lanes to 6 lanes
     Road
     Between SR-14 freeway and     Re-stripe roadway from 4
     Lost Canyon Road              lanes to 6 lanes
      Whites Canyon Road
     Between Ashboro Drive and     Re-stripe roadway from 4
     Soledad Canyon Road           lanes to 6 lanes
       Wiley Canyon Road
     Bridge over Railroad Avenue   Widen roadway from 4 lanes       Includes bridge widening
                                   to a 6 lane Major Highway
     Between bridge over           Re-stripe roadway from 4         Will lose the existing
     Railroad Avenue and Lyons     lanes to 6 lanes                 Class II bike lane due to
     Avenue                                                         re-striping
     Between Lyons Avenue and      Restripe roadway from 2 lanes
     Wabuska Street                to a 4 lanes
     Between Wabuska Street        Widen roadway from 2 lanes
     and Calgrove Boulevard        to 4 lanes
Standard Cross Sections
The standard cross sections shown in Exhibit C-3 are adopted for both City and County areas of
the Santa Clarita Valley.
                                             C-27                                    June 2011
Circulation                                                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                                         Exhibit C-3: Standard Roadway Cross Sections
                                              Major Highway with Bike Trail Detail
    Sidewalk/Parkway                                                                                              Sidewalk/Parkway
                                                                                                                                            Bike Lane           Bike Lane
                                                            Median
                                                                     116’
   10’                                                      14’                                                   10’                               12’
                       12’          11’       12’                             12’         11’         12’                                  5’               5’
Three Lanes in Each Direction With Raised Landscape Median, No On-Street Parking
                                              Major Highway with Bike Lane Detail
    Sidewalk/Parkway                                                                                                                                      Sidewalk/Parkway
                       Bike Lane                                     Median                                                    Bike Lane
                                                                     116’
   10’                                                               14’                                                                                 10’
                       6’          12’      11’     12’                             12’         11’         12’                      6’
Three Lanes in Each Direction With Raised Landscape Median, No On-Street Parking
June 2011                                                 C-28

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                                                                           Circulation
                                                        Exhibit C-3: Standard Roadway Cross Sections, Continued
                                                          Major Highway 8-Lane Alternative with Bike Trail Detail
                   Sidewalk/Parkway                                                                                               Sidewalk/Parkway           Bike Lane    Bike Lane
                                                                                   Median
                                                                                   138’
                   10’                                                            14’                                             10’                                12’
                                                  12’     11’    11’    12’                   12’         11’     11’     12’                                    5’ 5’
Four Lanes in Each Direction With Raised Landscape Median, No On-Street Parking
                                                         Major Highway 8-Lane Alternative with Bike Lane Detail
Sidewalk/Parkway                                                                                                                                                          Sidewalk/Parkway
                                      Bike Lane                                      Median                                                          Bike Lane
                                                                                   138’
10’                                                                                14’                                                                                    10’
                                       6’         12’     11’    11’    12’                         12’         11’     11’     12’                  6’
Four Lanes in Each Direction With Raised Landscape Median, No On-Street Parking
                                                                                   C-29                                                        June 2011

Circulation                                                                           City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                              Exhibit C-3: Standard Roadway Cross Sections, Continued
                                        Urban Secondary Highway with Bike Trail Detail
      Sidewalk/Parkway                                                                             Sidewalk/Parkway
                                                                                                                              Bike Lane     Bike Lane
                                                                    88’
     10’                                                                                             8’                               12’
                                  12’           11’           12’         11’         12’                                     5’            5’
Two Lanes in Each Direction With Two Way Left Turn Lane, No On-Street Parking
                                        Urban Secondary Highway with Bike Lane Detail
      Sidewalk/Parkway                                                                                                                      Sidewalk/Parkway
                          Bike Lane                                                                                   Bike Lane
                                                                    88’
     10’                 6’                                                                                            6’                   10’
                                          12’         11’           12’         11’          12’
Two Lanes in Each Direction With Two Way Left Turn Lane, No On-Street Parking
June 2011                                                   C-30

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                                                                  Circulation
                              Exhibit C-3: Standard Roadway Cross Sections, Continued
                                      Sub-Urban Secondary Highway with Bike Trail Detail
      Sidewalk/Parkway                                                                        Sidewalk/Parkway
                                                        Median                                                          Bike Lane      Bike Lane
                                                                 92’
     10’                                               14’                                      8’                              12’
                               12’         12’                            12’     12’                                    5’            5’
Two Lanes in Each Direction With Raised Landscape Median, No On-Street Parking
                                      Sub-Urban Secondary Highway with Bike Lane Detail
      Sidewalk/Parkway                                                                                                                 Sidewalk/Parkway
                          Bike Lane                              Median                                          Bike Lane
                                                                 92’
     10’                 6’                                      14’                                              6’                   10’
                                         12’     12’                            12’     12’
Two Lanes in Each Direction With Raised Landscape Median
                                                                 C-31                                                               June 2011

Circulation                                                                                  City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                              Exhibit C-3: Standard Roadway Cross Sections, Continued
                           Limited Secondary Arterial Highway- Two Lanes in Each Direction
        Sidewalk/Parkway                                                                                            Sidewalk/Parkway
                                                                   84’
       10’                       7’                  11’           12’                 11’               15’       10’
                                  Two lanes in each direction with no on-street parking.
                           Limited Secondary Arterial Highway-One Lane in Each Direction
                                         Flow Line                 Center Line               Flow Line
                                                                   84’
       8’                        14’       4’              14’                   14’            4’       14’        8’
                                  Two lanes in each direction with no on-street parking.
June 2011                                                   C-32

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                   Circulation
                          Exhibit C-3: Standard Roadway Cross Sections, Continued
                                        Industrial/Commercial Cul-de-sac
       Sidewalk/Parkway                                                              Sidewalk/Parkway
                              Parking                                      Parking
                                                        66’
       10’                   7’           11’           10’         11’     7’       10’
                                                Residential Collector
       Sidewalk/Parkway                                                              Sidewalk/Parkway
                              Parking                                      Parking
                                                         64’
       12’                   8’             12’                   12’       8’       12’
                                                        C-33                         June 2011

Circulation                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                           Exhibit C-3: Standard Roadway Cross Sections, Continued
                                          Residential Through Street
        Sidewalk/Parkway                                                                    Sidewalk/Parkway
                               Parking                                        Parking
                                                        60’
       12’                    7’           11’                11’              7’          12’
                                            Residential Cul-de-sac
        Sidewalk/Parkway                                                                    Sidewalk/Parkway
                               Parking                                        Parking
                                                        58’
       12’                    7’           10’                10’              7’          12’
June 2011                                        C-34

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                     Circulation
                 Exhibit C-3: Standard Roadway Cross Sections, Continued
                                     Rural Secondary Highway
          R/W                                                                          R/W
      12’                                        86’                                        12’
       *                 FL                                              FL                  *
                                                 62’
                                    31’                         31’
                  12’        13’         12’     12’        12’     13’         12’
               8’     4’                          CL                          4’    8’
            2%                                                                 2%
                                     2%                  2%
                                        Rural Major Highway
          R/W                                                                          R/W
      12’                                        108’                                       12’
       *                 FL                                              FL                  *
                  12’                            84’                            12’
                                    42’                         42’
               8’     4’    13’    11’    12’    12’    12’     11’  13’      4’    8’
                                                  CL
           2%                                                                  2%
                                2%                           2%
* Master Plan Multi-Purpose Riding and Hiking Trail per Santa Clarita Area Plan.
Final design of rural highways to be approved by Los Angeles County Department of Public
Works.
                                               C-35                                    June 2011

Circulation                                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Truck Route Plan
One of the primary goals of the Circulation Element is to provide for the safe and efficient
movement of goods throughout the planning area. Industrial uses require truck access for the
delivery of raw materials or parts, the shifting of inventory, and the delivery of finished products.
Commercial uses require the delivery of sales goods to market and the transferring of
commercial inventories.
Designating appropriate routes for trucks within the planning area serves to minimize the effects
of truck traffic on normal vehicular traffic, and to limit noise and air pollution impacts on
residential neighborhoods. In addition, the weight of trucks can have deleterious effects on
paving, if the roadway was not designed for truck traffic. Within the planning area, streets
approved to be used for truck traffic include all streets designated as major and secondary
highways. Allowing trucks to use these streets, rather than local and collector streets except for
the purpose of local deliveries, will ensure that the noise and diesel exhaust generated by truck
traffic will not adversely impact residential neighborhoods. In addition, by allowing trucks to use
all major and secondary highways, instead of designating only certain truck routes through the
planning area, truck traffic will be dispersed instead of concentrated in a few locations, thereby
lessening impacts on pavement.
Truck parking has also been identified as a concern, especially in areas where residential
neighborhoods are subject to noise from idling engines and refrigeration units. Truck parking
will continue to be regulated in terms of location and hours, as issues arise.
Recommendations for Street and Highway System
Additional Access for Castaic
The Castaic community, located in the northwestern portion of the planning area, has limited
access to the remainder of the Santa Clarita Valley. Access is primarily provided by the Golden
State Freeway (Interstate 5), which is often subject to heavy congestion and closures resulting
from snow, wildfires, and traffic accidents. The Old Road is the principal alternative to Interstate
5. However, The Old Road is often subject to the same constraints, as it parallels Interstate 5
through Castaic.
The Castaic Town Council identified Castaic’s limited access as a pressing issue and requested
alternatives to Interstate 5 and The Old Road. Specifically, the Town Council requested an
alternative access route from Castaic to the Tesoro del Valle community. The alternative access
route would generally travel southeasterly from Ridge Route Road, in the center of the Castaic
community, to Tesoro del Valle Drive near its intersection with Copper Hill Drive. The Town
Council requested that this alternative access route be designated on the County’s Master Plan
of Highways. The County’s Interdepartmental Engineering Committee (IEC) evaluated this
request and determined that the route should not be designated on the Master Plan of
Highways. The IEC’s determination was based on two factors. First, the route would traverse
steep topography and other environmental constraints, making construction of a Highway
extremely difficult and expensive. Second, the route would traverse lands where minimal future
development is envisioned by the Land Use Map.
June 2011                                C-36

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Circulation
Although the alternative access route is not designated on the Master Plan of Highways, it could
be constructed as a collector street. As described earlier in this Element, a collector street is a
roadway which has an ultimate roadway section of two lanes with limited vehicular access to the
roadway from driveways and cross streets. Any future land division in this area will be required
to explore the feasibility of accommodating the roadway and reserving right-of-way or
constructing the roadway, where deemed appropriate.
San Francisquito Canyon Road Extension
The County’s Master Plan of Highways includes a proposed extension of San Francisquito
Canyon Road, north of Cooper Hill Drive, that would connect directly to McBean Parkway. Prior
to the adoption of this Area Plan, the proposed extension was designated as a Secondary
Highway. As mentioned earlier in this Element, the proposed extension was recommended to
be reclassified as a Limited Secondary Highway as a result of the traffic analysis conducted for
this Area Plan. Accordingly, the proposed extension is now designated as a Limited Secondary
Highway on the Master Plan of Highways (see Exhibit C-2 in this Area Plan).
The San Francisquito Canyon Preservation Association, whose membership includes local
residents, property owners, and equestrian users, expressed concerns regarding the proposed
extension of San Francisquito Canyon Road. Although they acknowledged that a Limited
Secondary Highway would have fewer potential impacts on the local community than a
Secondary Highway, they requested that the proposed extension be completely removed from
the Master Plan of Highways. The County’s Interdepartmental Engineering Committee (IEC)
evaluated this request and determined that the proposed extension should remain on the
Master Plan of Highways. The IEC’s determination was based on the need for safe, effective
circulation in the area, as the proposed extension is superior to the current alignment of San
Francisquito Canyon Road. However, the IEC acknowledged the community’s concerns,
especially as they related to equestrian users.
Prior to the construction of the proposed extension of San Francisquito Canyon Road, the
County’s Department of Public Works will conduct outreach to the community and will
investigate any concerns that are expressed. To ensure that concerns are addressed and
potential impacts are minimized, the Department of Public Works will also implement any
required traffic mitigations. These mitigations could include an equestrian crossing above or
below the roadway, provided that the crossing is technically, environmentally, and financially
feasible.
H. Constraints and Opportunities for Improving Roadways
Funding for Roadways
Metro has the authority as the Regional Transportation Planning Agency to award regional
transportation funds in Los Angeles County. Metro administers two local transportation sales
tax initiatives, receiving the collected funds from the State. The primary sources of Metro funds
are local sales taxes (Propositions A and C) and portions of the State and federal gasoline tax.
California sales tax on motor vehicle fuel provides additional revenue. Metro provides funding
directly to projects through grants of local funds, or indirectly through allocated federal or State
grants.
                                                 C-37                                    June 2011

Circulation                                                      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Another funding source for traffic improvements is provided by developers, who are required to
provide infrastructure to support new growth as it occurs. As part of the land use entitlement
and subdivision approval process, developers are required to build on-site roadway
improvements and to contribute their fair share to off-site improvements. Often this fair-share
contribution to off-site regional improvements is collected in the form of a traffic impact fee.
The City and County have received sufficient funds over the last 10 years to make significant
improvements to the street systems in the Valley. More improvements are planned, including
completion of the Cross-Valley Connector, road widening, and intersection improvements.
However, the availability of funding is limited and targeted to increasing capacity of the existing
roadway system. Additionally, the Valley’s topography, with its ridgelines, canyons, drainage
courses, and utility rights-of-way, makes building many new arterial highways and freeways
infeasible for environmental as well as financial reasons. As a result of these constraints, no
new freeways or new arterial highways are planned as part of this Circulation Element, other
than those planned for in the prior Element. Instead, the Element proposes methods and
policies to make more efficient use of the existing roadway system through various types of
system improvements, as described in this section.
Travel Demand Management
Travel Demand Management (TDM) refers to strategies intended to result in more efficient use
of transportation resources, which may include moving people more efficiently as well as
designing land uses to reduce distances between destinations. Typical TDM strategies include
policies to reduce congestion through alternative work schedules, use of high-occupancy
vehicle lanes, promotion of alternative travel modes, and mixed-use zoning designations. The
City’s Non-Motorized Transportation Plan identified the following TDM measures which could
effectively reduce vehicle trips in the Santa Clarita Valley:
    •   Employer incentives to promote alternatives to single-occupancy vehicle work trips;
    •   Employer incentives to promote ridesharing;
    •   Promotion of alternative work schedules, including compressed work weeks, staggered
        shifts, and flex time;
    •   Guaranteed Ride Home programs for employees who use alternative travel modes to
        work;
    •   Telecommuting;
    •   Shuttle buses along high-use routes; and
    •   Increased use of non-motorized travel modes.
In addition to the City’s plans for non-motorized transportation improvements, regional plans
have been developed to promote alternative travel modes. The Long Range Transportation
Plan for Los Angeles County, approved in April 2006 by the Metro Board, establishes goals and
strategies to improve mobility, air quality, and access throughout the County. Strategies include
TDM measures such as incentives by employers for alternative travel modes by employees and
smart growth strategies to maximize use of public transit.
Parking Management
Parking management refers to strategies that encourage efficient use of parking spaces as a
method of reducing vehicle trips. Recent studies have concluded that parking spaces are
provided at a higher rate than needed to support development. In his book The High Cost of
June 2011                                C-38

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Circulation
Free Parking, UCLA Urban Planning Professor Dr. Donald Shoup presents documentation
supporting his conclusion that reforming parking policy will lead to better pedestrian
environments, cleaner streets and air, safer shopping districts, and no significant inconvenience
to motorists.2 In addition, the reduction of parking requirements may free land for other more
beneficial uses, and alleviate the heat-island effect of large asphalt parking lots. Based on
these concepts, some cities have revised their zoning ordinances to reduce parking
requirements. Possible parking management strategies for the Santa Clarita Valley include the
following:
     •   Allowance for shared parking between uses and sites;
     •   Provision of public parking to serve multiple uses;
     •   Within transit-oriented, mixed-use areas, the separation of parking requirements from
         development entitlements;
     •   Pricing (fee parking)strategies;
     •   Regulation of parking to restrict duration, and designation of spaces for employees and
         residents; and
     •   Restricting vehicles within pedestrian-oriented areas.
Intersection Improvements
Traffic congestion is usually generated at intersections, due to turn movements, pedestrian
crossings, signal timing and other traffic control devices. If traffic flow at intersections is
maintained, then the intervening roadway segments also generally operate at acceptable levels
of service. As noted above, the City has implemented programs for intersection monitoring and
signal synchronization to improve capacity at intersections.
Based on the traffic model analysis undertaken for the One Valley One Visiion planning effort,
which evaluated 23 key intersections within the Santa Clarita Valley, intersection improvements
are required at the following locations. These improvements may include but are not limited to
additional turn lanes, installation of traffic signals, synchronization of signals, and other traffic
control devices.
     City Intersections
     •   Bouquet Canyon Road at Newhall Ranch Road
     •   Bouquet Canyon Road at Soledad Canyon Road
     •   Sierra Highway at Soledad Canyon Road
     •   Sierra Highway at Newhall Avenue
     •   McBean Parkway at Newhall Ranch Road
     •   McBean Parkway at Magic Mountain Parkway
     •   McBean Parkway at Valencia Boulevard
     •   Valencia Boulevard at Magic Mountain Parkway
     •   Railroad Avenue at Lyons Avenue
     •   Whites Canyon Road at Soledad Canyon Road
     •   Orchard Village Road at McBean Parkway
     •   Orchard Village Road at Wiley Canyon Road
2
  Shoup, Donald. The High Cost of Free Parking. Chicago: Planners Press, 2005.
                                                  C-39                                   June 2011

Circulation                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
     County Intersections
     •   The Old Road at Rye Canyon Road
     •   The Old Road at Magic Mountain Parkway
     •   The Old Road at McBean Parkway
     •   The Old Road at Pico Canyon Road
Land Use Strategies
As further explained in the Land Use Element, trip reductions can be gained by allowing mixed
land uses so that residents can walk or bicycle to needed services, recreational facilities, parks,
and shops. The land use plan developed for the Santa Clarita Valley includes many strategies
designed to reduce vehicle trips, including designation of mixed use designations; allowance for
neighborhood commercial uses within residential areas; allowance for higher residential
densities in urban areas; restrictions on urban sprawl through land use designations; and
promotion of transit-oriented, compact development around Metrolink stations. People are
generally comfortable walking to destinations within one-quarter mile, but routinely walk one-half
mile to access rail transit3. Surveys of bicycle commuters indicate that average bicycle commute
distance can vary from approximately 4.5 miles4, to 7.5 miles5. By encouraging mixed uses, the
land use plan will create opportunities for non-motorized travel modes.
Congestion Relief
The strategies identified in this section, including intersection enhancements, signal
synchronization, mixed land uses, transportation demand and parking demand management,
and transportation system management, will all be used to address traffic congestion on the
Valley’s street and highway system. However, even with aggressive use of these programs,
traffic congestion may still occur at some locations due to daily and seasonal fluctuations in
traffic volumes, lack of a grid pattern of streets to provide alternate routes to motorists, and
relatively high volumes of traffic concentrated along major arterial corridors. The most cost-
effective way to achieve congestion relief on surface streets will be provision of alternative
transportation modes that are convenient, safe, efficient, pleasant and cost-effective, as
described in later sections of this Element.
3
  Scholssberg, Agrawal, Irvin, and Bekkouche, “How Far, By Which Route, and Why? A Spatial Analysis
of Pedestrian Preference,” Mineta Transportation Institute, 2007.
4
  Forester, John, “Bicycle Transportation: A Handbook for Cycling Transportation Engineers,” MIT Press,
1994.
5
  Moritz, William E., “A Survey of North American Bicycle Commuters,” Transportation Research Record
1578, 1997.
June 2011                                   C-40

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Circulation
I. Rail Service
Rail Freight Service
The rail freight element of the State Rail Plan provides a detailed account of the State’s rail
system, including service in North Los Angeles County. Port projections in Southern California
show a doubling of international container shipments by year 2020. Capacity issues are a
growing concern among California’s railroads and rail freight shippers. There is only one rail
line extending through the Santa Clarita Valley, which is shared by both freight and passenger
rail service. Only about five freight trains per day use the rail line. The primary issue for freight
service on this line is competition with the service needs of passenger rail, and potential
conflicts with surface street traffic at rail crossings.
Due to the rapidly increasing use of the ports at San Pedro and Long Beach, it has been
proposed that the port facilities at Port Hueneme in Ventura County be expanded to handle a
larger proportion of incoming freight. As part of this proposal, a freight rail line has been
proposed from Port Hueneme through Santa Clarita to Victorville, which is emerging as a
distribution hub. However, this concept has not won wide support in the Santa Clarita Valley,
due to concerns about potential environmental impacts as well as economic feasibility. Other
rail needs, such as additional grade separations and capacity expansion of the Antelope Valley
Route (through double-tracking and/or passing sidings) have been identified as more necessary
and feasible within the Valley.
Metrolink Service
The Southern California Regional Rail Authority (SCRRA) operates Metrolink, a five-county
commuter rail network of over 400 miles. Metrolink’s seven commuter rail routes all connect at
Union Station near downtown Los Angeles, where connections to other trains operated by
Amtrak can be made, or where riders may board buses, vans, or the Metro Red Line subway to
other Los Angeles locations. Union Station also provides connections to the Metro Gold Line, a
light rail transit line connecting to Pasadena and other San Gabriel Valley destinations, and to
Los Angeles International Airport (LAX) via the Metro Purple, Blue and Green light rail lines or
the Fly-Away Bus service. Average daily ridership on all Metrolink commuter train lines trains is
over 48,000, and more than one million passengers ride Metrolink trains each month.
Metrolink began service between Santa Clarita, the San Fernando Valley, Burbank, Glendale,
and Los Angeles Union Station in 1992. Metrolink now provides commuter service between
Santa Clarita and downtown Los Angeles, Glendale, Burbank, San Fernando, and the Antelope
Valley. The Antelope Valley line operates on the Union Pacific rail line, which is also used for
freight rail service. About 24 Metrolink trains per day use the line.
                                                    C-41                                 June 2011

Circulation                                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
When established in 1992, Metrolink commuter rail service included only one station, the Santa
Clarita station in Saugus, near Soledad Canyon Road about two miles east of Valencia. This
station has parking for about 500 vehicles, restroom facilities, and a passenger drop-off area.
The station also serves as a major transit center for buses. A second station, Via Princessa,
was opened as a temporary facility in 1994 to serve Canyon Country residents in the wake of
the Northridge earthquake. This station contains 420 parking spaces. Recommendations to
develop a permanent Metrolink station with transfer facilities to accommodate bus service, and
increased park-and-ride spaces, were included in the City’s 2006 Transportation Development
Plan. The Jan Heidt Newhall station opened in 2000 with 150 parking spaces, and was later
expanded by an additional 100 spaces in 2006. A need has been identified for a future fourth
station on the east side of the Valley.
As of 2008, 12 commuter trains run daily in each direction on the Antelope Valley line from
Monday through Friday, with five trains departing Santa Clarita to Union Station before 8:00
a.m. Three of the twelve daily trains in each direction do not extend to the Antelope Valley, and
City of Santa Clarita Transit provides connecting express buses for those trips. Commuters
benefit from the line’s easy access to the Metro Red Line subway and buses. Reduced
Saturday and Sunday service is also available on the Antelope Valley Line, with six trains on
Saturday and three trains on Sunday running between Union Station and Lancaster.
Approximately 6,500 passengers typically ride the Antelope Valley Line on weekdays, with
about 1,100 passengers from the Santa Clarita Valley. Interviews with riders indicate that gas
prices, avoiding clogged freeways, environmental concerns, and time for reading while
commuting are primary reasons for riding Metrolink. Recently some issues of crowding have
been identified by passengers of the Antelope Valley line. In response to increased ridership,
SCRRA has ordered new cars which will be in use on the Antelope Valley line by 2008.
Passengers have also asked for additional runs during mid-day hours.
An abandoned railroad right-of-way parallels State Route 126 and Magic Mountain Parkway
connecting Santa Clarita with Fillmore and Santa Paula in Ventura County. A portion of the
railroad corridor has been displaced by development along Magic Mountain Parkway. If this
right-of-way were re-used for transportation purposes, a new alignment would be required over
much of this distance. The Newhall Land and Farming Company has indicated its intent to
preserve the segment of right-of-way within its development area to allow for potential future
use as a rail passenger corridor, and has indicated interest in construction of a station and park-
and-ride lot. No funding has been identified for rail in this corridor; however, future rail service
between the Santa Clarita Valley and Ventura County could be provided through this linkage.
One proposal being studied by the Ventura County Transportation Committee calls for
extending the Santa Paula Line to the terminus at the Santa Clarita Metrolink Rail Station. The
Santa Clarita City Council has supported extending the Santa Paula Line into the Santa Clarita
Valley for tourism and passenger service, but has not indicated support for any portion of this
line to be used for freight service.
June 2011                               C-42

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                      Circulation
Another concern regarding commuter rail service in the Valley is the number of at-grade
crossings in urbanized areas, which have the potential to result in conflicts with vehicles and
pedestrians, especially during peak traffic periods. In California, grade crossings are regulated
by the State Public Utilities Commission, whose policy is to increase public safety by reducing
the number of at-grade crossings. Additional at-grade crossings will generally not be allowed
except where the total number does not increase. Opportunities for grade separations will be
considered where feasible in the future. In the North Newhall Area, where an at-grade crossing
is proposed to be relocated and improved, upgrades to other crossings may also be proposed.
In cooperation with SCRRA, the City has studied a proposed realignment of the Metrolink tracks
within the Whittaker-Bermite property; however, due to the cost of such realignment it was found
to be infeasible. Planning studies for this area are also addressing the issue of grade
separations to allow for extension of two major arterial streets (Magic Mountain Parkway and
Santa Clarita Parkway.)
Amtrak California
Amtrak California rail service does not operate between Bakersfield and Santa Clarita.
However, Amtrak California operates an extensive network of daily express buses along I-5 that
connects throughout Southern California, to and from the daily San Joaquin trains that originate
at the Bakersfield Amtrak station. Of these connecting Bakersfield buses, a total of 5 daily
northbound and six daily southbound trips stop in Santa Clarita at the Newhall Metrolink station.
High Speed Transporation Development
The City of Santa Clarita recognizes that the transportation needs for the planning area and
beyond call for the implementation of a high speed transportation system alignment through the
Santa Clarita Valley. Potential alignments would need to follow either the Interstate 5 or State
Route 14 corridors. Although a station location is not currently identified, this General Plan
recognizes that such a facility must be sited to serve the bulk of the existing population centers
on either corridor.
The State of California has been studying the feasibility of a statewide intercity high speed rail
network since the early 1990’s. Various possible alignments have been looked at by the
California High Speed Rail Authority for the 700-mile route linking the cities of Sacramento, San
Francisco, Los Angeles and San Diego. The proposed rail system would use steel wheels on
steel rails and be powered by overhead electrical towers, with top speeds proposed at over 200
miles per hour. One segment of the proposed route would extend from Union Station in Los
Angeles to Bakersfield, through the San Fernando Valley, Santa Clarita, the Antelope Valley,
and Tehachapi Pass. Under this scenario, the closest station serving Santa Clarita would likely
be Sylmar. The greatest potential impacts of a high speed rail line on the Santa Clarita Valley
may be from noise, aesthetics, and on biological resources along the Santa Clara River and
open space areas. The environmental studies for this project are underway. As part of the
environmental study, a corridor study along the Interstate 5 corridor is being initiated with a
possible station facility in the Santa Clarita Valley
In addition to the State’s high speed rail project, the Orangeline Development Authority (OLDA)
was formed as a joint powers authority to finance, design, construct, and operate an
environmentally sensitive, high-speed transportation system. OLDA includes 14 Orange County
and Los Angeles County cities, including the City of Santa Clarita and Bob Hope Airport. The
new transportation infrastructure is proposed as an elevated transportation system that would
                                                 C-43                                   June 2011

Circulation                                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
provide service between Orange County and North Los Angeles County with stations located at
key locations along the route, including one in the Santa Clarita Valley adjacent to the Antelope
Valley Freeway. Other high-speed lines would link Los Angeles International Airport to airports
in Burbank, Ontario and Palmdale as well as extend to Las Vegas. To date, the alternatives
analysis, feasibility analysis, and Phase 1 Engineering have been completed. The next step is
to begin work on the Environmental Impact Report. The City and County will work cooperatively
with the OLDA on the alignment for the new system through the planning area to identify the
most suitable station site in the Santa Clarita Valley. While the station is envisioned generally in
the vicinity of the Antelope Valley Freeway, more information is needed before a specific site
can be identified. The station would serve as a regional hub within the Santa Clarita Valley but
would also act as a gateway between the Valley and the rest of California. The station area
would likely contain hotels, parking structures, office buildings, retail space, residential units and
even recreational or cultural amenities. The station would require significant investment in new
infrastructure and the amount of land needed for development would depend on the type of
station proposed. Planning for the new transportation system remains preliminary and it is too
early in the process to know which potential station site would best serve the Valley’s high-
speed transportation needs with the least impact on existing development.
J. Air Service
Aviation facilities are an integral component of the regional transportation system. The Los
Angeles World Airports (LAWA) provides commercial air travel to the planning area through its
main facilities in Los Angeles (LAX); the Van Nuys Regional Airport; and Palmdale Regional
Airport. In addition, the Burbank/Glendale/Pasadena Regional Airport (also called the Bob
Hope Airport) serves residents of the planning area.
Santa Clarita Valley residents primarily use the Bob Hope Airport in Burbank for shorter
distance flights and LAX for international flights, or for destinations not served by Burbank. In
addition to taxi service, there are shuttle services providing trips to local airports, including the
Antelope Valley Airport Express and the Van Nuys Fly-Away Shuttle. Fly-Away service to LAX
is also available from Union Station in Los Angeles, which connects with Metrolink service to the
Santa Clarita Valley.
Planned expansion of passenger air service at the Palmdale Regional Airport is being studied
as an alternative to continued expansion of service at LAX. Officials representing the Santa
Clarita Valley have indicated support for this plan, which would make air service more
accessible to Valley residents. Due to congestion on Interstate Routes 5 and 405, expanded
airport operations in Palmdale would provide a shorter and less congested alternative for air
passengers from the Santa Clarita Valley.
The Agua Dulce Airpark is a privately owned airport serving general aviation needs with one
runway, aircraft parking, fuel, and basic passenger services. The Airpark averages about 28
operations per week and stores about 35 aircraft. Most of the Airpark’s activity involves local
operations. The Airpark is located in an unincorporated area of Los Angeles County, and the
County has adopted an Airport Land Use Plan to protect the clear zones and ensure land use
compatibility with airport operations. In 2006, the County approved continued operation and
expansion of Airpark services, including allowing up to 300 airplanes and adding helicopter
operations.
June 2011                                C-44

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                Circulation
There are also several helipads in the planning area used for medical transport, law
enforcement, fire department activities, and other special transport needs. The locations of
these helipads are shown on Exhibit C-4.
                                             C-45                                 June 2011
Circulation                                                      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
K. Public Transit and Other Transportation Services
City of Santa Clarita Transit
Local and regional bus service is provided by City of Santa Clarita Transit, which operates local
routes within the planning area and commuter service into and out of Downtown Los Angeles,
Century City, the Antelope Valley and Warner Center. The City of Santa Clarita assumed
responsibility for local transit in 1991 from Los Angeles County, which operated a small transit
system. Under City management, express services to the San Fernando Valley, West Los
Angeles, and downtown Los Angeles were expanded. The City completed a Transit
Development Plan (TDP) in 1997 which made several recommendations for improvements and
modifications. Since 1997 and based on the TDP, total transit system ridership has more than
doubled. The City updated the TDP in 2006.
With ridership of 3.7 million passengers in 2006, City of Santa Clarita Transit provides
connections with services by Metrolink, Antelope Valley Transit Authority, Metro, and other
regional transit providers. City of Santa Clarita Transit provides service on eight local fixed
routes, eight commuter express routes, two station link routes, and supplemental school day
service. Local routes provide service seven days a week while the remaining services operate
on weekdays only. Express buses operate to and from the Antelope Valley, Downtown Los
Angeles, North Hollywood, Westwood/Century City, and Woodland Hills. City of Santa Clarita
Transit’s regional routes serve several park-and-ride lots located throughout the Valley, as well
as the Santa Clarita and Newhall Metrolink stations.
The City has adopted a program to subsidize fares for senior citizens, and all buses are
wheelchair accessible. City of Santa Clarita Transit also provides daily Dial-a-Ride (DAR)
service within the Valley to provide service to senior citizens and disabled residents. Much of
the DAR services are to the Adult Day Care Center and the Senior Center in Newhall. DAR
passengers represent only two percent of daily patronage, but almost 20 percent of the transit
budget. The updated TDP proposes several operational improvements to improve efficiency of
this program.
A new state-of-the-art transit maintenance facility opened in the Rye Canyon Business Park in
April 2006, replacing scattered facilities rented from the private sector. The building was
constructed using environmentally-sensitive design features and materials, including hay-bale
walls and drought-resistant landscaping, and has received a Gold rating from the U. S. Green
Building Council under the Leadership in Environmental Energy and Design (LEED) rating
system. In 2002, the McBean Regional Transfer Center was opened adjacent to the Valencia
Town Center; this facility provides a central transfer focal point to serve the community and has
improved overall efficiency.
June 2011                                 C-46

City of Santa Clarita General Plan Circulation
                                               C-47 June 2011
Circulation                                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
The City of Santa Clarita Transit’s 2006 TDP calls for a 58 percent expansion of services over
the next several years. In the future, the major capital facility needs for transit will be additional
buses and vehicles. Planned improvements include automated vehicle location equipment,
passenger information systems, and automated ridership count equipment. Signage will be
posted throughout the community to highlight when buses will arrive; this information will also be
accessible through personal computers and hand held computer devices.
The areas generating the highest transit ridership are Newhall and Canyon Country in the
vicinity of the intersection of Soledad Canyon Road and Sierra Highway. The City and County
have opportunities to promote denser, transit-oriented development in areas where transit use is
already high. Low-density residential development along the outskirts of the urban area
provides the least opportunity to make effective use of transit.
The 2006 TDP identified major employers and other activity centers which are served by transit,
including Six Flags Magic Mountain, Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital, the Valencia
Industrial Center, the Valencia Commerce Center, and the Valencia Town Center. The Plan
also identified employers and destinations that are not yet served. According to the Plan,
“transit service is desirable at locations where very large employers or clusters of employment
are found. Locations that attract large numbers of visitors, students, children, the elderly or
disabled should also have transit service available.”
City of Santa Clarita Transit provides good coverage and generates high ridership throughout
the Valley. However, about 40 percent of the Valley’s residents live outside a ¼-mile walking
distance from a bus route, generally accepted as the distance most people are readily willing to
walk to bus service. Lack of adequate access to transit stops causes service deficiencies in
Sand Canyon, Castaic, Val Verde, Placerita Canyon, and other areas along the rural fringe. In
some areas, such as Placerita Canyon and Calgrove Boulevard, gates have been installed
across collector streets, precluding transit service in adjacent neighborhoods. Even in more
urbanized areas, barriers that separate residents from transit stops include steep terrain,
aqueducts, flood control channels, power line corridors, walled neighborhoods, lack of street
connectivity, and grade separations. Many of the internal paseo systems do not connect to
transit stops. There is a need for better pedestrian links to transit stops throughout the Valley in
order to increase ridership.
In recent years, increased ridership and traffic congestion have affected service reliability by
delaying buses. The intersection of Soledad Canyon Road and Bouquet Canyon Road has
been particularly problematic in causing bus delay; however, the completion of the Cross Valley
Connector has alleviated some of this delay. In addition, it is recommended that traffic signals
be programmed to give priority to buses at major intersections. Congestion is also caused by
lack of adequate bus turnouts on heavily traveled arterial streets; these should be designed with
sufficient length to allow the bus to re-enter the travel lane.
The City has implemented a transit impact fee to recover capital costs from new development to
mitigate impacts of that development on the transit system. This fee is currently under review
with respect to anticipated system needs. In the future, the County will also evaluate the
feasibility of adopting a similar fee to fund the capital costs of expanding the public transit
system to serve new development in unincorporated areas of the Valley.
June 2011                                 C-48

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Circulation
Commuter Transit Service
City of Santa Clarita Transit operates local commuter service into and out of Downtown Los
Angeles, Century City, the Antelope Valley, and Warner Center. Most of these routes are well
used; use is monitored and adjustments are made to times if necessary to accommodate
demand. The busiest commuter transit stops serve the Metrolink stations and park-and-ride
lots. Commuters have identified the need to increase service to downtown Los Angeles during
mid-day hours, and to provide service to the North Hollywood Metrolink Station which has
service to the Orange and Red Lines. City of Santa Clarita Transit will continue to expand
service to meet customer needs as funding allows.
Special Transit Services
City of Santa Clarita Transit provides special bus routes to major destination points throughout
the Los Angeles area and to special events. Other special transit services include provision of
transit to the Getty Center, Hollywood Bowl, beaches, and various festivals with destinations
and routes determined on an as-needed basis.
In order to facilitate multi-modal transportation, City of Santa Clarita Transit installed bicycle
racks on all buses in July 2006. These racks can accommodate two to three bicycles per bus.
Approximately 100 riders per month use the bicycle racks.
Bus Stop Improvement Program
The Bus Stop Improvement Program identified opportunities to create uniform and aesthetically
pleasing bus stop improvements throughout City and County portions of the Santa Clarita
Valley. As highly visible features within the streetscape right-of-way, bus shelters and benches
provide an opportunity to assist in creating a distinctive identity for the Valley, as well as
promoting a positive environment for transit riders. A goal of the program is to remove shelters
that provide advertising and replace them with an architecturally enhanced bus shelter design
that meets federal regulations and enhances the Valley’s image.
A significant need identified in the 2006 TDP was improving accessibility, convenience and
safety for bus stops. Some stops have no paved waiting areas for transit riders to stand while
waiting for the bus, causing them to stand on unpaved shoulders of busy streets, or in
landscaped areas where sprinklers spray intermittently. The Plan recommended retrofitting bus
waiting areas to provide pavement and connections to walkways, and ensuring that new
development provides or contributes to adequate transit stop facilities as a condition of
approval, where appropriate.
Park-and-ride Lots
Five park-and-ride lots are located in and near the planning area to encourage the use of public
transit for a portion of commuter travel. All park-and-ride lots within the City have transit service
except for the lot at Golden Valley Road at SR-14. Several of the park-and-ride lots, including
those at the Newhall and Santa Clarita Metrolink stations, are at or exceeding capacity.
Additional commuter parking is provided in scattered locations within businesses adjacent to
transit routes.
                                                C-49                                      June 2011

Circulation                                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
The 2006 TDP identified a need for development of a major (500+ spaces) park-and-ride lot at
the intersection of Newhall Avenue and Sierra Highway. In addition to improving service at that
location, a larger lot would increase parking capacity at the Newhall and Santa Clarita Metrolink
Stations by diverting some bus riders from parking at the Metrolink stations. A second park-
and-ride lot is also needed near the McBean Transfer Station, according to the plan. Funding
sources for these improvements are being evaluated.
School Bus Transportation
Each of the elementary school districts provides limited yellow bus transportation to students.
Over the last decade the William S. Hart School District has gradually eliminated school buses
to junior high and high schools. City of Santa Clarita Transit provides transit services near the
schools, providing an alternative means of transportation for students although not designated
as the official school transport provider.
Taxi Service
Taxi service is provided in the Santa Clarita Valley by various companies including Yellow Cab
and Eagle Cab Companies, which have comparable rates. There are no subsidies provided for
taxi service.
L. Non-Motorized Travel Modes
According to the regional planning agency, Southern California Association of Governments
(SCAG), average travel time on southern California roadways is higher than both the state and
national averages. The resulting congestion contributes to poor air quality, opportunity costs of
delay, high energy costs, and greenhouse gas emissions contributing to global climate change,
and decreased quality of life for residents. The Congestion Management Program for Los
Angeles County predicts that the largest increase in daily trips is expected to occur in North Los
Angeles County, including the Santa Clarita and Antelope Valleys. Because of the expected
growth within the Santa Clarita Valley, and the growing concern about traffic congestion, a
major component of the Circulation Element is promotion of non-motorized travel modes,
including bikeways and walkways.
Planning for Bikeways
A vital component of the Valley’s circulation system is an integrated system of bikeways, both
on-street and off-street. An interconnected network of safe and convenient bikeways provides
residents with both recreational benefits and options for reducing vehicle trips for short trips. In
addition, providing attractive bikeways can provide public health benefits by encouraging
exercise.
For planning purposes, bikeways are classified as to their location and type into three
categories. A Class I bikeway is an exclusive, two-way path for bicycles that is completely
separated from a street or highway. Class II bike lanes are signed and striped one-way lanes
on streets or highways, typically at the edge of the pavement. Bike lanes provide a demarcated
space for bicyclists within the roadway right-of-way, which is especially important on streets with
moderate or higher volumes and speeds. Class III bike routes share the right-of-way with
vehicles; they may be signed, but are not exclusively striped for use by cyclists. Although bike
routes offer little benefit to cyclists on busy roadways, they can be used to guide cyclists through
the street network. On any street carrying over 10,000 vehicles per day at speeds of 30 mph or
June 2011                                   C-50

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Circulation
higher, striped bike lanes are recommended over bike routes. In selecting routes for bikeways
that share the right-of-way with vehicles, design criteria include connectivity, traffic volumes,
speeds, curb width, intersection protection, and the number of commercial driveways.
In planning for bikeways, consideration should also be given to the differing needs of
experienced cyclists versus casual riders, and to utilitarian cyclists versus recreational riders. In
general, cyclists who are less experienced or who are riding for enjoyment prefer using Class I,
off-street bike paths that are landscaped, shaded, and may meander through neighborhoods or
open areas. Cyclists who are experienced racers, long-distance riders, or who regularly ride as
a way of commuting to work or services, generally prefer to ride within the travel lanes of the
right-of-way because the directness of the route is more important than visual interest, and they
can avoid conflicts with recreational trail users and pedestrians.
Regional Bikeway Planning
The MTA Board adopted the Metro Bicycle Transportation Strategic Plan in 2006 to promote
bicycle use throughout the County. The Plan’s vision is to make cycling a viable travel choice
by promoting links between bicycle facilities and the transit network. The plan identifies four
“bike-transit” hubs within the Santa Clarita Valley: the Valley’s three Metrolink commuter rail
stations, and the McBean Transfer Station.
Another goal of the Metro Bicycle Transportation Strategic Plan was to         evaluate gaps in the
inter-jurisdictional bikeway network connecting cities and unincorporated      areas to destinations
and transit stops, and provide strategies for connecting bikeway links.         Where gaps in the
system were identified, city and county planners are encouraged to             consider projects to
complete the bikeway network.
Within the Santa Clarita Valley, four gaps in the inter-jurisdictional bikeway network were
identified by the Metro plan. These are summarized in Table C-4. Funds are available from the
Bicycle Transportation Account program to help improve bicycle facilities, provided local
agencies have adopted Bicycle Transportation Plans. The City of Santa Clarita’s Non-
Motorized Transportation Plan will fulfill this funding requirement.
It should be noted that a portion of Bikeway Link No. 31 in Table C-4 extends through the
Newhall Ranch Specific Plan area, adopted by Los Angeles County in 2003. The Master Plan
for Trails within the Specific Plan shows a regional trail planned adjacent to the Santa Clara
River from the eastern edge of the project to the Ventura County Line. When completed, this
trail will fulfill the need for a bikeway connection between the Santa Clarita Valley and Ventura
County.
Both the City and the County have actively planned for and promoted development of trails and
bikeways. Los Angeles County has adopted and is currently updating the County Plan of
Bikeways, which divides the County into six subareas, of which the North County area is one.
When the update is complete, the County’s bikeway plan will be incorporated into the
comprehensive Valley-wide bikeway plan in this Element (Exhibit C-5).
                                                  C-51                                   June 2011

 Circulation                                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                                                Table C-4
                          Gaps in the Inter-Jurisdictional Bikeway Network
                                          Santa Clarita Valley
MTA
          Corridor         Jurisdiction              Description                    Constraints
 #
                                             Located along Old Road          May require shoulder
                                             adjacent to Golden State        improvements and road
                                             Freeway. Connection             widening in some places to
                                             between Valencia, Santa         create Class II or III
 30       Old Road          LA County
                                             Clarita and San Fernando        bikeway.
                                             Road Metrolink right-of-
                                             way bike path in the San
                                             Fernando Valley
                                             Connection between Santa        May require shoulder
                                             Clarita and the Ventura         improvements and road
 31       Route 126         LA County        County Line.                    widening in some places to
                                                                             create Class II or III
                                                                             bikeway.
                                             Connection between Santa May require shoulder
         Castaic/San          Santa          Clarita and Castaic Lake        improvements and road
 49      Francisquito       Clarita/LA       along Castaic Creek, San        widening in some places to
             Creek            County         Francisquito Creek, and         create Class II or III
                                             the Golden State Freeway        bikeway.
                                             Connection between the          May require shoulder
                              Santa          Old Road and Soledad            improvements and road
             Sierra
 50                         Clarita/LA       Canyon Bike Path                widening in some places to
           Highway
                          County/Caltrans                                    create Class II or III
                                                                             bikeway.
 Source: Los Angeles Metropolitan Transportation Authority: 2006 Metro Bicycle Transportation
 Strategic Plan, p. 103-104.
 City of Santa Clarita Bikeway Planning
 The City of Santa Clarita first adopted the Multi-Use Corridor System plan as part of its
 Circulation Element update in 1997. The Multi-Use Corridor System is a trail system that serves
 a combination of users, including pedestrians, bicyclists, and equestrians; an example of this
 type of facility is the South Fork Trail. Multi-Use Corridors are encouraged within and adjacent
 to local river and flood plain facilities, and typically include a right-of-way of 17 feet in order to
 provide separation between cyclists and pedestrians. Where equestrian use is allowed, a
 minimum of 30 feet is desirable.
 The first bike paths built in the City generally followed the Santa Clara River and its tributaries.
 Newer paths have been developed which connect residential neighborhoods to the river paths.
 Bike paths exist in most neighborhoods, providing connections to the Santa Clarita Metrolink
 Station, several schools, businesses along Soledad Canyon Road and McBean Parkway, and to
 recreational opportunities along the rivers. Grade-separated undercrossings are generally
 provided where Class I bike paths cross major highways.
 June 2011                                  C-52
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                           Circulation
The City of Santa Clarita initiated preparation of a Non-Motorized Transportation Plan in 2006,
with the general goal of reducing the number and length of vehicle trips through promotion of
walking and biking as alternate modes of transportation. In undertaking a plan to increase non-
motorized transportation, the City identified quality of life benefits such as reduced noise from
traffic, better air quality, reduced fuel costs, and less time spent in traffic congestion. The
resulting plan, entitled City of Santa Clarita Non-Motorized Transportation Plan, found that
generally people tend to walk to destinations within ¼-mile, and bike to destinations within ½-
mile. Other studies have found that people routinely walk one-half mile to access rail transit6
and surveys of bicycle commuters indicate that average bicycle commute distance can vary
from approximately 4.5 miles7, to 7.5 miles8. Initial surveys of residents and cyclists indicated
that some of the reasons cited for not walking or cycling to destinations included the following:
     •   Too many cars that drive too fast;
     •   Difficult to cross streets;
     •   No bike lanes or walking paths;
     •   Paths in poor conditions;
     •   Destinations are too far away;
     •   Inadequate lighting; and
     •   Lack of time.
The City’s Non-Motorized Transportation Plan, adopted in June 2008, addressed these issues
through development of connected, safe, and convenient routes for cyclists and pedestrians.
The plan also included a Safe Routes to Schools Program for three elementary schools.
Policies and programs in the plan were designed to identify and prioritize bikeway needs;
provide a plan for needed facilities and services; contribute to the quality of life through trail
development; improve safety for cyclists and pedestrians; identify land use patterns that
promote walking and cycling; improve access to transit; maximize funding opportunities for
trails; and provide educational and incentive programs. According to City staff, “primary goals of
the plan are to alleviate the current traffic congestion in the City and to encourage future
decreases in motor vehicle use by making it easier, safer and more enjoyable to bicycle and
walk as a general means of transportation. The plan will also encourage transit use and
address equestrian needs.”
The coordinated master plan for bikeways in the Santa Clarita Valley is shown on Exhibit C-5.
The City has already taken several steps to encourage walking and biking, including providing
bicycle racks on City buses; promoting transit-oriented development in Downtown Newhall;
constructing over 30 miles of off-street bicycle trails and over 14 miles of bicycle lanes;
providing bicycle lockers at Metrolink stations, the McBean transfer station and City Hall;
modifying traffic signal detection for bicycles; promoting Bike-To-Work days; and hosting the
Amgen Tour Bicycle Race in 2007-09.
Within the City of Santa Clarita, many opportunities are available for recreational riders on Class
I trails, and more such trails are planned. The Non-Motorized Transportation Plan also
identified a need to accommodate on-street riders through designation of bike lanes on arterials,
6
  Scholssberg, Agrawal, Irvin, and Bekkouche, “How Far, By Which Route, and Why? A Spatial Analysis
of Pedestrian Preference,” Mineta Transportation Institute, 2007.
7
  Forester, John, “Bicycle Transportation: A Handbook for Cycling Transportation Engineers,” MIT Press,
1994.
8
  Moritz, William E., “A Survey of North American Bicycle Commuters,” Transportation Research Record
1578, 1997.
                                                   C-53                                      June 2011

Circulation                                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
wide curb lanes, loop detectors at signals, direct commuter routes, and protected intersection
crossing locations. In addition, connections between residential areas and bikeways are
needed to facilitate increased bicycle use for both recreational and commuting purposes.
June 2011                               C-54
City of Santa Clarita General Plan Circulation
                                               C-55 June 2011
Circulation                                                      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Bicycle Parking and Support Facilities
Adequate bicycle parking to serve transit facilities and commercial areas has also been
identified as a goal by both the City and the County. Bicycle lockers are provided at all three
Metrolink stations and at City Hall. Several major employers, such as Six Flags Magic Mountain
and The Master’s College, provide bicycle parking and changing facilities to promote bicycle
support for employees. In order to encourage bicycle use at major employment and commercial
centers, it is necessary that bicycle parking facilities be secure. Policies have been added to
the Circulation and Land Use Elements to require adequate bicycle parking and support
facilities where appropriate.
Pedestrian Circulation System
A fundamental goal of the General Plan is to create walkable communities and neighborhoods
within the Santa Clarita Valley. In order to achieve this objective, pedestrian access must be
considered in all phases of development planning, including site design, subdivision design, and
public improvement projects. The basic needs for pedestrian travel are safety, connectivity, and
accessibility for all, including the disabled.
The Valley’s existing pedestrian network is comprised of sidewalks, paseos, and multi-use trails.
Sidewalks are defined as pathways running alongside a parallel roadway. Paseos are paved
walking paths that provide pedestrian links outside of the street network. Multi-use trails are
unpaved trails that are suitable for walkers, hikers, equestrians and mountain bikers.
Most of the major roadways in the Valley have sidewalks along portions of their length. Along
many arterials, such as Soledad Canyon Road, sidewalks are located adjacent to the curb and
are not buffered from vehicle traffic by landscaped parkways, causing an unpleasant walking
environment due to traffic noise and fumes. In other areas, such as portions of McBean
Parkway and Newhall Ranch Road, sidewalks are separated from vehicle lanes by landscaped
parkways, resulting in a more user-friendly pedestrian experience. The network of sidewalks is
discontinuous in many areas; sidewalks are not provided on some residential streets, in some
industrial areas, or on designated rural roads. Not all bus stops are served by sidewalks, and in
some areas sidewalks are not provided on both sides of a street. Some rural communities in
the Valley, such as Agua Dulce and those with special standards districts such as Placerita
Canyon and Sand Canyon, have opted not to have concrete sidewalks and prefer streetscape
designs more in keeping with the rural and equestrian character of these neighborhoods;
however, even in these areas, walking trails of some type are desirable for pedestrians in
certain locations.
June 2011                                  C-56

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                      Circulation
Major intersections are striped with pedestrian crosswalks, and signalized intersections have
pedestrian push buttons to activate walk signals. Pedestrian countdown signals are planned for
approximately 200 intersections in the City; about 80 signals have been installed as of 2008,
and the work as completed in the beginning of 2011. However, crossing eight to 10 lanes of
traffic on streets where speeds average 45 to 55 miles per hour can be daunting for
pedestrians. Intersections can be made more pedestrian-friendly by installing traffic calming
features such as striping, landscaping, and pedestrian islands. Pedestrian bridges have been
provided for crossing of arterial streets in several areas throughout the community; these
improvements will continue to be required to enhance pedestrian safety and connectivity, where
feasible and practical. The City is also exploring the feasibility of using round-abouts at certain
intersections, which are designed to slow traffic and allow merging and turn movements without
causing long periods of idling for vehicles, while allowing pedestrians to walk safely around the
intersection.
Portions of the planning area, such as Valencia and Saugus, were planned with paseos that
provide attractive, landscaped pedestrian pathways connecting residential neighborhoods,
commercial and public uses. The Valencia paseo system also provides pedestrian overpasses
of arterial streets to increase public safety and preserve mobility on the arterials. Paseos were
designed to provide connections between cul-de-sacs, to schools, neighborhood parks, and
activity areas. They are landscaped, paved, and illuminated. In some areas paseos take the
place of sidewalks.
In other portions of the planning area, topography and subdivision design have discouraged the
use of walkways and, consequently, the use of public transit. Walled communities and steep
hills make it difficult for many residents to conveniently access buses operating on arterials. In
addition, the Non-Motorized Transportation Plan identified the following needs for pedestrians:
     •   Sufficient crossing time at signalized intersections;
     •   Visibility at crossings;
     •   Continuity of walkways;
     •   Adequate walkway width, removing obstructions in the walkway, and providing buffer or
         separation from travel lanes;
     •   Traffic calming to slow speeds in pedestrian areas;
     •   Mixed land uses decreasing distance between destinations; and
     •   Providing connectivity through cul-de-sacs and non-grid street patterns.
The City’s Unified Development Code also contains requirements for incorporating non-
motorized transportation amenities into new development. These include requiring pedestrian
access ways through blocks of over 700 feet in length; requiring amenities for transit users,
cyclists and pedestrians; requiring installation of pedestrian crossing treatments near schools,
parks, senior facilities, and other destinations for special needs groups; requirements for
sidewalks in most new development; and requirements for bicycle parking.
Recommendations for new development by the Non-Motorized Transportation Plan include
increasing connectivity to encourage walking and bicycling. Subdivision patterns that create
numerous cul-de-sacs, developments surrounded by block walls, and shopping centers with no
pedestrian connections to adjacent neighborhoods are discouraged. Where cul-de-sacs are
used, pedestrian connections to adjacent streets should be provided, and walkways should be
provided connecting neighborhoods to services and facilities. Policies have been included in
the Element to emphasize these objectives.
                                                  C-57                                  June 2011

Circulation                                                      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
In addition to the policies in the Circulation Element designed to promote walkable communities,
the Land Use Element has been developed to promote non-motorized transportation by
concentrating shops, restaurants, and other destinations in proximity to residences so that
people can walk to these services.
Hiking Trails
The City has developed several hiking trails, some shared by equestrian users, which are used
primarily for recreational purposes. The City maintains seven miles of multi-purpose trails,
which are unpaved and intended for hiking, horseback riding, and mountain biking. Trails are
located in rural areas, generally in the southern and eastern parts of the City. The network
includes an equestrian path that parallels the South Fork Trail, and one that parallels Sand
Canyon Road. The City plans to develop another five to six miles of multi-purpose trails in the
future.
The County also maintains a master plan for hiking trails in the Santa Clarita Valley, which was
most recently updated in 2007. The City’s and County’s hiking and recreational trails are
combined in the Valleywide Trail Master Plan, shown on Exhibit CO-9 in the Conservation and
Open Space Element.
M. Healthy Streets for Walkable Communities
Although the location and alignment of local neighborhood streets are not typically addressed at
the General Plan level, the City and County share a common goal to ensure that neighborhood
streets in urban areas are designed to be as safe and healthful as possible, for residents and
pedestrians as well as drivers. This section addresses pedestrian safety in urban areas where
full street improvements are required. While the need for public safety is also recognized in
rural areas with unimproved streets, other design measures are appropriate in these areas in
order to maintain rural character.
The need to consider pedestrian safety in street design has prompted traffic engineers to
develop a variety of design options which generally seek to improve pedestrian safety in three
ways: by separating pedestrians from vehicles (such as with pedestrian overpasses, refuge
islands, and paseos); by making pedestrians more visible and conspicuous to drivers (such as
through lighting, raised crosswalks, and “bulb-outs” of the sidewalk into the street at corners);
and by reducing vehicle speeds (such as with traffic circles, narrowed travel lanes, curving
roadways, raised intersections, and speed humps). These measures, often called “traffic-
calming” devices, have been successfully used in many cities to slow traffic and improve
pedestrian safety.
In California, the Local Government Commission has developed Street Design Guidelines for
Healthy Neighborhoods9, which outlines street-making guidelines initially prepared for
communities in the San Joaquin Valley but that are widely applicable, based on their
compliance with adopted standards of the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), American
Society of Civil Engineers (ASCE), the National Fire Code, and other national standards. The
guidelines are intended to be used for development of new residential communities of six to 12
dwellings/acre and mixed use areas in proximity to transit, and for protection of existing
traditional communities. Healthy streets are defined as “networks of roadways and connector
9
  Burden, Dan. Street Design Guidelines for Healthy Neighborhoods, Local Government Commission,
2002.
June 2011                                 C-58

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Circulation
trails in communities, designed primarily for use by people, not just motorized vehicles. Such
streets are designed for motorists to feel comfortable operating at low speeds (15 to 20 mph).
Low traffic volume and low noise, easy access, and multiple routes to destinations are also
featured. Pedestrian and bicycle movements are favored.” Healthy streets incorporate design
characteristics such as the following:
     •   Interconnected networks linking mixed uses;
     •   Shorter block length (250 to 350 feet);
     •   Landscaped medians, parkways, and tree canopies;
     •   On-street parking;
     •   Sidewalks;
     •   Curbs and gutters (in favor of rolled curbs or swales);
     •   Street furniture and lighting;
     •   Transit stops within ¼-mile;
     •   Building setbacks proportional to street width;
     •   Narrower intersections with smaller radii; and
     •   Speed control through geometrics, tee intersections and curves.
In addition to enhanced pedestrian and traffic safety, the use of narrower streets (where safe
and appropriate) can have other benefits. According to Livable Oregon, the use of narrower
street widths provides more efficient use of land, decreased storm water runoff, lower
maintenance costs, increased market value, lower development costs, and an enhanced sense
of community.
The Bay Area Stormwater Management Agencies Association has encouraged reducing
impervious area throughout cities as a means of maintaining water quality. According to their
publication Start at the Source10, streets comprise up to 25 percent of the total land area in
residential neighborhoods, and street pavement is often the largest component of total
impervious land coverage. Residential streets provide a major opportunity for reducing
pavement width to lower speeds, as well as reducing impervious surface area.
Many traditional residential neighborhoods developed prior to World War II were based on a
prototypical residential subdivision designed by Frederick Law Olmsted for Riverside, Illinois in
1869, with a pavement width of 24 feet and 12-foot parkway strips planted with street trees and
provided with five-foot sidewalks on both sides. After World War II new street standards were
developed to accommodate increased automobile use, higher traffic volumes and greater
speeds. The paved area was increased by up to 50 percent, with a typical residential street
width of 36 feet, plus curb, gutter, and five-foot sidewalks on both sides, and often no
landscaped parkway.
In 2006 the ITE published Context Sensitive Solutions in Designing Major Urban Thoroughfares
for Walkable Communities: An ITE Proposed Recommended Practice. The report “provides
guidance for the development of improvement projects on major urban thoroughfares, facilities
that are typically classified as arterial and collector roadways in urbanized areas . . . and in the
design of roadway improvement projects in places where community objectives support
walkable communities – compact development, mixed land uses and support for pedestrians
and bicyclists - whether it already exists or is a goal for the future.” This document recommends
an interdisciplinary team approach to designing thoroughfares, incorporating input from citizens,
10
   Bay Area Stormwater Management Agencies Association, Start at the Source, May, 2003, page 19.
                                                 C-59                                     June 2011

Circulation                                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
emergency services personnel and other stakeholders to achieve community goals, and states
that where the community has expressed a desire for walkable environments, context sensitive
solutions can be used to create places with the following characteristics:
    1. Mixed land uses in close proximity to one another;
    2. Building entries that front directly onto the street without parking between entries and the
          public right-of-way;
    3. Building, landscape and thoroughfare design that is pedestrian-scale, in other words, it
          provides architectural and urban design detail with size and design appreciated by
          persons who are traveling slowly and observing from the street level;
    4. Relatively compact developments (both residential and commercial);
    5. A highly-connected, multimodal circulation network, usually with a fine “grain” created by
          relatively small blocks; and
    6. Thoroughfares and other public spaces that contribute to “placemaking” – the creation of
          unique locations that are compact, mixed-use and pedestrian- and transit-oriented and
          have a strong civic character with lasting economic value.
The references cited above, which address methods of creating walkable streets in residential
neighborhood streets as well as along arterial thoroughfares, stress the need to coordinate land
use and development patterns with street patterns. Mixed land uses, building orientations and
setbacks, and location of parking are important components of creating walkable communities,
in addition to street design. The ITE’s Context Sensitive Solutions defines walkable
communities as follows:
          Walkable communities are desirable places to live, work, learn and play. Their
          desirability comes from two factors. First, by locating, within an easy and safe
          walk, goods (such as housing, offices, and retail) and services (such as
          transportation, schools, libraries) that a community resident or employee needs
          on a regular basis.        Second, by definition, walkable communities make
          pedestrian activity possible, thus expanding transportation options and creating a
          streetscape that better serves a range of users – pedestrians, bicyclists, transit
          riders, and drivers. To foster walkability, communities must mix land uses and
          build compactly, and ensure safe and inviting pedestrian corridors.
Within the Santa Clarita Valley, much of the development during the last twenty years has been
low-density with a suburban character, circuitous cul-de-sac street patterns, and wide streets.
In many of these existing areas, large-scale changes to street patterns will not be feasible or
desirable until redevelopment occurs many years in the future. However, small improvements
may be used to enhance pedestrian connectivity by linking cul-de-sac bulbs to adjacent streets
and transit stops, providing paseo links, and using traffic calming devices. Arterial streets can
be made more walkable by provision of connected walkways, transit stops and shelters, street
trees and landscaping, bulb-outs and refuge islands at intersections, and use of overpasses
where appropriate and feasible.
The greatest opportunities in the Valley to create walkable communities exist in areas planned
for infill development and redevelopment around transit centers, commercial corridors, mixed-
use nodes, and new development. The City and County have identified a common goal to
increase the health and livability of the community by encouraging the inclusion of walkable
streets in these areas, and policies have been included in the Circulation Element to achieve
this goal.
June 2011                                  C-60

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                      Circulation
N. Circulation Systems, Carbon Emissions, and Global Climate Change
In 2007 the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change of the United Nations published its
finding that overwhelming evidence establishes that global warming is occurring and is caused
by human activity. According to the State of California Attorney General’s office:
         With respect to impacts in the State, the California Climate Change Center
         reports that temperatures are expected to rise 4.7 to 10.5 F by the end of the
         century.     These increases would have serious consequences, including
         substantial loss of snow-pack, an increase of as much as 55% in the risk of large
         wildfires, and reductions in the quality and quantity of agricultural products.
         Additionally, the report predicts increased stress on the State’s vital resources
         and natural landscapes. Global warming will also slow the progress toward
         attainment of the ozone air quality standard by increasing the number of days
         that are meteorologically conducive to the formation of ozone.
In response to concerns about climate change, Assembly Bill 32 (AB 32), the California Global
Warming Solutions Act of 2006 (codified at Health and Safety Code Section 38500 et seq.), was
signed into law by the Governor on September 27, 2006. AB 32 requires reduction of the
State’s greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (CHG) to 1990 levels by 2020, a time within the
planning horizon of this General Plan. This emissions cap is equal to a 25 percent reduction
from current levels. The bill directs that the California Air Resources Board (CARB) publish a
list of early action emission reduction measures to be implemented by 2010. CARB’s early
action measures include reduction of emissions from fuel consumption. To further combat
global warming, California is promoting the development of alternative technologies to reduce
reliance on fossil fuels, including development of hydrogen and fuel cell technologies.
According to the California Energy Commission, transportation accounts for the largest single
share of California’s GHG (41 percent). The Governor’s Climate Action Team has identified
increased vehicle efficiency, the use of bio-fuels, and planning measures, as strategies to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions generated by transportation. The Climate Action Team
identified land use planning as a strategy to reduce vehicle travel by more than 10 percent of
the required reductions, including concentrating development in infill locations and at transit
nodes to reduce the automobile mode share of vehicle trips, increasing transit ridership, and
providing alternative transportation modes. Bond measures passed by California voters in 2006
earmarked funds for transit-oriented development and for incentives to promote planning,
housing and infill development using smart growth planning principles.
Pursuant to AB 32, standards and regulations for measuring and mitigating GHG were still being
developed during the time this General Plan was prepared. However, because of the
importance of this issue and in response to the State’s mandate that local agencies consider the
effects of greenhouse gas emissions in local planning decisions, the City and County have
incorporated policies in the General Plan to reduce vehicle trips and thereby reduce carbon
emissions through a variety of planning strategies. These strategies include establishing an
urban limit line on the Land Use Map, encouraging infill development through increased
densities allowed in the urban core, encouraging mixed use development in specified land use
designations, promoting transit oriented development around Metrolink stations and the bus
transfer station, expanding bikeways and walkways, and using transportation demand
management measures.
                                                C-61                                    June 2011

Circulation                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Future transportation technologies are being developed using alternative energy sources such
as hydrogen cells and electric vehicles. Some communities are exploring opportunities for
accommodating Neighborhood Electric Vehicles (NEV), which are capable of traveling up to 25
mph, are equipped with safety features, and may be operated on roads where the posted speed
is 35 mph or less. Most of these devices are electric powered with zero emissions, and they are
often used at resorts and senior communities. According to a recent publication from the
American Planning Association:
        As fuel prices increase and people look for more environmentally friendly driving
        options, it is likely that the number of NEV’s will increase. Most states already
        regulate them in some way, and transportation planners are beginning to
        examine the role of such vehicles in the roadway hierarchy. In some parts of the
        country, NEV’s are most common in communities where there is a network of
        multi-use paths. In other places, they are found on bike paths. . . Communities
        that cater to seniors or focus on recreation often plan a network of paths specially
        designed for these vehicles.11
The City and County recognize that opportunities may exist to incorporate new vehicle
technology into transit-oriented villages, as these areas are developed in the future. Therefore,
policies have been added to the Circulation Element encouraging flexibility in transportation
planning in order to maximize benefits from alternative travel modes as they become available.
O. Summary of Circulation Needs
Based on the existing conditions and transportation issues outlined in the background sections
of the Circulation Element, the circulation planning needs for the Santa Clarita Valley are
summarized below. Policies and objectives in the following section have been developed to
address these needs.
    1. Balance the needs for mobility and access in designing the roadway system.
    2. Increase connectivity between neighborhoods and districts.
    3. Maintain acceptable levels of service on streets and at intersections.
    4. Comply with the County’s Congestion Management Program and other regional
        transportation planning efforts.
    5. Implement roadway improvements needed to build out the Highway Plan as identified by
        the traffic analysis (see Table C-2).
    6. Reduce congestion and vehicle miles traveled by managing transportation systems and
        travel demand.
    7. Make more efficient use of parking facilities, to reduce the cost of vehicle storage and to
        free land for other uses.
11
   Hunter-Zaworski, Katharine, “Getting Around in an Aging Society,” Planning: the Magazine of the
American Planning Association, Volume 73, Number 5, page 25.
June 2011                                  C-62

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                         Circulation
    8. Enhance use of public transit by promoting transit-oriented, mixed use development near
        transit hubs.
    9. Continue to explore opportunities for high speed rail connections to other regions, in
        cooperation with other agencies.
    10. Enhance bus transit use through implementing recommendations of City of Santa Clarita
        Transit’s planning efforts, including evaluation of bus rapid transit (BRT).
    11. Evaluate park-and-ride lot locations and capacity, and expand facilities as needed.
    12. Plan for and implement a regional bikeway network, to meet both recreational and non-
        motorized travel needs.
    13. Make the Santa Clarita Valley a walkable community, by retrofitting pedestrian
        connections and facilities into existing development where needed, and by promoting
        healthy streets in new development.
    14. Contribute to a regional reduction in greenhouse gas emissions through land use
        planning and transportation strategies.
PART 2: CIRCULATION GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
Multi-Modal Circulation Network
Goal C 1: An inter-connected network of circulation facilities that integrates all travel modes,
provides viable alternatives to automobile use, and conforms with regional plans.
        Objective C 1.1: Provide multi-modal circulation systems that move people and goods
        efficiently while protecting environmental resources and quality of life.
                Policy C 1.1.1: Reduce dependence on the automobile, particularly single-
                occupancy vehicle use, by providing safe and convenient access to transit,
                bikeways, and walkways.
                Policy C 1.1.2: Promote expansion of alternative transportation options to
                increase accessibility to all demographic and economic groups throughout the
                community, including mobility-impaired persons, senior citizens, low-income
                persons, and youth.
                Policy C 1.1.3: Work with local and regional agencies and employers to
                promote an integrated, seamless transportation system that meets access
                needs, including local and regional bus service, dial-a-ride, taxis, rail, van pools,
                car pools, bus pools, bicycling, walking, and automobiles.
                Policy C 1.1.4: Promote public health through provision of safe, pleasant, and
                accessible walkways, bikeways, and multi-purpose trail systems for residents.
                                                 C-63                                      June 2011

Circulation                                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
               Policy C 1.1.5:         Plan for efficient links between circulation systems at
               appropriate locations, including but not limited to bus-rail connections and
               pedestrian-bus connections.
               Policy C 1.1.6: Provide adequate facilities for multi-modal travel, including but
               not limited to bicycle parking and storage, expanded park-and-ride lots, and
               adequate station and transfer facilities in appropriate locations.
               Policy C 1.1.7: Consider the safety and convenience of the traveling public,
               including pedestrians and cyclists, in design and development of all
               transportation systems.
               Policy C 1.1.8: Acquire and/or reserve adequate right-of-way in transportation
               corridors to accommodate multiple travel modes, including bus turnouts, bus
               rapid transit (BRT), bikeways, walkways, and linkages to trail systems.
               Policy C 1.1.9: Incorporate funding for all modes of transportation in the capital
               improvement program, and seek funding from all available sources for multi-
               modal system development.
               Policy C 1.1.10:         Provide for flexibility in the transportation system to
               accommodate new technology as it becomes available, in order to reduce trips
               by vehicles using fossil fuels where feasible and appropriate.
               Policy C 1.1.11: Promote use of multi-modal facilities by providing adequate
               and attractive way-finding programs directing users to transit stations, park-and-
               ride lots, bicycle storage, and other facilities.
               Policy C 1.1.12: Implement recommendations of the City’s Non-Motorized
               Transportation Plan to expand opportunities for alternative travel modes.
               Policy C 1.1.13: Design new activity centers and improve existing activity
               centers to prioritize walking, bicycling and circulator transit for internal circulation
               of person-travel.
        Objective C 1.2: Coordinate land use and circulation planning to achieve greater
        accessibility and mobility for users of all travel modes.
               Policy C 1.2.1: Develop coordinated plans for land use, circulation, and transit
               to promote transit-oriented development that concentrates higher density
               housing, employment, and commercial areas in proximity to transit corridors.
               Policy C 1.2.2: Create walkable communities, with paseos and walkways
               connecting residential neighborhoods to multi-modal transportation services such
               as bus stops and rail stations.
               Policy C 1.2.3: Require that new commercial and industrial development
               provide walkway connections to public sidewalks and transit stops, where
               available.
June 2011                                 C-64

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                     Circulation
               Policy C 1.2.4: Consider location, availability, and accessibility of transit in
               evaluating new development plans.
               Policy C 1.2.5: In mixed use projects, require compact development and a mix
               of land uses to locate housing, workplaces, and services within walking or
               bicycling distance of each other.
               Policy C 1.2.6: Provide flexible standards for parking and roadway design in
               transit-oriented development areas to promote transit use, where appropriate.
               Policy C 1.2.7: In pedestrian-oriented areas, provide a highly connected
               circulation grid with relatively small blocks to encourage walking.
               Policy C 1.2.8: Provide safe pedestrian connections across barriers, which may
               include but are not limited to major traffic corridors, drainage and flood control
               facilities, utility easements, grade separations, and walls.
               Policy C 1.2.9:            Emphasize providing right-of-way for non-vehicular
               transportation modes so that walking and bicycling are the easiest, most
               convenient modes of transportation available for short trips.
               Policy C 1.2.10: Protect communities by discouraging the construction of
               facilities that sever residential neighborhoods.
               Policy C 1.2.11: Reduce vehicle miles traveled (VMT) through the use of smart
               growth concepts.
               Policy C 1.2.12: Balance the anticipated volume of people and goods
               movement with the need to maintain a walkable and bicycle friendly environment.
        Objective C 1.3:            Ensure conformance of the Circulation Plan with regional
        transportation plans.
               Policy C 1.3.1: Continue coordinating with the Metropolitan Transportation
               Authority (Metro) to implement the County’s Congestion Management Program
               (CMP) for designated CMP roadways.
               Policy C-1.3.2: Participate in updates to the CMP and collaborate with Caltrans
               and Metro to revise CMP impact thresholds, ensuring that they are adequate and
               appropriate.
               Policy C 1.3.3: Through trip reduction strategies and emphasis on multi-modal
               transportation options, contribute to achieving the air quality goals of the South
               Coast Air Quality Management District Air Quality Management Plan.
               Policy C 1.3.4: Coordinate circulation planning with the Regional Transportation
               Plan prepared by the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG),
               to ensure consistency of planned improvements with regional needs.
               Policy C 1.3.5: Continue coordinating with Caltrans on circulation and land use
               decisions that may affect Interstate 5, State Route 14, and State Route 126, and
                                                  C-65                                 June 2011

Circulation                                                      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
               support programs to increase capacity and improve operations on these
               highways.
               Policy C 1.3.6: Collaborate with Caltrans and Metro to implement the
               recommendations of the North County Combined Highways Corridors Study and
               support efforts by Metro to update this Study after SCAG adopts a Sustainable
               Communities Strategy.
               Policy C 1.3.7: Support the Golden State Gateway Coalition in its advocacy
               efforts to improve the Interstate 5 corridor, recognizing that the corridor facilitates
               regional and international travel that impacts the Santa Clarita Valley.
               Policy C 1.3.8: Ensure consistency with the County’s adopted Airport Land Use
               Plan as it pertains to the Agua Dulce Airport, in order to mitigate aviation-related
               hazards and protect airport operations from encroachment by incompatible uses.
               Policy C 1.3.9: Support the expansion of Palmdale Regional Airport and the
               extension of multi-modal travel choices between the airport and the Santa Clarita
               Valley, in conformance with regional planning efforts.
               Policy C 1.3.10: Apply for regional, State, and federal grants for bicycle and
               pedestrian infrastructure projects.
Street and Highway System
Goal C 2: A unified and well-maintained network of streets and highways which provides safe
and efficient movement of people and goods between neighborhoods, districts, and regional
centers, while maintaining community character.
        Objective C 2.1: Implement the Circulation Plan (as shown on Exhibit C-2) for streets
        and highways to meet existing and future travel demands for mobility, access,
        connectivity, and capacity.
               Policy C 2.1.1: Protect mobility on arterial highways by limiting excessive cross
               traffic, access points, and turning movements; traffic signals on arterial highways
               should be spaced at least ½-mile apart, and the minimum allowable separation
               should be at least ¼-mile.
               Policy C 2.1.2: Enhance connectivity of the roadway network to the extent
               feasible given the constraints of topography, existing development patterns, and
               environmental resources, by constructing grade separations and bridges;
               connecting discontinuous streets; extending secondary access into areas where
               needed; prohibiting gates on public streets; and other improvements as deemed
               appropriate based on traffic analysis.
               Policy C 2.1.3: Protect and enhance the capacity of the roadway system by
               upgrading intersections to meet level of service standards, widening and/or
               restriping for additional lanes, synchronizing traffic signals, and other means as
               appropriate.
June 2011                                C-66

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                         Circulation
                Policy C 2.1.4: Ensure that future dedication and acquisition of right-of-way is
                based on the adopted Circulation Plan, proposed land uses, and projected
                demand.
                Policy C 2.1.5: At the time of project level review, monitor levels of service,
                traffic accident patterns, and physical conditions of the existing street system,
                and upgrade roadways as needed through the Capital Improvement Program.
        Objective C 2.2: Adopt and apply consistent standards throughout the Santa Clarita
        Valley for street design and service levels, which promote safety, convenience, and
        efficiency of travel.
                Policy C 2.2.1: Designate roadways within the planning area based on their
                functional classification as shown on Exhibit C-2.
                Policy C 2.2.2: Adopt consistent standard street cross sections for City and
                County roadways in the planning area, as shown on Exhibit C-3.
                Policy C 2.2.3: Coordinate circulation plans of new development projects with
                each other and the surrounding street network, within both City and County
                areas.
                Policy C 2.2.4: Strive to maintain a Level of Service (LOS) D or better on most
                roadway segments and intersections to the extent practical; in some locations, a
                LOS E may be acceptable, or LOS F may be necessary, for limited durations
                during peak traffic periods.
                Policy C 2.2.5: Adopt common standards for pavement width in consideration of
                capacity needs to serve projected travel demand, provided that a reduction in
                pavement width may be allowed in order to reduce traffic speeds, protect
                resources, enhance pedestrian mobility, or as otherwise deemed appropriate by
                the reviewing authority.
                Policy C 2.2.6: Within residential neighborhoods, promote the design of “healthy
                streets” which may include reduced pavement width, shorter block length,
                provision of on-street parking, traffic-calming devices, bike routes and pedestrian
                connectivity, landscaped parkways, and canopy street trees.
                Policy C 2.2.7: Where practical, encourage the use of grid or modified grid
                street systems to increase connectivity and walkability; where cul-de-sacs are
                provided, promote the use of walkways connecting cul-de-sac bulbs to adjacent
                streets and/or facilities to facilitate pedestrian access; where street connectivity is
                limited and pedestrian routes are spaced over 500 feet apart, promote the use of
                intermediate pedestrian connections through or between blocks.
                Policy C 2.2.8: Local street patterns should be designed to create logical and
                understandable travel paths for users and to provide access between
                neighborhoods for local residents while discouraging cut-through traffic; cul-de-
                sac length should not exceed 600 feet, and “dog-leg” cul-de-sacs with one or
                more turns between the bulb and the outlet should be avoided where possible.
                                                    C-67                                   June 2011

Circulation                                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
               Policy C 2.2.9: Medians constructed in arterial streets should be provided with
               paved crossover points for emergency vehicles, where deemed necessary by the
               Fire Department.
               Policy C 2.2.10: The street system design, including block length, width,
               horizontal and vertical alignments, curves, and other design characteristics,
               should function safely and effectively without the subsequent need for excessive
               traffic control devices to slow or deflect traffic.
               Policy C 2.2.11: For intersections of collector or larger streets, four-way
               intersections are preferred over offset intersections.
               Policy C 2.2.12: Private streets, other than driveways and alleyways typically
               associated with multi-family development, should be constructed to standards for
               public rights-of-way, except as otherwise approved by the reviewing agency.
               Policy C 2.2.13: Protect the community character of rural areas by requiring use
               of rural street standards, which may include reduced pavement width, reduced
               street lighting to protect night skies, rolled curbs or no curbs and no sidewalks.
               Policy C 2.2.14: Streets should be designed in context with the terrain and the
               natural and built features of the area, but excessively circuitous streets should be
               avoided to minimize unnecessary vehicle, bicycle and pedestrian mileage.
               Policy C 2.2.15: Adopt consistent standards for implementation of Americans
               with Disabilities Act requirements such as curb ramp design and accessible
               pedestrian signals.
        Objective C 2.3: Balance the needs of congestion relief with community values for
        aesthetics and quality of life.
               Policy C 2.3.1: Enhance community appearance through landscaping, street
               lighting, street furniture, bus shelters and benches, and other aspects of
               streetscape design within the right-of-way, where appropriate.
               Policy C 2.3.2: Encourage unified treatment of arterial streets within both City
               and County areas, while permitting flexibility of streetscape design between
               neighborhoods and districts to preserve village character.
               Policy C 2.3.3: When evaluating road widening projects, consider the impacts of
               additional traffic, noise, and fumes on adjacent land uses and use context-
               sensitive design techniques where appropriate.
               Policy C 2.3.4: Protect residential neighborhoods from cut-through traffic using
               local streets to avoid congested arterials, through use of street design and traffic
               control devices.
        Objective C 2.4: Allow trucks to utilize only major and secondary highways as through
        routes, to minimize impacts of truck traffic on surface streets and residential
        neighborhoods.
June 2011                                 C-68
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                      Circulation
                Policy C 2.4.1: Require design of pavement sections on major and secondary
                highways to account for truck traffic, to prevent excessive pavement deterioration
                from truck use.
                Policy C 2.4.2: Establish adequate setbacks from major and secondary
                highways for sensitive receptors and sensitive uses, so as to minimize impacts
                on these individuals and uses from noise and air pollution caused by truck traffic.
                Policy C 2.4.3: Prohibit through truck traffic on designated scenic routes.
                Policy C 2.4.4: Adopt regulations for truck parking on public streets, to avoid
                impacts to residential neighborhoods.
        Objective C 2.5: Consider the needs for emergency access in transportation planning.
                Policy C 2.5.1: Maintain a current evacuation plan as part of emergency
                response planning.
                Policy C 2.5.2: Ensure that new development is provided with adequate
                emergency and/or secondary access for purposes of evacuation and emergency
                response; require two points of ingress and egress for every subdivision or phase
                thereof, except as otherwise approved for small subdivisions where physical
                constraints preclude a second access point.
                Policy C 2.5.3: Require provision of visible street name signs and addresses on
                all development to aid in emergency response.
                Policy C 2.5.4: Provide directional signage to Interstate 5 and State Route 14 at
                key intersections in the Valley, to assist emergency evacuation operations.
        Objective C 2.6: Ensure that funding and phasing of new transportation improvements
        is coordinated with growth.
                Policy C 2.6.1:       Require that new development construct transportation
                improvements or provide its fair share of the cost of transportation such
                improvements, and ensure that required improvements or in-lieu contributions
                are in place to support the development prior to occupancy.
                Policy C 2.6.2: Evaluate the feasibility of establishing a joint City/County
                Intelligent Transportation Management System (ITMS) impact fee for new
                development that is unable to otherwise mitigate its impacts to the roadway
                system through implementation of the adopted Highway Plan.
                Policy C 2.6.3: Coordinate with Caltrans and other local, regional, state and
                federal agencies in identifying and implementing funding alternatives for the
                Valley’s transportation systems.
                Policy C 2.6.4: Coordinate road construction with improvements to other utility
                systems in the right-of-way.
                                                 C-69                                   June 2011

Circulation                                                      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
        Objective C 2.7: Pursue the safety, efficiency and tranquility of existing and future
        residential streets by properly planning for local, collector and arterial roadways and
        limiting residential driveway access onto collector or arterial roadways.
                Policy C.2.7.1: To the extent feasible, plan residential subdivisions with sufficient
                arterial and non-loaded collector streets so that projected traffic volumes on local
                residential streets with unrestricted driveway access remains below 2000 ADT.
                Policy C.2.7.2: Discourage direct driveway access onto collector streets within
                single family residential subdivisions. Limit driveway access from multi-family
                residential and commercial development onto collector streets to the extent
                possible.
                Policy C.2.7.3: Where feasible, design new residential subdivisions with more
                than 200 residential units with direct access to an existing arterial roadway or an
                existing non loaded collector street. Discourage new large residential
                subdivisions from having primary access through local neighborhood streets.
Vehicle Trip Reduction
Goal C 3: Reduction of vehicle trips and emissions through effective management of travel
demand, transportation systems, and parking.
        Objective C 3.1: Promote the use of travel demand management strategies to reduce
        vehicle trips.
                Policy C 3.1.1: In evaluating new development projects, require trip reduction
                measures as feasible to relieve congestion and reduce air pollution from vehicle
                emissions.
                Policy C 3.1.2: Promote home-based businesses and live-work units as a
                means of reducing home-to-work trips.
                Policy C 3.1.3: Promote the use of flexible work schedules and telecommuting
                to reduce home to work trips.
                Policy C 3.1.4: Promote the use of employee incentives to encourage
                alternative travel modes to work.
                Policy C 3.1.5: Promote the use of van pools, car pools, and shuttles to
                encourage trip reduction.
                Policy C 3.1.6: Promote the provision of showers and lockers within businesses
                and employment centers, in order to encourage opportunities for employees to
                bicycle to work.
                Policy C 3.1.7: Encourage special event center operators to advertise and offer
                discounted transit passes with event tickets.
June 2011                                 C-70
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                         Circulation
                Policy C 3.1.8: Encourage special event center operators to advertise and offer
                discount on-site parking incentives to carpooling patrons, with four or more
                persons per vehicle.
        Objective C 3.2: Encourage reduction in airborne emissions from vehicles through use
        of clean vehicles and transportation system management.
                Policy C 3.2.1: Adopt clean vehicle purchase policies for City and County fleets.
                Policy C 3.2.2: Continue to enhance signal timing and synchronization to allow
                for free traffic flow, minimizing idling and vehicle emissions.
                Policy C 3.2.3: When available and feasible, provide opportunities and
                infrastructure to support use of alternative fuel vehicles and travel devices.
                Policy C 3.2.4: The City/County will encourage new commercial and retail
                developments to provide prioritized parking for electric vehicles and vehicles
                using alternative fuels.
        Objective C 3.3: Make more efficient use of parking and maximize economic use of
        land, while decreasing impervious surfaces in urban areas, through parking
        management strategies.
                Policy C 3.3.1: Evaluate parking standards and reduce requirements where
                appropriate, based on data showing that requirements are in excess of demand.
                Policy C 3.3.2: In pedestrian-oriented, high density mixed use districts, provide
                for common parking facilities to serve the district, where appropriate.
                Policy C 3.3.3: Promote shared use of parking facilities between businesses
                with complementary uses and hours, where feasible.
                Policy C 3.3.4: Within transit-oriented development projects, provide incentives
                such as higher floor area ratio and/or lower parking requirements for commercial
                development that provides transit and ride-share programs.
                Policy C 3.3.5: Encourage convenient short-term parking in high-activity areas,
                and all day parking at the periphery of the development areas.
                Policy C 3.3.6: In the development review process, prioritize direct pedestrian
                access between building entrances, sidewalks and transit stops, by placing
                parking behind buildings where possible, to the sides of buildings when
                necessary, and always away from street intersections.
                Policy C 3.3.7: Create parking benefit districts which invest meter revenues in
                pedestrian infrastructure and other public amenities wherever feasible.
                Policy C 3.3.8: Establish performance pricing of street parking, so that the costs
                are enough to promote frequent turnover with a goal to keep 15 percent of
                spaces empty at all times, wherever feasible.
                                                   C-71                                    June 2011
Circulation                                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Rail Service
Goal C 4: Rail service to meet regional and inter-regional needs for convenient, cost-effective
travel alternatives, which are fully integrated into the Valley’s circulation systems and land use
patterns.
        Objective C 4.1: Maximize the effectiveness of Metrolink’s commuter rail service
        through provision of support facilities and land planning.
                Policy C 4.1.1: Develop permanent Metrolink facilities with an expanded bus
                transfer station and additional park-and-ride spaces at the Via Princessa station,
                or other alternative location as deemed appropriate to meet the travel needs of
                residents on the Valley’s east side.
                Policy C 4.1.2: Coordinate with other agencies to facilitate extension of a
                passenger rail line from the Santa Clarita Station to Ventura County, which may
                be used for Metrolink service.
                Policy C 4.1.3: Continue to expand and improve commuter services, including
                park-and-ride lots, bicycle parking and storage, and waiting facilities, at all
                Metrolink stations.
                Policy C 4.1.4: Encourage the preservation of abandoned railroad right-of-way
                for future transportation facilities, where appropriate.
                Policy C 4.1.5: Work with other agencies to increase rail efficiency and public
                safety through street and track improvements, and grade separations where
                needs are identified.
                Policy C 4.1.6: Provide incentives to promote transit-oriented development near
                rail stations.
                Policy C 4.1.7: Facilitate coordination of planning for any future high speed
                regional rail systems in the Valley with Metrolink services.
                Policy C 4.1.8: Minimize impacts to passenger rail service and the community
                from any proposed increase to freight rail service through the Valley.
        Objective C 4.2: Access to a high speed rail system connecting the Santa Clarita
        Valley with other regions, and other regional rail service connections.
                Policy C 4.2.1: Continue to work with the Orange Line Development Authority
                (OLDA) to plan for development of an environmentally sensitive, high speed
                transportation system with a route through the Santa Clarita Valley, including a
                regional transit hub with associated infrastructure that would provide connections
                to the Los Angeles Basin, Palmdale Regional Airport, and other destinations.
                Policy C 4.2.2: Coordinate with other agencies as needed to facilitate planning
                for other high-speed rail alternatives in the Santa Clarita Valley.
June 2011                                 C-72

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                         Circulation
               Policy C 4.2.3: Promote and encourage the expansion of Amtrak Rail Service to
               the Santa Clarita Valley.
Bus Transit
Goal C 5: Bus transit service as a viable choice for all residents, easily accessible and serving
destinations throughout the Valley.
        Objective C 5.1: Ensure that street patterns and design standards accommodate transit
        needs.
               Policy C 5.1.1: Require that new subdivisions provide for two means of access
               into and out of the development, in order to provide for transit access, where
               feasible.
               Policy C 5.1.2: For private gated communities, require the developer to
               accommodate bus access through the entry gate, or provide bus waiting facilities
               at the project entry with pedestrian connections to residential streets, where
               appropriate.
               Policy C 5.1.3: Consider the operational characteristics of buses when
               determining acceptable street designs, including grades and turning radii.
               Policy C 5.1.4: Provide for location of bus stops within ¼-mile of residential
               neighborhoods, and include paved bus waiting areas in street improvement plans
               wherever appropriate and feasible.
               Policy C 5.1.5: Locate and design bus turnouts to limit traffic obstruction and to
               provide sufficient merging length for the bus to re-enter the traffic flow.
               Policy C 5.1.6: Evaluate the feasibility of giving buses priority at signalized
               intersections to maintain transit service level standards, where appropriate.
        Objective C 5.2: Maximize the accessibility, safety, convenience, and appeal of transit
        stops.
               Policy C 5.2.1: Require paved waiting areas, accessible by paved walkways
               and reasonably direct pedestrian routes, for bus stops in new development; and
               provide for retrofitting of existing bus stops, where feasible and practicable.
               Policy C 5.2.2: Adopt and implement consistent design standards for use in
               both City and County areas for bus shelters, bus benches, trash receptacles,
               lighting, and other improvements for transit stops that are aesthetically pleasing
               and consistent with community character.
               Policy C 5.2.3: Adopt and implement common design standards for bus
               turnouts and merging lanes along arterial streets, in convenient, accessible
               locations.
               Policy C 5.2.4: Enhance way-finding signage along walkways and paseos to
               direct pedestrians to transit stops.
                                                  C-73                                     June 2011

Circulation                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                Policy C 5.2.5: Complementary transportation modes should be interconnected
                at intermodal transit centers, including provisions for bicycles on buses, bicycle
                parking at transit centers, and park-and-ride at transit stops.
        Objective C 5.3: Explore opportunities to improve and expand bus transit service.
                Policy C 5.3.1: Continue to provide fixed route service to significant activity
                areas and neighborhoods with moderate to high density, and serve low-density
                and rural areas with dial-a-ride, flexible fixed routes, or other transit services as
                deemed appropriate.
                Policy C 5.3.2: Promote concentrated development patterns in coordination with
                transit planning to maximize service efficiency and ridership.
                Policy C 5.3.3: Evaluate the feasibility of providing “fly-away” bus transit service
                to airports located at Burbank, Palmdale, and Los Angeles, and implement this
                program when warranted by demand.
                Policy C 5.3.4: Evaluate the feasibility of providing bus rapid transit (BRT) for
                key transit corridors when light-rail is not feasible or cost effective.
        Objective C 5.4: Provide adequate funding to expand transit services to meet the
        needs of new development in the Valley.
                Policy C 5.4.1: Establish transit impact fee rates that are based on the actual
                impacts of new development on the transit system, and regularly monitor and
                adjust these fees as needed to ensure adequate mitigation.
                Policy C 5.4.2: Evaluate the feasibility of establishing a joint City/County transit
                impact fee to equitably distribute the capital costs of transit system expansion to
                meet the needs of new development in both County and City areas of the Valley.
                Policy C 5.4.3: Seek funding for transit system expansion and improvement
                from all available sources, including local, state, and federal programs and
                grants.
Bikeways
Goal C 6: A unified and well-maintained bikeway system with safe and convenient routes for
commuting, recreational use and utilitarian travel, connecting communities and the region.
        Objective C 6.1: Adopt and implement a coordinated master plan for bikeways for the
        Valley, including both City and County areas, to make bicycling an attractive and feasible
        mode of transportation.
                Policy C 6.1.1: For recreational riders, continue to develop Class I bike paths,
                separated from the right-of-way, linking neighborhoods to open space and
                activity areas.
June 2011                                C-74

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Circulation
               Policy C 6.1.2: For long-distance riders and those who bicycle to work or
               services, provide striped Class II bike lanes within the right-of-way, with adequate
               delineation and signage, where feasible and appropriate.
               Policy C 6.1.3: Continue to acquire or reserve right-of-way and/or easements
               needed to complete the bicycle circulation system as development occurs.
               Policy C 6.1.4: Where inadequate right-of-way exists for Class I or II bikeways,
               provide signage for Class III bike routes or designate alternative routes as
               appropriate.
               Policy C 6.1.5: Plan for continuous bikeways to serve major destinations,
               including but not limited to regional shopping areas, college campuses, public
               buildings, parks, and employment centers.
        Objective C 6.2: Encourage provision of equipment and facilities to support the use of
        bicycles as an alternative means of travel.
               Policy C 6.2.1: Require bicycle parking, which can include bicycle lockers and
               sheltered areas at commercial sites and multi-family housing complexes for use
               by employees and residents, as well as customers and visitors.
               Policy C 6.2.2: Provide bicycle racks on transit vehicles to give bike-and-ride
               commuters the ability to transport their bicycles.
               Policy C 6.2.3: Promote the inclusion of services for bicycle commuters, such
               as showers and changing rooms, as part of the development review process for
               new development or substantial alterations of existing commercial or industrial
               uses, where appropriate.
Pedestrian Circulation
Goal C 7: Walkable communities, in which interconnected walkways provide a safe,
comfortable and viable alternative to driving for local destinations.
        Objective C 7.1: A continuous, integrated system of safe and attractive pedestrian
        walkways, paseos and trails linking residents to parks, open space, schools, services,
        and transit.
               Policy C 7.1.1: In reviewing new development proposals, consider pedestrian
               connections within and between developments as an integral component of the
               site design, which may include seating, shading, lighting, directional signage,
               accessibility, and convenience.
               Policy C 7.1.2: For existing walled subdivisions, extend pedestrian access to
               connect these neighborhoods to transit and services through public education
               and by facilitating retrofitted improvements where feasible.
               Policy C 7.1.3: Where feasible and practical, consider grade separated facilities
               to provide pedestrian connections across arterial streets, flood control channels,
               utility easements, and other barriers.
                                                 C-75                                     June 2011
Circulation                                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                Policy C 7.1.4: Identify and develop an improvement program to connect
                existing walkways and paseos to transit and services, where needed and
                appropriate.
                Policy C 7.1.5: In new commercial development, provide for direct, clearly
                delineated, and preferably landscaped pedestrian walkways from transit stops
                and parking areas to building entries, and avoid placement of uses (such as
                drive-through facilities) in locations that would obstruct pedestrian pathways.
                Policy C 7.1.6: Encourage placement of building entries in locations accessible
                to public sidewalks and transit.
                Policy C 7.1.7: Utilize pedestrian-oriented scale and design features in areas
                intended for pedestrian use.
                Policy C 7.1.8: Upgrade streets that are not pedestrian-friendly due to lack of
                sidewalk connections, safe street crossing points, vehicle sight distance, or other
                design deficiencies.
                Policy C 7.1.9: Promote pedestrian-oriented street design through traffic-
                calming measures where appropriate, which may include but are not limited to
                bulb-outs or chokers at intersections, raised crosswalks, refuge islands, striping,
                and landscaping.
                Policy C 7.1.10: Continue to expand and improve the Valley’s multi-use trail
                system to provide additional routes for pedestrian travel.
PART 3: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CIRCULATION ELEMENT
The City of Santa Clarita will implement the goals, objectives and policies of the Circulation
Element of the Santa Clarita Valley General Plan through the following actions.
City of Santa Clarita
City Task 1: Update and implement the Highway Plan
1.1     Amend the Highway Plan to reflect the OVOV Circulation Plan, consistent with the
        County’s Highway Plan for the Santa Clarita Valley.
1.2     Adopt the standard street cross sections in the Circulation Plan, consistent with the
        County’s street standards for the Santa Clarita Valley.
1.3     Ensure that all future street improvements conform to the adopted Highway Plan and
        street cross sections.
1.4     Continue to monitor traffic conditions within the planning area on an ongoing basis, and
        amend the Highway Plan and Circulation Element as needed to address changing needs
        and conditions.
June 2011                                  C-76

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                        Circulation
1.5     As part of the review process for proposed development projects, require traffic studies
        where appropriate to evaluate impacts to the roadway network, and require
        improvements as needed to maintain acceptable service levels.
1.6     Continue to coordinate with Los Angeles County and other regional agencies to ensure
        orderly phasing of roadway improvements with new development as it occurs.
1.7     Continue to improve traffic operations through signal upgrades, striping, synchronization,
        and other improvements where needed.
1.8     Provide directional signage where needed to facilitate efficient traffic movement through
        the Valley, including freeway directional signs to I-5 and SR 14 at key intersections to
        help lost travelers.
City Task 2: Update and implement master plans for trails
2.1     Adopt the Valleywide Bikeway Plan in the Circulation Element (as it may be amended
        from time to time).
2.2     Implement the City’s Non-Motorized Transportation Plan, adopted in 2008, as it may be
        amended from time to time.
2.3     Continue to require paseos, walkways, sidewalks, and trails within development projects
        as part of the approval process, consistent with adopted plans, special standards
        districts, and other applicable policies and regulations.
2.4     Through the design review process, require that development projects include facilities
        to encourage use of non-motorized travel modes for commuters, where appropriate.
City Task 3: Implement circulation improvements through the Capital Improvement
Program
3.1     Annually update the Capital Improvement Program (CIP) to implement roadway
        improvements, trails, transit facilities, and other circulation facilities identified in the
        Circulation Element.
3.2     Annually review the CIP to ensure consistency with the General Plan including
        Circulation Element.
3.3     Ensure consistency with the Circulation Element for all transportation improvement
        projects, including right-of-way acquisition and roadway design.
City Task 4: Promote multi-modal transportation solutions to regional circulation needs
4.1     During development review of new projects, require integration of multi-modal circulation
        systems as part of project designs, to the extent feasible.
4.2     Acquire right-of-way where needed for multi-modal transportation improvements.
4.3     Through the land planning process, including preparation and review of specific plans,
        promote mixed uses and higher densities in proximity to transit centers (including rail
        stations and bus transfer facilities).
                                                 C-77                                     June 2011

Circulation                                                      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
4.4     Through the regulatory and development review process, evaluate options for reducing
        the amount of land occupied by vehicle parking, which may include alternative parking
        options or flexible standards such as shared parking and off-site parking, where
        appropriate.
4.5     In coordination with Los Angeles County, develop and implement uniform or compatible
        design standards for bus turnouts, benches, shelters, lighting, and furniture at bus stops
        within the Santa Clarita Valley.
4.6     Plan for expansion of permanent commuter transit facilities to meet the City’s needs,
        including park-and-ride lots, Metrolink stations, and ancillary facilities, incorporating
        these facilities in the CIP for programming of funds for site acquisition and construction.
4.7     Provide adequate funds for maintenance of commuter facilities in a safe and clean
        condition.
City Task 5: Seek funding opportunities from all available sources for circulation
improvements
5.1     Support construction of regional transportation improvements through joint funding
        programs and other efforts as appropriate.
5.2     Continue to actively participate on regional boards and commissions that address
        circulation needs and improvements.
5.3     Maintain consistency with regional plans, and complete all local plans needed to
        compete successfully for funding.
5.4     Continue to require new development to fund its fair share of transportation
        improvements, which may include construction or payment of impact fees.
5.5      The City and County shall work with Metro and Caltrans to study appropriate
         methodologies for determining new developments’ project-level and cumulative impacts
         on freeways and how best to assess them for their fair share contributions to mitigate
         project-level impacts.
June 2011                                  C-78

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                         Noise
                                       NOISE ELEMENT
                                           JUNE, 2011
PART 1: BACKGROUND AND NOISE ISSUES
A. Historical Context
The noise environment within the OVOV planning area has evolved in a manner consistent with
historical development patterns of this Valley. Early land use patterns were primarily rural in
nature while incorporating limited residential development including support services typically
found in suburban communities.          These residential neighborhoods were predominantly
supported by employment centers located outside the OVOV planning area including the San
Fernando Valley and downtown Los Angeles. Neighborhoods were dispersed in a manner
consistent with an emerging suburban community while maintaining a significant portion of the
rural character resulting in corresponding noise levels.
Early forecast models developed by SCAG projected development within the OVOV planning
area to result in a more diverse and robust community. This community was to include a
residential base that integrated centers of employment and economic diversity that would result
in an increasingly self sustaining community. In 1967, the first residents of the newly master
planned community of Valencia relocated to the area. Additional noise sources formed with the
development of Valencia and the enhancement of the newly developing community including
the increased use of Interstate 5 and State Route 14 in addition to the established railway. This
development brought new residents and increased employment opportunities including the
development of the Valencia Industrial Center.
Historical sources of noise within the Santa Clarita Valley centered on unique land uses such as
Magic Mountain amusement park, Saugus Speedway, the operation of the Whittaker Bermite
site, and movie ranch filming activities. More recently, event-specific noise generators such as
the Amgen Tour of California, Cowboy Festival and numerous other community based events
and activities have created additional noise generators that have added texture to the present
noise environment.
In 1987, the City of Santa Clarita was incorporated to include portions of the communities of
Canyon Country, Newhall, Saugus, and Valencia. Acknowledging various preferences in
residential lifestyles, subsequent development focused on the maintenance of distinct
neighborhoods such as Placerita Canyon and Sand Canyon as exemplified by the creation of
Special Standards Districts primarily focused on maintaining the rural and equestrian nature of
these communities. Likewise, new developments focused on providing lifestyle amenities
including ease of access to recreational opportunities and retail shopping centers. This
diversified approach established a variation of ambient noise within distinct living environments
that created localized noise generators throughout the OVOV planning area. Therefore, the
noise environment varies greatly depending on location. The subjectivity associated with
acceptable noise levels has created lifestyle environments that are exemplified by a variety of
desirable neighborhoods.
                                                N-1                                    June, 2011
Noise                                                            City of Santa Clarita General Plan
The OVOV General Plan update acknowledges the evolution of neighborhoods within the
planning area by encouraging the concentration of noise generating uses and minimizing the
sprawl of these uses throughout the community landscape. The Land Use Element includes the
Mixed Use (MX) designation that offer a diverse range of complementary land uses, in
appropriate locations throughout the planning area that are served by public transit and in
proximity to supportive uses and services. Fulfillment of mixed use development creates a
localization of noise generators concentrating impacts into those portions of the planning area
where resulting noise levels are most appropriate thus facilitating the goals and objectives
identified within the Noise Element.
B. Purpose and Intent of the Noise Element
Noise is often defined as unwanted or undesired sound. Excessive noise levels are not only a
potential annoyance but can constitute a health threat, potentially resulting in temporary or
permanent hearing loss and mental distress. Physical health, psychological well-being, social
cohesion, property values, and economic productivity can all be affected by excessive amounts
of noise. The noise environment is an integral component of the quality of life for Santa Clarita
Valley residents.
The Noise Element of the General Plan is a comprehensive program for including noise
management in the planning process, providing a tool for planners to use in achieving and
maintaining land uses that are compatible with existing and future environmental noise levels.
The Noise Element identifies current noise conditions within the planning area, and projects
future noise impacts resulting from continued growth allowed by the Land Use Element. The
element identifies noise-sensitive land uses and noise sources, and defines areas of noise
impact for the purpose of developing programs to ensure that residents in the Santa Clarita
Valley will be protected from excessive noise intrusion. As development proposals are reviewed
in the future, the City and County will evaluate each proposal with respect to the Noise Element
to ensure that noise impacts are reduced through planning and project design. Through
implementation of the policies and programs of the Noise Element, current and future adverse
noise impacts will be reduced or avoided in order to protect the general health, safety, and
welfare of the community.
C. Background
The issues in the Noise Element include those set forth in California Government Code Section
65302(f), which requires that the Noise Element of the General Plan “identify and appraise noise
problems in the community.” Noise elements are required to address noise generated from
highways and freeways, arterials and major streets, rail operations and transit, aviation and
airports, industrial plants, and other stationary noise sources. Noise contours must be shown for
all these sources, and the noise contours are to be used as a guide for establishing a pattern of
land uses that minimizes the exposure of residents to excessive noise. The California Office of
Planning and Research has developed guidelines to assist local agencies in the development of
a noise element. This Noise Element has been prepared in conformance with the State’s
General Plan Guidelines and Government Code requirements. The Element quantifies the
community noise environment in terms of noise exposure contours for both near and long-term
levels of growth and traffic activity.
June, 2011                             N-2

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                           Noise
The Noise Element is directly related to the Land Use and Circulation Elements, because traffic
on highways and arterial roadways has been identified as a major source of noise that has the
potential to affect sensitive land uses. Within the context of a noise analysis, sensitive land
uses are those in which persons occupying the use are particularly sensitive to the effects of
noise, including housing, schools, medical facilities, libraries, social care facilities, and similar
facilities. The Noise Element contains policies that are intended to protect sensitive land uses
from noise that exceeds recommended levels. Analysis of noise from mobile sources, including
traffic on streets and highways, airport activity, and rail operations, has been completed for the
Noise Element based on projected traffic volumes identified in the Circulation Element. The
Noise Element is consistent with policies of the Safety Element and Housing Element because it
contains policies and guidelines designed to protect residents from noise exceeding
recommended levels. The Noise Element is also consistent with the Conservation and Open
Space Element and Economic Development Element, because policies in the Noise Element
address noise compatibility between sensitive receptors adjacent to parks, sports and recreation
uses, and entertainment centers.
The City of Santa Clarita adopted a Noise Element as part of the first comprehensive General
Plan on June 25, 1991, and subsequently amended the Noise Element on May 23, 2000. The
2000 Noise Element contained guidelines for acceptable noise levels in residential, commercial,
and industrial areas, along with goals and policies designed to protect residents from excessive
noise levels. The City has also adopted provisions in the Municipal Code establishing noise
standards for various uses and circumstances. Chapter 11.40 of the City’s Municipal Code
contains restrictions on “noisy street hawking and advertising.” Chapter 11.44 (the City’s Noise
Ordinance) establishes noise limits for residential, commercial and manufacturing zones during
daytime and nighttime hours, and addresses noise from machinery, construction, and
amplification equipment. The stated purpose of this code section is, in part, “to prohibit
unnecessary, excessive and annoying noises from all sources,” and the Ordinance contains
provisions for enforcement and violations.
The Board of Supervisors adopted the first Noise Element for Los Angeles County in 1974.
The County also regulates noise in Chapter 12.08 of the County Code, which sets forth
acceptable exterior noise levels for noise sensitive areas and for residential, commercial, and
industrial uses within the County’s jurisdiction. The County’s first noise control ordinance was
adopted in 1977. In 2001, the County amended Title 13 of the County Code to prohibit loud,
unnecessary and unusual noise that disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood. In
addition to these Countywide provisions, local communities throughout the County may address
local noise concerns in their individual Area, Community or Neighborhood plans. Within
unincorporated portions of the Santa Clarita Valley, noise policies will be adopted through the
Santa Clarita Valley Area Plan, developed in conjunction with the One Valley One Vision
planning effort by the City of Santa Clarita and the County of Los Angeles.
This Noise Element update was prepared in conjunction with a noise analysis and technical
report prepared by Mestre Greve Associates, a noise consultant retained to assist with the
element. Their final report, entitled One Valley One Vision Noise Element of the General Plan
(Technical Appendix), was used as the primary reference and is included as an appendix to the
Element. This Technical Appendix contains detailed information on the methodology, analysis,
and sources of information referenced in the Noise Element.
                                                 N-3                                      June, 2011

Noise                                                                    City of Santa Clarita General Plan
D. Fundamental Concepts for Noise Analysis
This section of the Noise Element presents background information on the characteristics of
noise, in order to provide an understanding of how noise levels are measured for planning
purposes.
Sound Level and Frequency
Sound is produced when an action causes air pressure to vibrate in all directions around the
source, similar to waves produced in a pond when a stone is thrown into the water. When
people hear sounds, they are actually detecting the changes in air pressure on their eardrums.
Sound can be described technically in terms of the sound pressure (amplitude) and frequency
(similar to pitch). Sound pressure is a direct measure of the magnitude of a sound without
consideration for other factors that may influence its perception.
The range of sound pressures that occur in the environment is so large that it is convenient to
express these pressures as sound pressure levels on a logarithmic scale, which compresses
the wide range of sound pressures to a more usable range of numbers. The standard unit of
measurement of sound is the decibel (dB), which describes the pressure of a sound relative to a
reference pressure.
The frequency (pitch) of a sound is expressed as Hertz (Hz), or cycles per second. The normal
audible frequency for young adults is 20 Hz to 20,000 Hz.1 Community noise, including aircraft
and motor vehicles, typically ranges between 50 Hz and 5,000 Hz. The human ear is not
equally sensitive to all frequencies, with some frequencies judged to be louder for a given signal
than others. As a result of this, various methods of frequency weighting have been developed.
The most common weighting is the A-weighted noise curve (dBA). The A-weighted decibel
scale (dBA) performs this compensation by discriminating against frequencies in a manner
approximating the sensitivity of the human ear. In the A-weighted decibel, everyday sounds
normally range from 30 dBA (very quiet) to 100 dBA (very loud). Most community noise
analyses are based upon the A-weighted decibel scale. Examples of various sound
environments, expressed in dBA, are presented in Exhibit N-1.
Propagation of Noise
Outdoor sound levels decrease as the distance from the source increases, and as a result of
wave divergence, atmospheric absorption, and ground attenuation. Sound radiating from a
source in a homogeneous and undisturbed manner travels in spherical waves. As the sound
wave travels away from the source, the sound energy is dispersed over a greater area,
decreasing the sound power of the wave. Spherical spreading of the sound wave reduces the
noise level at a rate of 6 dB per doubling of the distance.
Atmospheric absorption also influences the sound levels received by the observer. The greater
the distance traveled, the greater the influence of the atmosphere and the resultant fluctuations
in sound. Atmospheric absorption becomes important at distances of greater than 1,000 feet.
The degree of absorption varies depending on the frequency of the sound as well as the
humidity and temperature of the air. For example, atmospheric absorption is lowest (i.e., sound
carries farther) at high humidity and high temperatures. Turbulence and gradients of wind,
1
  Young adults are considered a good baseline population for measuring normal hearing, because
hearing is typically at its best within this group and deteriorates with age.
June, 2011                                  N-4
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                      Noise
temperature, and humidity also play a role in determining the degree of sound attenuation.
Certain conditions, such as air temperature inversions, can channel or focus the sound waves,
resulting in higher noise levels than would result from simple spherical spreading. Absorption
effects in the atmosphere vary with frequency, with higher frequencies more readily absorbed
than lower frequencies. Over large distances, the lower frequencies become the dominant
sound as the higher frequencies are attenuated. More information on atmospheric conditions
affecting the noise environment is included the Technical Appendix. However, for purposes of
land use planning based on consideration of the effects of continuous noise sources, local
weather conditions are typically not a factor in land use decisions because they are changeable
and intermittent.
                                                 N-5                                 June, 2011
Noise                                                   City of Santa Clarita General Plan
           Exhibit N-1: Typical Sound Levels in A-Weighted Decibels
June, 2011                       N-6
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                        Noise
Duration of Sound
Annoyance from a noise event increases with increased duration of the noise event; in general,
the longer the noise event lasts, the more annoying it is. The "effective duration" of a sound is
the time between when a sound rises above the background sound level until it drops back
below the background level. Psycho-acoustic studies have determined the relationship between
duration and annoyance, and the amount that a sound must be reduced in order to be judged
equally annoying for an increased duration. Duration is an important factor in describing sound
in a community setting.
The relationship between duration and noise level is the basis of the equivalent energy principal
of sound exposure. Reducing the acoustic energy of a sound by one half results in a 3 dB
reduction. Doubling the duration of the sound increases the total energy of the event by 3 dB.
This equivalent energy principal is based on the premise that the potential for a noise to impact
a person is dependent on the total acoustical energy content of the noise. Defined in
subsequent sections of this element, noise metrics such as CNEL, DNL, LEQ and SENEL are
all based on the equal energy principle.
Change in Noise
The concept of change in ambient sound levels can be understood with an explanation of the
receptor’s reaction to sound. The human ear is a far better detector of relative differences in
sound levels than absolute values of levels. Under controlled laboratory conditions, listening to
a steady unwavering pure tone sound that can be changed to slightly different sound levels, a
person can just barely detect a sound level change of approximately one decibel for sounds in
the mid-frequency region. When ordinary noises are heard, a young healthy ear can detect
changes of two to three decibels. A five-decibel change is readily noticeable, while a 10 decibel
change is judged by most people as a doubling or a halving of the loudness of the sound. It is
typical in environmental documents to consider a 3 dB change as potentially discernable.
Masking Effect
The tendency for one sound to limit a listener from hearing another sound is known as the
masking effect. The presence of one sound effectively raises the threshold of audibility for the
second sound. For a signal to be heard, it must exceed the threshold of hearing for that
particular individual and exceed the masking threshold for the background noise.
The masking characteristics of sound depend on many factors, including the spectral
(frequency) characteristics of the two sounds, the sound pressure levels, and the relative start
time of the sounds. Masking effect is greatest when the frequencies of the two sounds are
similar or when low frequency sounds mask higher frequency sounds. High frequency sounds
do not easily mask low frequency sounds.
Factors Influencing Human Response to Sound
Many factors influence sound perception and annoyance. These factors include not only
physical characteristics of the sound, but also secondary influences such as sociological and
external factors. Molino, in the Handbook of Noise Control, describes human response to
sound in terms of both acoustic and non-acoustic factors. These factors are summarized in
Table N-1.
                                               N-7                                    June, 2011

Noise                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                   Table N-1: Factors Affecting Human Response to Noise
       Primary Acoustic Factors                   • Sound level
                                                  • Frequency
                                                  • Duration
       Secondary Acoustic Factors                 • Spectral complexity
                                                  • Fluctuations in sound level
                                                  • Fluctuations in frequency
                                                  • Rise-time of the noise
                                                  • Localization of noise source
       Non-Acoustic Factors                       • Physiology
                                                  • Adaptation and past experience
                                                  • How the listener’s activity affects
                                                      annoyance
                                                  • Predictability of when a noise will
                                                      occur
                                                  • Whether the noise is necessary
                                                  • Individual differences and
                                                      personality
               Source: C. Harris, 1979
Sound rating scales are developed in reaction to the factors affecting human response to sound.
Nearly all of these factors are relevant in describing how sounds are perceived in the
community. Many non-acoustic parameters play a prominent role in affecting individual
response to noise. Background sound, an additional acoustic factor not specifically listed, is
also important in describing sound in rural settings. Researchers have identified the effects of
personal and situational variables on noise annoyance, and have identified a clear association
of reported annoyance and various other individual perceptions or beliefs. Thus, it is important
to recognize that non-acoustic factors as well as acoustic factors contribute to human response
to noise.
Sound Rating Scales
The description, analysis, and reporting of community sound levels is made difficult by the
complexity of human response to sound, and the large number of sound-rating scales and
metrics developed to describe acoustic effects. Various rating scales have been developed to
approximate the human subjective assessment to the "loudness" or "noisiness" of a sound.
Noise metrics have also been developed to account for additional parameters such as duration
of sound, and the cumulative effect of multiple noise events.
Noise metrics are categorized as single event metrics and cumulative metrics. Single event
metrics describe the noise from individual events, such as one aircraft flyover. Cumulative
metrics describe the noise in terms of the total noise exposure throughout the day. Noise
metrics used in this study are described below.
June, 2011                           N-8

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                             Noise
Single Event Metrics
    •   Frequency Weighted Metrics (dBA). In order to simplify the measurement and
        computation of sound loudness levels, frequency weighted networks have obtained wide
        acceptance. The A-weighting (dBA) scale has become the most prominent of these
        scales and is widely used in community noise analysis. Its advantages are that it has
        shown good correlation with community response and is easily measured. The metrics
        used in the Noise Element are all based on the dBA scale.
    •   Maximum Noise Level or Lmax is the highest noise level reached during a noise event.
        For example, as an aircraft approaches, the sound of the aircraft begins to rise above
        ambient noise levels. The closer the aircraft gets the louder it is, until the aircraft is at its
        closest point directly overhead. Then, as the aircraft passes, the noise level decreases
        until the sound level again settles to ambient levels. Such a history of a flyover is plotted
        at the top of Exhibit N-2. It is this metric to which people generally instantaneously
        respond when an aircraft flyover or a loud vehicle like a truck or motorcycle passes by.
    •   Single Event Noise Exposure Level (SENEL) or Sound Exposure Level (SEL) is
        computed from dBA sound levels, and is used to quantify the total noise associated with
        an event such as an aircraft overflight or a train pass-by. Referring again to the top of
        Exhibit N-2, the shaded area, or the area within 10 dB of the maximum noise level, is the
        area from which the SENEL is computed. The SENEL value is the integration of all the
        acoustic energy contained within the event. Speech and sleep interference research
        can be assessed relative to SENEL data. The SENEL metric takes into account the
        maximum noise level of the event and the duration of the event. Single event metrics
        are a convenient method for describing noise from individual aircraft events. This metric
        is useful in that airport noise models contain aircraft noise curve data based upon the
        SENEL metric. In addition, cumulative noise metrics such as LEQ, CNEL and DNL can
        be computed from SENEL data.
Cumulative Metrics
Cumulative noise metrics assess community response to noise by including the loudness of the
noise, the duration of the noise, the total number of noise events, and the time of day these
events occur into one single number rating scale.
    •   Equivalent Noise Level (Leq) is the sound level corresponding to a steady-state A-
        weighted sound level containing the same total energy as several SEL events during a
        given sample period. Leq is the "energy" average noise level during the time period of
        the sample. It is based on the observation that the potential for noise annoyance is
        dependent on the total acoustical energy content of the noise. This is graphically
        illustrated in the middle graph of Exhibit N-2. Leq can be measured for any time period,
        but is typically measured for 15 minutes, 1 hour or 24-hours. Leq for a one-hour period
        is used by the Federal Highway Administration for assessing highway noise impacts.
        Leq for one hour is called Hourly Noise Level (HNL) in the California Airport Noise
        Regulations and is used to develop Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) values
        for aircraft operations.
                                                  N-9                                      June, 2011

Noise                                                   City of Santa Clarita General Plan
          Exhibit N-2: Single and Cumulative Noise Metric Definitions
Source: Mestre Greve Associates, 1998
June, 2011                       N-10
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                          Noise
     •   Community Noise Equivalent Level, or CNEL is a 24-hour, time-weighted energy
         average noise level based on the A-weighted decibel. It is a measure of the overall
         noise experienced during an entire day. The term “time-weighted” refers to the penalties
         attached to noise events occurring during certain sensitive time periods. In the CNEL
         scale, noise occurring between the hours of 7 p.m. and 10 p.m. is penalized by
         approximately 5 dB. This penalty accounts for the greater potential for noise to cause
         communication interference during these hours, as well as typically lower ambient noise
         levels during these hours. Noise that takes place during the night (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.) is
         penalized by 10 dB. This penalty was selected to attempt to account for the higher
         sensitivity to noise in the nighttime, and the expected further decrease in background
         noise levels that typically occur in the nighttime.
         CNEL is graphically illustrated at the bottom of Exhibit N-2. Examples of various noise
         environments in terms of CNEL are presented in Exhibit N-3. The State’s General Plan
         Guidelines specify the use of CNEL or Ldn by local planning agencies in preparation of
         the General Plan Noise Element for purposes of land use compatibility planning. This
         element uses CNEL for that purpose.
     •   The Daily Noise Level (DNL) index is very similar to CNEL, but does not include the
         evening (7 p.m. to 10 p.m.) penalty that is included in CNEL. It does include the
         nighttime (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.) penalty. Typically, DNL is about 1 dB lower than CNEL,
         although the difference may be greater if there is an abnormal concentration of noise
         events in the 7 p.m. to 10 p.m. time period. DNL is specified for use in all states except
         California.
     •   L(%), Lmax and Lmin are statistical methods of describing noise which accounts for
         variance in noise levels throughout a given measurement period. L(%) is a way of
         expressing the noise level exceeded for a percentage of time in a given measurement
         period. For example, since five minutes is 25% of 20 minutes, L(25) is the noise level
         that is equal to or exceeded for five minutes in a 20-minute measurement period. It is
         L(%) that is used for most Noise Ordinance standards. Lmax represents the loudest
         noise level that is measured. The Lmax only occurs for a fraction of a second with all
         the other noise less than the Lmax level. Lmin represents the quietest noise level during
         a noise measurement. All other noise during the measurement period is louder than the
         Lmin.
E. Health Effects of Noise
Noise, often described as unwanted sound, is known to have several adverse effects on
humans. From these known adverse effects of noise, criteria have been established to help
protect the public health and safety and prevent disruption of certain human activities. These
criteria are based on effects of noise on people such as hearing loss (not a factor with typical
community noise), communication interference, sleep interference, physiological responses,
and annoyance. Each of these potential noise impacts on people is briefly discussed below.
                                                  N-11                                  June, 2011

Noise                                                      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
             Exhibit N-3: Examples of Typical Outdoor CNEL Levels
Source: Adapted from “Information on Levels of Environmental Noise Requisite to
Protect Public Health and Welfare With an Adequate Margin of Safety”, EPA, 1974
June, 2011                         N-12

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Noise
Hearing Loss
Hearing loss is generally not a concern in community noise problems, even very near a major
airport or a major freeway. The potential for noise induced hearing loss is more commonly
associated with occupational noise exposures in heavy industry, very noisy work environments
with long term exposure, or certain very loud recreational activities such as target shooting,
motorcycle or car racing. The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) identifies
a noise exposure limit of 90 dBA for eight hours per day to protect workers from hearing loss
(higher limits are allowed for shorter duration exposures). Noise levels in neighborhoods, even
in very noisy neighborhoods, are not sufficiently loud to cause hearing loss.
Communication Interference
Communication interference is one of the primary concerns in environmental noise problems,
and includes speech interference and interference with activities such as watching television.
Normal conversational speech is in the range of 60 to 65 dBA, and any noise in this range or
louder may interfere with speech. There are various methods of describing speech interference
as a function of distance between speaker and listener and voice level.
Sleep Interference
Sleep interference is a major noise concern in noise assessment and is most critical during
nighttime hours. Sleep disturbance is one of the major causes of annoyance due to community
noise. Noise can make it difficult to fall asleep, create momentary disturbances of natural sleep
patterns by causing shifts from deep to lighter stages, and cause awakening. Noise may even
cause awakening that a person may not be able to recall.
Extensive research has been conducted on the effect of noise on sleep disturbance, with
varying results. Recommended values for desired sound levels in residential bedroom space
range from 25 to 45 dBA, with 35 to 40 dBA being the norm. In 1981, the National Association
of Noise Control Officials published data on the probability of sleep disturbance with various
single event noise levels. Based on laboratory experiments conducted in the 1970s, this data
indicated that noise exposure from a 75 dBA interior noise level event will cause noise-induced
awakening in 30 percent of the cases. More information on these studies is contained in the
Technical Appendix.
Physiological Responses to Noise
Physiological responses are those measurable effects of noise on people that are realized as
changes in pulse rate, blood pressure, and other vital signs. While such effects can be induced
and observed, the extent to which these physiological responses cause harm or are a sign of
harm is unknown. Generally, physiological responses are a reaction to a loud short-term noise
such as a rifle shot or a very loud jet over flight.
                                                  N-13                               June, 2011
Noise                                                           City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Health effects from noise have been studied around the world for over thirty years. Scientists
have attempted to determine whether high noise levels can adversely affect human health in
ways other than auditory damage, which is well documented. These research efforts have
covered a broad range of potential impacts, from cardiovascular response to fetal weight and
mortality. While a relationship between noise and health effects seems plausible, it has yet to
be conclusively demonstrated by multiple scientific studies. Health effects from noise may also
be associated with a wide variety of other environmental stressors. Isolating the effects of
aircraft noise alone as a source of long-term physiological change has proved to be difficult in
studies completed to date. More information on these studies is contained in the Technical
Appendix.
Annoyance
Annoyance is the most difficult of all noise responses to describe. Annoyance is a very
individual characteristic and can vary widely from person to person. Noise that one person
considers tolerable can be unbearable to another of equal hearing capability. The level of
annoyance depends both on the characteristics of the noise (including loudness, frequency,
time, and duration), and how much activity interference (such as speech interference and sleep
interference) results from the noise. However, the level of annoyance is also a function of the
attitude of the receiver. Personal sensitivity to noise varies widely. It has been estimated that
two to 10 percent of the population is highly susceptible to annoyance from any noise not of
their own making, while approximately 20 percent are unaffected by noise. Attitudes may also
be affected by the relationship between the person affected and the source of noise, and
whether attempts have been made to abate the noise.
Various studies have correlated annoyance levels to CNEL levels, including a well-known
analysis developed by Theodore Schultz. Schultz developed a curve that estimates the percent
of a populace that can be expected to be annoyed by various DNL (CNEL in California) values
for residential land use with outdoor activity areas. At 65 dB DNL, the Schultz curve predicts
approximately 14% of the exposed population reporting themselves to be “highly annoyed.” At
60 dB DNL this decreases to approximately 8% of the population.
However, the Schultz curve and recent updates include data showing that some communities
report much higher percentages of population highly annoyed at these noise exposure levels. A
1981 study in Orange County of communities near John Wayne Airport found that populations in
some areas were approximately 5 dB CNEL more sensitive to noise than the average
population predicted by the Schultz curve. While the precise reasons for this increased noise
sensitivity were not identified, it is possible that non-acoustic factors, including the socio-
economic status of the surveyed population, may have played a role in increasing the sensitivity
of these communities during the period of the survey. Also, it should be noted that annoyance
levels have never been correlated statistically to single event noise exposure levels in airport
related studies. More information on these studies is contained in the Technical Appendix.
School Room Effects
Interference with classroom activities and learning from aircraft noise is an important
consideration, and the subject of much recent research. Studies from around the world indicate
that noise from vehicle traffic, railroads, and aircraft operations can have adverse effects on
reading ability, concentration, motivation, and long term learning retention among students who
June, 2011                            N-14

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                               Noise
are subjected to such noise2. A complicating factor in this research is the extent of background
noise from within the classroom itself. The studies that indicated the most adverse effects
examined cumulative noise levels equivalent to 65 CNEL or higher, and single event maximum
noise levels ranging from 85 to 95 dBA. In other studies, the level of noise was unstated or
ambiguous. According to these studies, a variety of adverse school room effects can be
expected from interior noise levels equal to or exceeding 65 CNEL and or 85 dBA SEL. Some
interference with classroom activities can be expected with noise events that interfere with
speech. As discussed in other sections of this element, speech interference begins at 65 dBA,
which is the level of normal conversation. Typical building design and construction materials
attenuate outdoor noise by 20 dBA with windows closed, and 12 dBA with windows open. Thus,
some interference of classroom activities can be expected at outdoor levels of 77 to 85 dBA.
F. Analysis of Existing and Future Noise Environment in the Planning Area
The Noise Element of the City of Santa Clarita General Plan, adopted in May 2000, identified
roadways as the primary source of noise in the City. While traffic noise is still the major noise
source in the City, other sources of noise have also become a concern. The City of Santa
Clarita and County of Los Angeles retained a noise consultant, Mestre Greve Associates, to
conduct a noise study for the One Valley One Vision planning effort. This study evaluated
existing noise conditions throughout the planning area, and projected future noise levels based
upon growth and traffic projections developed through the OVOV planning effort. This section of
the element describes existing sources of noise in the Santa Clarita Valley, and the
methodology used to analyze noise levels.
Methodology
Twenty sites in the OVOV planning area were selected for measurement of the existing noise
environment. A review of noise complaints, discussions with City and County staff, and
identification of major noise sources in the community provided the initial basis for development
of the community noise survey. The measurement locations were selected on the basis of
proximity to major noise sources and noise sensitivity of the land use. The measurement
locations are depicted in Exhibit N-4.
Noise measurements were made of the short-term Leq values. These measurements provide a
short ‘snapshot’ view of the noise environment. The noise measurements were made at an
average human receptor height of about five feet above the ground. Measurements were made
on August 7 and 8, 2007. The measurements were made with a Bruel & Kjaer Type 2236
Sound Level Meter, and calibrated every few hours. These noise measurement systems meet
the American National Standards Institute “Type 1” specifications, which is the most accurate for
community noise measurements. The meter and calibrator have current certification traceable
to the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).
2
  For more information, see “Effects of Aircraft Noise: Research Update on Selected Topics,” by Vincent
Mestre, published by the Transportation Research Board of the National Academies, 2008.
                                                    N-15                                     June, 2011

Noise                                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Results
The results of the noise measurements for existing conditions are shown in Exhibit N-5a, N-5b,
and N-5c. These figures also depict the date and time of the measurement. The cause of the
loudest event is identified and the most predominant noise source(s) are identified. The
quantities measured were the Equivalent Noise Level (Leq), the maximum noise level (Lmax)
and the minimum noise levels (Lmin).
June, 2011                        N-16
City of Santa Clarita General Plan Noise
                                         N-17 June, 2011
Noise                                                            City of Santa Clarita General Plan
When examining the noise data shown in Exhibit N-5, it is important to note that this data is
intended to identify noise levels over a broad range of the study area; it is not an assessment of
impacts at these sites. The noise levels measured cover a wide range of noise exposure
throughout the planning area. In almost all cases, the major sources of noise were motor
vehicles. The quietest environment was in a residential area in the foothills, where noise levels
were often below 50 dBA. The loudest events were generated by buses and trucks, and these
events would push the noise levels into the mid 80 dBA range. In general, aircraft noise,
industrial noise, and commercial noise sources did not appear to contribute significantly to the
noise levels measured.
A detailed discussion of the noise measurements at each of the 20 sites is presented in the
Noise Study prepared by Mestre Greve Associates in 2008, attached as the Technical
Appendix.
Noise Contour Maps
Noise contour maps of the planning area were prepared to show both existing and anticipated
future noise levels. The contour map of existing noise levels was based on field measurements
described above. Based on this data, the consultant concluded that the noise environment in
the Santa Clarita Valley is attributable primarily to roadways, which include both surface streets
and freeways. The Union Pacific Railroad, which runs from the southern portion of the City to
the center of the City and then directly to the east, is also a major noise source. The Agua Dulce
Airport is located in the study area; however, sporadic airplane or helicopter operations that
occur across the OVOV study area were not determined to be loud enough and consistent
enough to be substantial noise generators.
The noise contours for the planning area are presented in Exhibit N-6 for existing conditions as
of August, 2007, and in Exhibit N-7 for build-out conditions projected for the City’s General Plan
and the County’s Area Plan.. The existing contours are based on the existing conditions of
traffic volumes and other sources of noise in the community derived from field measurements.
The future contours represent a year 2030 scenario, based on traffic volumes estimated by a
traffic study performed by Austin Foust, a traffic consultant. The traffic noise contours, including
the average daily traffic, are also presented in a tabular form in the Appendix to the Noise
Element.
June, 2011                           N-18

     Noise
     City of Santa Clarita General Plan                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                                                                                         Noise
                         Exhibit N-5: Noise Measurement Results, August 2007
DRAFT – September, 2010                      N-19N-19                                June, 2011

Noise                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
The noise contours for arterial roadways and highways were generated using a mathematical
model developed by the Federal Highway Administration ("Traffic Noise Model," Version 2.5,
April 14, 2004). The Traffic Noise Model (TNM) uses traffic volume, vehicle mix, average
vehicle speed, roadway geometry, and sound propagation path characteristics to predict hourly
A-weighted Leq values adjacent to a road. Vehicle mix is reported in terms of the number of
automobiles, medium trucks, and heavy trucks. The truck categories are defined in the TNM
model by number of axles and weight. In order to compute a CNEL value for roadways, the
hourly data for a 24-hour period are used according to the CNEL formula. Vehicle distribution
over the 24 hour day must be known, including the percent of vehicles in the daytime period (7
a.m. to 7 p.m.), evening period (7 p.m. to 10 p.m.), and night period (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.). The
mix of automobiles, medium trucks and heavy trucks has an effect on noise levels. The
assumption used to model noise is based on known traffic mix data. For arterial roadways, the
vehicle mix data are obtained from mix data collected by the County of Orange during extensive
surveys of 53 intersections within the County. This survey is the most comprehensive
conducted in Southern California, and is considered representative for the vast majority of
arterial highways throughout Southern California. Caltrans conducts periodic traffic counts on
freeways and publishes them on their website (www.dot.ca.gov/hq/traffops/saferesr/trafdata/).
The various truck percentages reported by Caltrans were used for the projections on Interstate
5, State Route 14 and StateRoute 126. The traffic mix data used for the Noise Element are
contained in the Noise Study prepared for the project by Mestre Greve Associates, included as
the Technical Appendix.
The Union Pacific Railroad line handles two types of trains in the Santa Clarita Valley, Metrolink
commuter rail and freight. In terms of rail noise, freight is the more dominant noise source.
Published train schedules were consulted in 2008 and it was determined that 24 Metrolink trains
run through the Santa Clarita Valley each day. No precise numbers of daily freight train
operations could be provided; however, it was estimated that up to five freight trains pass
through the planning area each day. According to the Multi-County Goods Movement Action
Plan prepared for Los Angeles County in April 2008, the number of freight trains expected to
use the Union Pacific rail line from Los Angeles through the Santa Clarita Valley by 2025 ranges
from 27-49 trains per day. Based on this information, the model included 48 freight trains per
day. Metro, which operates the Metrolink system, has also prepared an updated draft 2008
Long Range Transportation Plan (LRTP) that shows proposed rail facilities and increased
operations throughout its service area. The list of projects for North Los Angeles County in the
LRTP includes adding reverse commute service on the Antelope Valley line, expanding capacity
on existing trains, and adding four Metrolink trains from the Santa Clarita Valley to Los Angeles.
These two documents contain the most recent available data on existing and future planned rail
operations in the Santa Clarita Valley, and were used to generate the existing and projected
train noise contours shown on Exhibits N-6 and N-7.
Noise contours on the contour map exhibits represent lines of equal noise exposure, just as the
contour lines on a topographic map show lines of equal elevation. The contours shown on the
map are for the 60, 65 and 70 dB CNEL noise levels. These noise contour maps can be used
as a guide for land use planning decisions. The 60 CNEL contour defines the Noise Referral
Zone. This is the noise level for which noise considerations should be included when making
land use policy decisions.
June, 2011                            N-20
City of Santa Clarita General Plan Noise
                                         N-21 June, 2011
Noise           City of Santa Clarita General Plan
June, 2011 N-22
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                         Noise
The contours presented in this report are a graphic representation of the existing and future
projected noise environment. These distances to contour values are also shown in tabulated
format in the Noise Element, Technical Appendix.. However, it should be understood when
consulting these maps and tables that topography and intervening buildings or barriers have a
very complex effect on the propagation of noise, because barriers deflect sound waves. The
effect of topography and building placement on specific development sites was not considered
when preparing the noise contour maps for the entire planning area; therefore, the contours
present a worst-case projection of existing and future noise levels, and should be considered in
conjunction with local conditions when evaluating specific development plans.
Projected Noise Impacts from City General Plan and County Area Plan Buildout
Because of continued growth and development allowed by the City General Plan and County
Area Plan, traffic levels will change throughout the planning area in future years, and the
resulting noise levels will also undergo a corresponding change. In order to evaluate the future
estimated noise levels, a comparison was made between the existing noise levels and future
noise levels within the OVOV planning area (i.e., cumulative noise increase), based on the
anticipated growth permitted by the City General Plan and County Area Plan update.
Table N-2 shows the expected incremental traffic noise level increases on the primary arterial
roadways that were analyzed in the OVOV traffic study. The traffic study divided up the arterial
roadway network into 318 roadway links; the roadway segment numbers on Table N-2
correspond to the segment number identified by the traffic engineer. However, only those
arterial roadway links on which discernable changes in noise levels are projected are included
on Table N-2; roadway links with negligible change in noise levels are not listed. Also, since the
traffic study did not include local and collector streets, these streets were not included in the
noise model. Such streets carry substantially less traffic, with lower speed limits, than arterial
streets, which reduces the noise generated.
A significance threshold of five (5) dB is often used to evaluate a change in environmental noise
that occurs slowly over a long period of time. A total of 29 roadway links were identified that
showed a change in noise level of 5 dB or more between the existing conditions and future
build-out of the City General Plan and County Area Plan. The noise analysis also compared
projected future noise levels under the OVOV planning effort with the noise levels anticipated to
be generated under build-out of the City General Plan and County Area Plan that were in effect
prior to the Plans updated through the OVOV effort. Table N-2 shows roadway links that will
experience an increase of one (1) dB with the updated City General Plan and County Area Plan,
as compared to the previously adopted City General Plan and County Area Plan. As shown by
the minus signs in the fourth column of Table N-2, many roadway segments will experience
decreased noise impacts under the updated City General Plan and County Area Plan, as
compared with the previously adopted City General Plan and County Area Plan. The land uses
listed in the fifth column of Table N-2 were based on observations from aerial photographs and
on-site visits. It should be noted that the land use listed on the table may not be the same as
the zoning designation, as these are generalized land use categories rather than Area Plan
designations or zones.
The Santa Clarita Valley will experience population growth in upcoming years and, as a result,
noise levels will increase along many roadways. Some of the roadway links bordered by
residential uses that will experience much of the noise increase include portions of Pico
Canyon Road, Via Princessa, Golden Valley Road, and Lost Canyon Road. However, with
                                                N-23                                  June, 2011
Noise                                                           City of Santa Clarita General Plan
development under the updated City General Plan and County Area Plan, the noise levels will
go down on more roadways than will go up in comparison to the currently adopted City General
Plan and County Area Plan. There are only three roadway links out of the 318 links that in the
entire roadway network where the noise levels with the updated City General Plan and County
Area Plan increase by one (1) dB or more, in comparison to the previously adopted City General
Plan and County Area Plan. For purposes of evaluating environmental noise, a difference of
three (3) dB is barely discernable. Only one roadway link, Ridge Route north of Castaic, will
experience a noise increase of 3 dB in comparison to the previously adopted City General Plan
and County Area Plan. This area is primarily developed and planned for commercial uses,
which are not considered to be sensitive to that level of noise increase. Therefore, although the
Santa Clarita Valley will experience substantial increases in traffic over existing levels and
corresponding increases in traffic noise, the updated City General Plan and County Area Plan
will result in slightly lower noise levels for more streets than would otherwise occur under the
previously adopted City General Plan and County Area Plan.
Even for the residential areas where the noise levels are projected to increase by more than one
(1) dB over existing conditions, the Noise Study determined that in most cases residences are
currently protected by existing sound walls or are set back far enough from the roadway so that
future noise levels generated by build-out under the updated City General Plan and County
Area Plan will be consistent with the Noise and Land Use Compatibility Guidelines. Therefore,
noise impacts in these areas from City General Plan and County Area Plan build out were
determined to be minimal.
Noise levels were also projected for the railroad line that passes through the Santa Clarita
Valley. Both Metrolink and freight trains utilize the railroad line. In future years both the
operations of freight and Metrolink are expected to increase. A moderate increase in the CNEL
noise level of 2.4 dB is projected to occur between existing levels and build-out of the City
General Plan and County Area Plan. This level of noise increase is expected to occur with
build-out under either the previously adopted City General Plan and County Area Plan or the
updated City General Plan and County Area Plan. The projected 2.4 dB increase for rail-
generated noise is not considered to be a substantial noise increase that would adversely affect
community                                         noise                                     levels.
June, 2011                            N-24
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                                 Noise
          Table N-2: Projected Noise Increases Along Roadway Links in CNEL (dB)
                  Based on City General Plan and County Area Plan Buildout
   Segment                                             Cumulative      Change Due to
                                                                 4                6
      No.                 Roadway Link                  Increase          OVOV                Land Use
        2      Agua Dulce n/o Davenport                     6.4               0.0        Residential
        3      Agua Dulce n/o SR-14                         6.7               0.0        Open Space
        4      Agua Dulce s/o SR-14                         4.8               1.8        Open Space
        8      Ave Stanford s/o Vanderbilt                  5.3               0.8        Commercial
       29      Chiquito Cyn n/o SR-126                     11.0              -0.3        Open Space
       41      Copper Hill e/o Haskell                      5.3              -0.2        Residential
       43      Davenport e/o Sierra Hwy                     4.8               1.8        Commercial
       53      Dockweiler w/o Sierra Hwy                    6.8              -0.2        Residential
       55      Franklin e/o Wolcott Way                     9.0               0.0        Open Space
       57      Golden Valley s/o Plum Cyn                   7.8               0.0        Residential
       59      Golden Valley n/o Soledad                    5.0               0.0        Commercial/Indust
       68      Hasley Cyn w/o Del Valle                     6.4               0.7        Open Space
       72      Henry Mayo e/o Commerce Center               5.1              -0.3        Residential
       77      Lake Hughes e/o Castaic                      6.1              -0.7        Mixed
       78      Lake Hughes e/o Ridge Route                  5.4              -2.3        Commercial
       84      Lost Cyn n/o Jakes Way                       n/a               1.1        Residential
       85      Lost Cyn n/o Canyon Park                     n/a               1.1        Residential
       87      Lost Cyn s/o Via Princessa                   7.4              -0.4        Residential
       98      Magic Mtn w/o The Old Road                   7.3               0.1        Open Space
       99      Magic Mtn e/o The Old Road                   5.0               0.2        Office
      105      Magic Mtn e/o Valencia                       5.3               0.2        Mixed
      128      Newhall Ranch e/o Bouquet Cyn               8.2               0.2         Mixed
      143      Pico Cyn w/o Stevenson Ranch                 9.9               0.0        Residential
      161      Ridge Route n/o Lake Hughes                 8.5               -0.1        Mixed
      162      Ridge Route n/o Castaic                      2.0               3.0        Commercial
               San Martinez Grande Cyn n/o SR-
      172      126                                          7.0              -1.5        Open Space
      233      Stevenson Ranch n/o Poe                     -0.7               1.4        Open Space
      238      The Old Road n/o Hillcrest                   6.4              -0.3        Mixed
      254      Ave. Tibbitts s/o Newhall Ranch              5.8               0.0        Commercial
      262      Valencia w/o The Old Road                    5.8               0.1        Residential
      276      Via Princessa e/o Oak Ridge                  5.7               0.0        Residential
      279      Via Princessa w/o Rainbow Glen              11.3              0.7         Residential
      280      Via Princessa e/o Rainbow Glen               7.6               0.5        Residential
      283      Via Princessa n/o Lost Cyn                   6.8               0.2        Residential
      290      Wiley Cyn e/o Orchard Village                5.8               0.3        Residential
      295      Wolcott n/o SR-126                           7.8               0.0        Open Space
4
  “Cumulative Increase” refers to projected noise levels over existing conditions based on development
allowed by the City General Plan and County Area Plan Update.
6
  “Change Due to OVOV” refers to the net increase or decrease in projected noise levels between the
City General Plan and County Area Plan in effect prior to OVOV, and the OVOV update. A minus sign in
this column indicates that future noise levels are projected to be less under the OVOV Plans than under
the previously adopted plans.
                                                   N-25                                         June, 2011

Noise                                                           City of Santa Clarita General Plan
G. Other Noise Issues in the Planning Area
In addition to traffic-generated noise impacts, several other noise-related issues were identified
during preparation of the Noise Element, based on discussions with staff. Some of these
additional noise issues may be addressed in local planning decisions by the City of Santa
Clarita and the County of Los Angeles, as described below. With regard to other noise issues
that are outside the authority of local planning agencies, the discussion below is provided for
informational purposes only.
High-Speed Rail Line
A high-speed rail line is being planned by the California High-Speed Rail Authority to connect
northern and southern California. The anticipated route of this railway would run from
Sacramento to Los Angeles, and would likely traverse the Santa Clarita Valley in the area of the
Antelope Valley Freeway (SR-14) corridor. As the planning for this project proceeds, a separate
environmental impact report will be required to evaluate potential impacts of the proposed high-
speed rail line, including noise. At this time, the precise route of the future high-speed rail line
through the planning area is not known, and the type of train and corresponding noise levels
have not been determined. Therefore, no substantive planning in regard to future noise impacts
from high-speed rail can be addressed in the Noise Element at this time. However, a policy has
been included in the Element that calls for the City and County to participate in the review of the
high-speed rail plan documents to ensure adequate mitigation of noise and other impacts, if and
when the rail project is approved.
High Density Residential Development Adjacent to Railroad
As part of the OVOV strategy to encourage Transit-Oriented Development (TOD) in the Santa
Clarita Valley, higher density residential housing, and mixed-use commercial districts that may
contain residential uses, are planned in proximity to portions of the railroad corridor currently
used for freight and Metrolink passenger service. Most notably, this will occur in the areas
where the railroad parallels Railroad Avenue and along Soledad Canyon Road, especially in the
vicinity of the Metrolink Station on Soledad Canyon Road, which is well-suited for future transit-
oriented development to occur. The TOD strategy will provide residents with ready access to
public transit for commuting to work and service centers that are accessible by Metrolink,
thereby decreasing dependence on single-use automobile trips, and reducing vehicle emissions
and vehicle-generated noise.
June, 2010                                   N-26
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                            Noise
Developing residential uses along railroad corridors presents special challenges with respect to
noise. First, constructing sound walls along railroads is often not feasible because of height
restrictions. Sound walls that are constructed may provide some protection for lower residential
floors, but provide little or no protection for the upper floors. Secondly, although the CNEL noise
scale is the best scale to use for environmental noise, it is not the only measurement to consider
when dealing with train events (and, to a similar extent, aircraft noise). Train noise is what is
referred to as “single event noise”. When a train passes a residence, it generates loud levels of
noise for a short period of time, and then there will be no railroad noise for an extended period
of time. The CNEL scale accounts for the number of trains, the time of day that they occur, and
how loud the trains are; but it can be argued that the annoyance and activity disruption that is
generated by the single event of a train is not fully accounted for in such CNEL measurements.
For example, if a train passes by and awakens a resident, his or her main focus is on that one
train and not on the other factors that go into the CNEL scale calculation. The use of CNEL (or
the similar Ldn scale) for noise and land use planning is required by State code. In most
instances, the use of the CNEL scale provides the best correlation with how people view the
noise environment.
One of the actions the City and County can take to address potential annoyance from train
noise is to require disclosure to potential buyers and renters of homes near the railroad. This
notification would provide information to buyers and renters about the location and type of noise
sources in the area, and the fact that there may be loud events generated by these sources. A
policy has been included in this Element to address disclosure requirements for residents near
the railroad.
In many cases, high-density residential and mixed uses developments contain few outdoor
private areas where quiet can be anticipated. Generally, dwellings in such developments might
be provided with small balcony or patio areas, but there is little expectation that the noise levels
for these private outdoor areas will be low. A noise barrier, often made of glass, is the only way
to provide noise protection for a small balcony area adjacent to a noise source such as a
freeway or railroad. Balcony barriers are often disliked by residents because they create a
“closed-in” feeling. In order to address this issue, it is recommended that the design of high-
density residential uses include one or more outdoor areas in the complex where peace and
quiet can be found. Such an area may be provided in communal courtyards, or a pool area
where people can sit and relax. It is important to provide noise protection for these areas. Such
common outdoor areas can often be protected through site design, such as by locating buildings
or parking structures between noise sources and common open space. A policy has been
included in the Element to encourage site designs for multi-family and mixed-use projects that
promote the inclusion of common recreational or open space areas that are protected from
noise.
Mixed-Use Developments that Combine Residential and Non-Residential Uses
The City General Plan and County Area Plan Land Use Maps developed through the OVOV
planning effort shows several areas that can be developed with mixed uses. In addition, the
City of Santa Clarita Unified Development Code allows mixed uses in certain zone districts, with
0 approval of a development plan. The commercial/residential interface that can occur in mixed-
use developments presents special challenges in terms of noise mitigation. The primary
concern is that some commercial uses may operate through the evening hours and into the
nighttime hours. Clubs, theaters, late-night restaurants, and banquet facilities are some
examples of commercial uses that could locate in a mixed-use area and generate noise into
nighttime hours. Another characteristic of commercial areas is that the tenants in a building
often change over time. For example, a bookstore that did not operate at night could be
                                                          N-27                            June, 2010

Noise                                                            City of Santa Clarita General Plan
replaced by a popular restaurant where operations could extend through the evening and into
nighttime hours. Because of changes in use, the noise levels that are reviewed when a
development plan is approved may change over time. For these reasons, it is difficult to properly
soundproof residences that are constructed in a mixed-use development.
It would be desirable to take some additional action in mixed-use developments so that
residents would view the noise environment as favorable. Putting time limits on the commercial
uses might be viable in some cases, but it may also deter some commercial uses from locating
in or near a mixed-use development. The State requires that buildings be designed to meet a
45 CNEL indoor noise standard for multi-family residences. It would not be possible to set an
indoor noise standard more restrictive than the State standard, because the State law has
precedence.
Buyer and renter notification is often the only recourse in trying to improve the noise
acceptability for residents in mixed-use projects. The notification should inform the potential
residents that commercial uses are located nearby, that their hours of operation may change
from time to time, and that the use within the commercial area, along with the noise generation
potential, may also change over time. A policy has been included in this Element to encourage
proper notification of residents in mixed-use developments of potential noise levels.
Agua Dulce Airport
The Agua Dulce Airport is located in the northeast quadrant of the Santa Clarita Valley, in a
rural populated area under the jurisdiction of the County of Los Angeles. The airport is privately
owned but is open to the public. The airport has a single 4,600 foot-long runway and serves
general aviation aircraft only. There are many noise restrictions in place for flight operations. No
night operations are allowed at the airport. Aircraft are not allowed to fly within 1,000 feet of the
Agua Dulce Elementary School, which is located one mile southwest of the airport. If aircraft
depart to the north on Runway 4, they are to avoid flying over the homes 2,000 feet northeast of
the end of the runway. Finally, touch-and-go practices are not allowed at the airport. A 65
CNEL noise contour has been generated for the airport by the County of Los Angeles and is
included in the Technical Appendix. The noise contour barely extends past the ends of the
runway and does not impact any residences. Therefore, no significant noise effects from airport
operations were identified in the Noise Study.
Six Flags Magic Mountain Theme Park
Six Flags Magic Mountain is an amusement park located in the western quadrant of the Santa
Clarita Valley planning area. The park operates a large number of thrill rides including a
number of roller coasters, has live entertainment, and periodically puts on firework displays.
The fireworks displays occur predominantly during the summer months and at Thanksgiving and
Christmas. With the exception of the display on July 4th, which typically lasts 15 minutes, the
displays last between one and two minutes. All displays occur before 10:00 p.m. Fireworks are
an impulsive noise source, which means, under Section 12.08.190 of the County’s Noise
Ordinance, that it is of short duration, usually less than one second and of high intensity, with an
abrupt onset and rapid decay.
The noise levels and hours of operation around the park vary considerably depending on the
time of day, the day of the week, the presence of holidays, and the season of the year. The
noise levels generated by park activities can be heard for a considerable distance around the
park at certain times. People buying or renting homes in the area may be surprised later when
June, 2010                                  N-28

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                        Noise
they can hear park activities. A buyer/renter notification program may be appropriate for new
developments that locate in the area, and a policy has been included in the Element to
encourage proper notification, where appropriate.
Special Events
Special events, such as outdoor concerts, may be held in the planning area on an irregular or
regular basis. The noise levels as they impact surrounding parcels would be limited by the Los
Angeles County Noise Ordinance and the Santa Clarita Noise Ordinance. The noise
ordinances apply to any events that are held on private property. The City of Santa Clarita
Noise Ordinance consists of Chapter 11.44 of Municipal Code. The limits contained in the
ordinance would apply to any special event, with only “lawfully conducted parades” and
“emergency work” exempted from the Ordinance. The Los Angeles County Noise Ordinance is
contained in Chapter 12.08 of the County Code. Similar to the City of Santa Clarita Noise
Ordinance, the Los Angeles County Ordinance contains specific noise limits that cannot be
exceeded at the property boundary. The limits vary depending on the time of day and land uses
involved. Finally, it should be noted that the noise ordinances are contained in the City or
County codes, and are not part of the Noise Element of the General Plan. Control of noise
sources on private property is usually regulated through the imposition of a city or county
regulation, and is not typically part of the General Plan.
Emergency Vehicles
Noise generated by emergency vehicles is not under the control of the City or the County. Both
the City and County noise ordinances exempt emergency operations from noise regulation. The
State has preempted local jurisdictions from controlling noise generated by emergency
equipment. The use of sirens on police vehicles, ambulances, and fire trucks cannot be
controlled by the City or County. Similarly, emergency flights of helicopters and airplanes
cannot be controlled by the City or County. Therefore, noise from these sources is not subject
to policies in the Noise Element. However, the location of heliports and helipads is subject to
zoning requirements for discretionary review, and to environmental review pursuant to the
California Environmental Quality Act.
H. Planning Strategies to Minimize Noise Impacts
The information on existing and future projected noise levels described in the previous sections
of this Element has been used as a guideline for the development of policies to ensure that land
uses are compatible with the noise environment. This information will also provide baseline
levels and noise source identification for enforcement of local noise regulations.
                                                        N-29                         June, 2010

Noise                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
The most basic planning strategy to minimize adverse impacts on new land uses due to noise is
to avoid designating sensitive land uses in areas that are subject to high levels of noise. Uses
such as schools, hospitals, child care, senior care, congregate care, churches, and all types of
residential use should be located outside of any area anticipated to exceed acceptable noise
levels as defined by the Noise and Land Use Compatibility Guidelines, or should be protected
from noise through sound attenuation measures such as site and architectural design and
sound walls. The State of California has adopted guidelines for acceptable noise levels in
various land use categories (California Office of Planning and Research, General Plan
Guidelines 2003, Appendix C). The City of Santa Clarita and the County of Los Angeles have
adopted these guidelines in a modified form as a basis for planning decisions based on noise
considerations. The modified guidelines are shown in Exhibit N-8. Modifications were made to
eliminate overlap between categories in the table, in order to make the guidelines easier for
applicants and decision makers to interpret and apply to planning decisions.
As described earlier in this Element, most residential uses throughout the planning area have
generally been designed with adequate setbacks from noise sources such as arterial roadways,
or have been protected by sound walls. This measure has already been implemented
throughout the planning area and will continue to be applied in the future, based on the policies
in the Element. However, future residential development next to Interstate 5 may require
increased wall height for sound attenuation, based on projected traffic volumes. Excessive wall
height needed for noise control is subject to both engineering and aesthetic constraints. Sound
wall heights greater than 16 feet are generally considered to be infeasible, and the appearance
of walls this high may not be acceptable in rural residential areas. Therefore, a policy has been
included in the Element that prohibits residential buildings within 150 feet of the Interstate 5
centerline. The policy references the centerline because the right-of-way width for I-5 varies
throughout the planning area. It should be noted that the recommendation to require a
separation between freeways and residential uses for purposes of noise attenuation is in
accordance with other adopted State guidelines. The California Air Resources Board (CARB)
has identified airborne pollutants generated from diesel exhaust as a potential health risk to
residents next to freeways, and has also adopted recommended spacing criteria for residential
uses adjacent to freeways.
For uses that are not classified as noise sensitive but which may be subject to potentially
significant noise impacts, site planning and design standards can be used to reduce noise
impacts. Through the design and environmental review processes, mitigation measures may be
applied such as buffer zones to increase separation between uses; earthen berms, walls, and
other noise attenuation devices; site planning and building orientation to shield outdoor spaces;
orienting windows away from noise sources; and use of acoustical building materials and
double-paned windows. Policies encouraging these measures have also been included in the
Element.
For uses that are subject to single event noise levels, such as noise generated by trains, mixed
uses, or entertainment uses, it is recommended that adequate disclosure of these noise sources
be provided to potential renters and homebuyers. A policy has been included in the Element
with suggested disclosure language.
June, 2010                                N-30
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                            Noise
                 Exhibit N-8: Noise and Land Use Compatibility Guidelines
                                                 N-31                     June, 2010
Noise                                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
I. Summary of Noise Planning Issues
Based on the existing conditions and projected growth as described in the background sections
of the Noise Element, the major noise issues for the Santa Clarita Valley are summarized
below. Policies and objectives in this Element have been developed to address these issues.
    1. Existing and projected noise generated by traffic on freeways, highways, and arterial
       streets were evaluated, and noise levels should be considered in land use planning for
       adjacent areas.
    2. Existing and projected noise generated by Metrolink and freight rail were evaluated, and
       noise levels should be considered in land use planning for areas adjacent to the railroad.
    3. Residential neighborhoods and other noise sensitive land uses should be protected from
       excessive noise.
    4. Potential noise impacts from any future high-speed rail project should be evaluated and
       mitigated through the appropriate environmental review process.
    5. Proposed new development projects should be reviewed to ensure that noise impacts
       are mitigated to acceptable levels.
    6. Coordination with other agencies should be ongoing to ensure that noise impacts from
       freeway projects and other public improvements are mitigated.
    7. Compatibility of land uses in mixed-use developments with respect to noise should be
       considered in future land use decisions.
    8. Adequate disclosure should be required to residents who may be affected by possible
       noise sources that cannot be abated.
    9. Consistency between the City of Santa Clarita and the County of Los Angeles with
       respect to the Noise and Land Use Compatibility Guidelines contained in Exhibit N-8 is
       intended to maintain a safe and healthy noise environment for all Santa Clarita Valley
       residents.
June, 2010                                 N-32
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                             Noise
PART 2: NOISE GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
Noise Environment
Goal N 1: A healthy and safe noise environment for Santa Clarita Valley residents, employees,
and visitors.
     Objective N 1.1: Protect the health and safety of the residents of the Santa Clarita Valley
     by the elimination, mitigation, and prevention of significant existing and future noise levels.
        Policy N 1.1.1: Use the Noise and Land Use Compatibility Guidelines contained on
        Exhibit N-8, which are consistent with State guidelines, as a policy basis for decisions on
        land use and development proposals related to noise.
        Policy N 1.1.2: Continue to implement the adopted Noise Ordinance and other
        applicable code provisions, consistent with state and federal standards, which establish
        noise impact thresholds for noise abatement and attenuation, in order to reduce potential
        health hazards associated with high noise levels.
        Policy N 1.1.3: Include consideration of potential noise impacts in land use planning
        and development review decisions.
        Policy N 1.1.4: Control noise sources adjacent to residential, recreational, and
        community facilities, and those land uses classified as noise sensitive.
        Policy N 1.1.5: Monitor and update data and information regarding current and
        projected noise levels in the planning area.
        Policy N 1.1.6: Provide development review comments on projects proposed by other
        agencies and special districts that may generate noise impacts affecting land uses within
        the Santa Clarita Valley, including any freeway and high-speed rail projects.
Reduction of Noise from Traffic
Goal N 2: Protect residents and sensitive receptors from traffic-generated noise.
     Objective N 2.1: Prevent and mitigate adverse effects of noise generated from traffic on
     arterial streets and highways through implementing noise reduction standards and
     programs.
        Policy N 2.1.1: Encourage owners of existing noise-sensitive uses, and require owners
        of proposed noise sensitive land uses, to construct sound barriers to protect users from
        significant noise levels, where feasible and appropriate.
        Policy N 2.1.2: Encourage the use of noise absorbing barriers, where appropriate.
        Policy N 2.1.3: Where appropriate, coordinate with the California Department of
        Transportation (Caltrans) to ensure that sound walls or other noise barriers are
        constructed along Interstate 5 and State Route 14 in the immediate vicinity of residential
        and other noise sensitive developments, where setbacks and other sound alleviation
        devices do not exist.
                                                        N-33                             June, 2010
Noise                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
       Policy N 2.1.4: Reduce significant noise levels related to through-traffic in residential
       areas by promoting subdivision circulation designs to contain a hierarchy of streets,
       which efficiently direct traffic to highways.
       Policy N 2.1.5: Encourage employers to develop van pool and other travel demand
       management programs to reduce vehicle trip-generated noise in the planning area.
       Policy N 2.1.6: Work with the City of Santa Clarita Transit to improve and expand
       current public transit services and routes to reduce vehicle trips and resulting noise
       levels.
       Policy N 2.1.7: Require vehicle owners to properly maintain their equipment to avoid
       generating excessive noise levels.
Residential Neighborhoods
Goal N 3: Protect residential neighborhoods from excessive noise.
   Objective N 3.1: Prevent and mitigate significant noise levels in residential neighborhoods.
       Policy N 3.1.1: Require that developers of new single-family and multi-family residential
       neighborhoods in areas where the ambient noise levels exceed 60 CNEL provide
       mitigation measures for the new residences to reduce interior noise levels to 45 CNEL,
       based on future traffic and railroad noise levels.
       Policy N 3.1.2: Require that developers of new single-family and multi-family residential
       neighborhoods in areas where the projected noise levels exceed 65 CNEL provide
       mitigation measures (which may include noise barriers, setbacks, and site design) for
       new residences to reduce outdoor noise levels to 65 CNEL, based on future traffic
       conditions.     This requirement would apply to rear yard areas for single-family
       developments, and to private open space and common recreational and open space
       areas for multi-family developments.
       Policy N 3.1.3: Through enforcement of the applicable Noise Ordinance, protect
       residential neighborhoods from noise generated by machinery or activities that produce
       significant discernable noise exceeding recommended levels for residential uses.
       Policy N 3.1.4: Require that those responsible for construction activities develop
       techniques to mitigate or minimize the noise impacts on residences, and adopt
       standards that regulate noise from construction activities that occur in or near residential
       neighborhoods.
       Policy N 3.1.5: Require that developers of private schools, childcare centers, senior
       housing, and other noise sensitive uses in areas where the ambient noise level exceeds
       65 dBA (day), provide mitigation measures for these uses to reduce interior noise to
       acceptable levels.
       Policy N 3.1.6: Ensure that new residential buildings shall not be located within 150 feet
       of the centerline for Interstate 5.
June, 2010                                    N-34
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                           Noise
        Policy N 3.1.7: Ensure that design of parks, recreational facilities, and schools minimize
        noise impacts to residential neighborhoods.
        Policy N 3.1.8: As a condition of issuing permits for special events, require event
        promoters to mitigate noise impacts to adjacent sensitive uses through limiting hours of
        operation and other means as appropriate, which may include notification to affected
        residents.
        Policy N 3.1.9: Implement a buyer and renter notification program for new residential
        developments where appropriate, to educate and inform potential buyers and renters of
        the sources of noise in the area and/or new sources of noise that may occur in the
        future. As determined by the reviewing authority, notification may be appropriate in the
        following areas:
                a. Within one mile of Six Flags Magic Mountain theme park, potential buyers
                    and renters should receive notice that noise may occasionally be generated
                    from this facility and that the frequency and loudness of noise events may
                    change over time.
                b. Within 1,000 feet of the railroad, potential buyers and renters should receive
                    notice that noise may occasionally be generated from this facility and that the
                    frequency and loudness of noise events may change over time.
                c. Within 200 feet of commercial uses in mixed-use developments, potential
                    buyers and renters should receive notice that the commercial uses within the
                    mixed-use developments may generate noise in excess of levels typically
                    found in residential areas, that the commercial uses may change over time,
                    and the associated noise levels and frequency of noise events may change
                    along with the use.
                d. Within 1,000 feet of the Saugus Speedway, in the event speedway operations
                    are resumed in the future.
Commercial and Industrial Noise
Goal N 4: Protection of sensitive uses from commercial and industrial noise generators.
    Objective N 4.1: Prevent, mitigate, and minimize noise spillover from commercial and
    industrial uses into adjacent residential neighborhoods and other noise sensitive uses.
        Policy N 4.1.1: Implement and enforce the applicable Noise Ordinance to control noise
        from commercial and industrial sources that may adversely impact adjacent residential
        neighborhoods and other sensitive uses.
        Policy N 4.1.2: Require appropriate noise buffering between commercial or industrial
        uses and residential neighborhoods and other sensitive uses.
        Policy N 4.1.3: Adopt and enforce standards for the control of noise from commercial
        and entertainment establishments when adjacent to residential neighborhoods and other
        sensitive uses.
                                                        N-35                            June, 2010
Noise                                                           City of Santa Clarita General Plan
PART 3: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NOISE ELEMENT
City of Santa Clarita
The City of Santa Clarita will implement the goals, objectives and policies of the Noise Element
of the City of Santa Clarita General Plan through the following actions:
    1. On the Land Use Map, designate areas that are subject to noise for appropriate land
        uses, in order to reduce exposure of persons and property to hazardous conditions.
    2. Implement the noise provisions of the Municipal Code, including regulations on special
        events, street vending, and construction noise.
    3. As part of the review process for new discretionary development applications, require
        consistency with the goals and policies of the Noise Element, including the guidelines for
        land use and noise compatibility, through requiring detailed noise analysis and mitigation
        of interior and exterior noise levels for residential and other sensitive uses, where
        appropriate.
    4. Review and provide input on projects undertaken by other agencies, including Caltrans
        and high speed rail projects, which may affect the noise environment to ensure that
        acceptable noise levels are maintained to protect residents.
    5. In design of City facilities that have the potential to generate noise, such as parks,
        outdoor concert sports venues, roadways or transit facilities, ensure that noise impacts
        are mitigated to protect adjacent sensitive land uses by using appropriate materials and
        construction methods to minimize ambient noise.
    6. During construction within public right-of-way for road widening or other improvements,
        control noise impacts on adjacent sensitive uses through hours of operation, noise
        reduction requirements on equipment, and other appropriate measures.
    7. Through code enforcement, monitor noise conditions throughout the City and enforce
        noise regulations, as needed, to protect public safety and welfare.
    8. As part of the annual General Plan review process, conduct an annual review of the
        Noise Element, along with other General Plan elements, to determine compliance, and
        file a report with the California Office of Planning and Research and Department of
        Community Development pursuant to Government Code Section 65400(a) (2).
    9. Ensure compliance with building standards for noise attenuation, such as insulation and
        window types, through plan review and inspection procedures on all new construction,
        pursuant to adopted codes and ordinances.
    10. Review any proposed General Plan Amendments to ensure compliance with applicable
        goals and policies of the Noise Element; coordinate this review with the County of Los
        Angeles, as appropriate.
    11. Monitor the effectiveness of the Noise Element in achieving the goals of protecting
        property, public health, and safety; initiate amendments thereto as needed to meet
        changing conditions, needs, and policies, coordinating such amendments with the
        County, as appropriate.
June, 2010                                 N-36
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Noise
    12. Work with owners of commercial and industrial uses to encourage businesses to limit
        employee exposure to loud noise, and to reduce noise spillover onto adjacent
        businesses and properties.
    13. Require the provision of disclosures to potential renters and buyers of residences in
        areas subject to noise events, where appropriate.
    14. Control noise from special events through conditions of approval and enforcement.
    15. Where feasible, assist or cooperate in the building of sound walls to mitigate noise
        impacts on sensitive land uses. These sound walls shall be designed with attributes to
        minimize reflective noise and to arrest noise at the source.
    16. Include provisions in the UDC that will require all new noise generators in residential
        zones to be enclosed, insulated or other methods that do not increase ambient noise
        levels.
                                                       N-37                         June, 2010
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                 Conservation and Open Space
                         CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
                                            JUNE, 2011
PART 1          BACKGROUND AND PLANNING ISSUES
A.       Purpose and Intent of the Conservation and Open Space Element
The Conservation and Open Space Element combines two of the mandatory General Plan
elements required by State law into a single element. Section 65302(d) of the California
Government Code requires “a conservation element for the conservation, development, and
utilization of natural resources including water and its hydraulic force, forests, soils, rivers and
other waters, harbors, fisheries, wildlife, minerals, and other natural resources.” Article 10.5 of
the Government Code establishes the framework for open space planning by local jurisdictions
and the required contents of an Open Space Element including open space for outdoor
recreation, public health and safety and preservation of natural resources.
Many resource conservation issues are related to planning for open space preservation. For
example, lands containing significant natural resources, such as Towsley Canyon and Elsmere
Canyon, are designated as open space on the General Plan land use map. Some historical and
cultural resources have been incorporated into park and recreational facilities, such as the
William S. Hart Park and Museum. Many hiking and recreational trails connect open space
lands with developed parks, and provide access to natural resource areas. Open space areas
provide opportunities for groundwater percolation to enhance water quality and recharge of
groundwater aquifers. These examples show the connection between resource protection and
open space preservation, and highlight the benefits of planning for both as a coordinated effort.
Because of the close relationship between resource conservation and open space planning,
these two topics have been combined into an integrated Conservation and Open Space
Element.
This combined Element establishes a policy framework for the designation and long-term
preservation of open space within the planning area, and addresses the wide range of
community benefits derived from open space. In addition to providing land for park and
recreational facilities, open spaces provide the benefits of wildlife habitat preservation, scenic
views, water recharge and watershed protection, enhancement of air quality, protection of
cultural and historical resources, moderation of microclimates, and enhanced property values.
In addition, preservation of scenic and accessible open spaces around the urbanized portions of
the Valley, and between neighborhoods and districts, contributes to community character and
the distinctive sense of place enjoyed by Santa Clarita Valley residents.
B.       Background
Consistency with Other General Plan Elements
The Conservation and Open Space Element of the General Plan is consistent with the Land
Use Element, because those areas having value for resource conservation purposes have been
designated for open space, agriculture, or rural, low-density development on the Land Use Map.
In addition, policies in the Conservation and Open Space Element to protect air and water
quality are consistent with Land Use and Economic Development Elements policies promoting
mixed-use development, sustainable and walkable communities. The Conservation and Open
Space Element is consistent with the Circulation Element, because both Elements promote air
quality goals through multi-modal strategies to reduce vehicle trips. The Element is consistent
                                                 CO-1                                    June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
with the Safety Element, because many of the areas prone to natural hazards, such as flooding
and seismic shaking, are also subject to conservation issues such as water quality, groundwater
recharge, slope stability, and soil erosion; the maps, policies and programs of both elements
have been coordinated to preserve such areas as open space. The element is consistent with
the Housing Element, because adequate residential uses have been designated within the
planning area to meet the need for new housing without impacting natural resource areas; and
because parks, recreational, and open space amenities have been planned to serve Valley
residents. The Element is consistent with the Noise Element, because policies have been
included to ensure that noise from aggregate resource extraction will not be detrimental to
residents and other sensitive uses, and that noise from human activities will not be detrimental
to natural communities.
Resource Maps
The background, goals and policies of this Conservation and Open Space Element are
supplemented with exhibits that show the locations and extent of the following resources within
the planning area:
    •   Significant ridgelines and hillsides subject to development restrictions (Exhibit CO-1);
    •   Mineral Resources, including areas with significant aggregate resources as designated
        by the State (Exhibit CO-2);
    •   Water Resources, including surface waters such as rivers and lakes, and underground
        basins (Exhibit CO-3);
    •   Groundwater Recharge Areas including groundwater Basins and                 recharge areas
        (Exhibit CO-3b);
    •   Biological Resources (Exhibit CO-4) and Significant Ecological Areas as designated by
        the County (Exhibit CO-5);
    •   Cultural and Historical Resources, including areas of local significance as well as sites
        having State or national historical designations (Exhibit CO-6);
    •   Scenic Resources, including canyons, geological features, and significant ridgelines
        (Exhibit CO-7);
    •   Open Space Resources, including passive and active parks and natural open areas
        protected for resource conservation (Exhibit CO-8);
    •   Master Plan for Trails, including regional, County, and City trails and bikeways (Exhibit
        CO-9).
Development and conservation policies have been established for each of these resource types,
as set forth in Part 2, Goals and Policies, of this element.
DRAFT May, 2011                                 CO-2

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                Conservation and Open Space
Organization of the Element
The Background section of the Conservation and Open Space Element contains subsections for
the following resource issues: soils and geological resources; water, including water supply,
quality and conservation; biological resources; cultural and historical resources; air quality,
energy conservation and climate change; parks, recreation, and trails; and open space
conservation. Goals, objectives and policies have been included in Part 2 to address each of
these issues.
C.      Prior Planning Efforts for Conservation and Open Space
City Planning for Open Space and Conservation
The City adopted its first Open Space and Conservation Element in 1991, and updated the
Element in 1999. The element addressed the issues of open space, biological resources, soil
resources, mineral resources, water resources, energy conservation, and cultural and historical
resources. Policies in the element addressed preservation of natural features and ridgelines,
sensitive habitats, recreation, the designation of open space as a buffer from natural hazards,
protection of mineral resources, groundwater quality and recharge, and preservation of cultural
resources. In addition, policies were included to address energy conservation and recycling. In
order to implement the resource conservation policies of the original General Plan, the City
adopted ordinances as part of Title 17 (Zoning) of the Municipal Code to regulate soil erosion
and dust prevention, hillside development, ridgeline preservation, stormwater quality, and oak
tree preservation. The City also adopted a Park and Recreation Master Plan in 1995, which is
currently being updated; and an Open Space Acquisition Plan in 2002, which will be updated as
part of the Open Space Initiative passed by the voters in 2007. The City adopted the Non-
Motorized Plan in 2008. These plans are discussed in greater detail in subsequent sections of
this Element.
County Planning for Open Space and Conservation
The County adopted the Santa Clarita Valley Area Plan in 1984 with a comprehensive update in
1990 to address specific planning issues within the Valley. Areas with special significance for
resource preservation were depicted on the Land Use Map of the Area Plan, including Open
Space, Hillside Management, Significant Ecological Areas, and Floodways/Floodplains. The
Area Plan contained a Scenic Highways Plan and plans for Trails and Bikeways, along with
goals and policies to promote preservation of open space and conservation of resources.
Hillside development policies were included for areas with slopes of 25 percent or greater.
The County has also adopted ordinances to regulate and protect natural resources, including
native oak trees, water quality, significant ecological areas, and hillside development. In 2007
the County recently updated the Master Trails Plan for the Santa Clarita Valley, and has made
numerous improvements to park and open space areas. More information about these topics is
contained in applicable sections of this element.
D.      Environmental Sustainability
The term sustainable development has been defined as balancing the fulfillment of human
needs with the protection of the natural environment, so that these needs can be met not only in
the present, but in the indefinite future. The term was first used in 1980 in the World
Conservation Strategy published by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature. In
                                                CO-3                                  June, 2011
Conservation and Open Space                                    City of Santa Clarita General Plan
1987 the Brundtland Commission (established by the United Nations General Assembly)
defined sustainable development as meeting “the needs of the present without compromising
the ability of future generations to meet their own needs”, and this definition has come into
general usage.
Research on sustainable development has generally focused on four areas: environmental
sustainability, economic sustainability, social sustainability, and political sustainability. For
purposes of the Conservation and Open Space Element, the concept of environmental
sustainability is addressed throughout the various background sections as well as in the goals
and policies.
An environmentally sustainable approach to land use planning is an interdisciplinary process,
considering proposed development and the surrounding ecosystem as components of
interdependent systems. These systems are complex, interconnected, and dynamic. The
fundamental basis of environmental sustainability is that the well-being of people is maintained
and enhanced only when the integrity of the ecosystem is maintained; therefore, the outcomes
of development decisions on all systems must be evaluated to ensure the well-being of both the
human and natural environments. Sustainability should be considered at every level of urban
organization, from individual development sites to neighborhoods, districts, and regions.
Environmental sustainability goes beyond the concept of minimizing individual impacts through
mitigation measures, and is instead a positive approach geared toward achieving long-term
well-being for human and natural ecosystems.
Because the issues of air quality, energy consumption, water supply and quality, climate
change, depletion of non-renewable resources, loss of biodiversity, use of land, and human
health are all interrelated, ensuring environmental quality and public welfare requires new
approaches to environmental protection. In the early years of regulation, environmental
requirements focused on “end-of-pipe” treatment that limited the amount of pollutants entering
water bodies and air basins from particular sources. In more recent years, the focus in
environmental protection has shifted to “upstream” approaches called source controls, which
may include minimizing resource use, reducing waste generation, product substitution, and
producing fewer pollutants. Evaluating pollution control and waste minimization at the source
requires a greater understanding of the wider impacts of development through the life cycle of
construction, use, re-use, demolition, and recycling of materials – impacts that may go beyond
the boundaries of the planning area, and that may extend over many years. Understanding life
cycles for development projects requires a more integrated, systematic approach to evaluating
and planning for development. For example, it has been pointed out that constructing a “green”
building with recycled materials and energy-efficient lighting may have minimal benefit, if the
location of the building causes a large increase in vehicle emissions due to its location many
miles from employees, suppliers, and markets.
In the following background sections, and in the goals and policies set forth in Part 2 of this
element, environmental sustainability has been addressed for the following issues:
    •   Renewable resource systems, including watersheds, aquifers, air resources, and
        biological resources;
    •   Non-renewable resource systems, including mineral resources, use of materials from
        fossil fuels, loss of open space, and generation of waste that cannot be recycled;
DRAFT May, 2011                                CO-4

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                   Conservation and Open Space
     •   Long-term chemical impacts, including existing and future pollutants that enter the
         environment from industrial, transportation, and other sources;
     •   Human-built systems, including land use, cultural resources, green building and design,
         and low impact development;
     •   Information and decision-making, including developing tools for monitoring the well-
         being of environmental systems, and providing this information to decision-makers and
         residents to assist them in making more sustainable decisions.
Approaching the land planning process from a standpoint of environmental sustainability will
require a shift in thinking on the part of local officials, staff, and builders. As with many new
ideas, resistance to change is expected. Methods of reducing pollution have already been
developed and are generally available at affordable prices, but have yet to be widely adopted.
Recent studies have found that barriers to sustainability arise because technological and
economic systems, and governing institutions are designed for permanence and reliability,
rather than change. For example, the economic systems and social mores based on
consumption of oil, including automobile sales and use, are rooted in American institutions and
lifestyles. In other cases, sustainable materials and practices have not been adopted because
cost savings would be deferred, rather than realized immediately. For instance, The Economist
reported in 2007 that even though use of available energy-efficient materials and design
practices can reduce the cost of operating buildings by 30 percent, most builders do not
incorporate them in project design because they don’t plan to own and operate the buildings
long-term. Addressing the issue of resistance to change will be a major objective in creating
more environmentally sustainable communities in the Santa Clarita Valley. Government,
business, and citizens must work together to create a vision of sustainable development that
includes both human and environmental wellness.
E.       Soils and Geologic Resources
Soil and Geologic Resource Issues
State law requires that the General Plan address the prevention, control, and correction of the
erosion of soils, and the location, quantity and quality of the rock, sand, and gravel resources
(Government Code Section 65302). Within the Santa Clarita Valley, the primary conservation
issues with respect to soils and geologic resources are soil conservation; hillside development
and ridgeline protection; and extraction of mineral resources.
Soil Resources and Conservation
The loss of topsoil is the most significant on-site consequence of erosion that occurs during and
after construction or other soil disturbance. Topsoil is the soil layer that contains organic matter,
plant nutrients, and biological activity. Loss of topsoil reduces the soil’s ability to support plant
life, regulate water flow, and maintain the biodiversity of soil microbes and insects that control
disease and pest outbreaks. Loss of nutrients, soil compaction, and decreased biodiversity of
soil inhabitants can severely limit the vitality of landscaping. This can lead to additional site
management and environmental concerns, such as increased use of fertilizers, irrigation and
pesticides, and increased stormwater runoff that contribute pollution to nearby water bodies.
                                                 CO-5                                     June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
The off-site consequences of soil erosion from developed sites include a variety of water quality
issues. Runoff from developed sites carries pollutants, sediments and nutrients that disrupt
aquatic habitats in the receiving waters. Nitrogen and phosphorous from runoff hasten
eutrophication by causing unwanted plant growth in aquatic systems, including algal blooms that
alter water quality and habitat conditions. Algal blooms can also result in decreased recreation
potential and diminished diversity of indigenous fish, plant, and animal populations.
Sedimentation also contributes to the degradation of water bodies.               The build-up of
sedimentation in stream channels can lessen flow capacity, potentially leading to increased
flooding. Sedimentation also affects aquatic habitat by increasing turbidity levels. Turbidity
reduces sunlight penetration into the water and leads to reduced photosynthesis in aquatic
vegetation, causing lower oxygen levels that cannot support diverse communities of aquatic life.
Erosion and sedimentation control measures are needed in order to minimize difficult and
expensive mitigation measures in receiving waters. The cost of erosion and sedimentation
control on construction sites involves minimal expense associated with installing and inspecting
control measures and devices, particularly before and after storm events.
Best management practices have been established under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) as part of the federal Clean Water Act, to decrease erosion and
sedimentation. The topic of post-construction runoff management continues to expand and is
addressed in NPDES permits, which require pre-project runoff water balance, sedimentation
balance, and channel protection. Policies have been included in the General Plan to underscore
the importance of soil conservation in the Santa Clarita Valley.
Hillside Development and Ridgeline Protection
The planning area is surrounded by the Santa Susana Mountains to the south and west, the
San Gabriel Mountains to the southeast, and the Sierra Pelona Mountains to the north, all of
which are part of the Transverse Ranges. Smaller hills and ridgelines bisect the valley floor,
which contains the drainage courses of the Santa Clara River and its tributaries. About 45
percent of the planning area (168,345 acres) contains land with slopes greater than 10 percent,
and 7,866 acres of land contain slopes of 25 percent or greater (see Exhibit CO-1).
Both the City and the County have adopted policies and ordinances to regulate development in
hillside areas, in order to protect the scenic quality and integrity of hillside areas from over-
development and erosion. In the City, average slopes exceeding 10 percent are subject to
special development standards, while in County areas such standards apply to land with
average slopes of 25 percent or more. Both City and County standards for hillside development
are intended to ensure that development in hillside areas maintains the natural topography,
resources, and amenities of these areas. In addition, the City has designated mapped
ridgelines, and the County has designated significant ridgelines within the Castaic Community
Standards District, which is located within the western portion of the planning area (see Exhibit
CO-1). Standards have been adopted by both agencies to regulate development in order to
preserve these scenic resource areas.
Policies have been included in this Element to support regulating development within hillside
areas and along significant ridgelines in a consistent manner. In order to achieve a more
uniform approach to regulating hillside development throughout the planning area, the City and
County have agreed to cooperate on developing a set of hillside guidelines that would apply
throughout the Santa Clarita Valley.
DRAFT May, 2011                               CO-6
City of Santa Clarita General Plan Conservation and Open Space
                                                               CO-7 June, 2011
Conservation and Open Space                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Mineral Resources
Mining activities in California are regulated by the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975
(SMARA). This Act provides for the reclamation of mined lands and directs the State Geologist
to classify and map mineral resources to show where economically significant mineral deposits
occur, or are likely to occur. Areas known as Mineral Resource Zones (MRZ) are classified
according to the presence or absence of significant deposits. MRZ-2 areas are underlain by
mineral deposits where geologic data indicate that significant measured, or indicated, resources
are present.
The planning area contains extensive aggregate mineral resources. Almost 19,000 acres in the
planning area are designated by the State as MRZ-2, or areas of prime importance due to
known economic mineral deposits. Sand and gravel resources are primarily concentrated along
waterways, including the Santa Clara River, the South Fork of the Santa Clara River, Castaic
Creek, and east of Sand Canyon Road. A significant deposit of construction-grade aggregate
extends approximately 15 miles from Agua Dulce Creek in the east, to the Ventura County line
on the west.
As of 2003 there were about 525 acres of land in the planning area used for mineral extraction
of sand, gravel, and rock. There were 14 permits for surface mining activities filed with the
County. Generally, aggregate mining sites are located in Canyon Country, Agua Dulce, Mint
Canyon, and Soledad Canyon (see Exhibit CO-2).
SMARA requires that significant mineral resources be protected from encroachment by
incompatible development, as they provide a needed resource to support the construction of
new homes, businesses, and roads. Mineral extraction within the County is an allowed use
within agricultural zones, subject to approval of a surface mining permit. Within the City, areas
that have significant mineral aggregate resources have been designated by a zoning overlay
district that permits extraction, along with other compatible uses.
The major goals of SMARA are to assure that (1) adverse environmental effects are prevented
or minimized and that mined lands are reclaimed to a usable condition which is readily
adaptable for alternative land uses; (2) the production and conservation of minerals are
encouraged, while giving consideration to values relating to recreation, wildlife, range and
forage, and aesthetic enjoyment; and (3) residual hazards to the public health and safety are
eliminated. These goals are achieved through the planning process by allowing the City and
County to balance the economic benefits of resource reclamation with other land use and
environmental goals. The General Plan identifies significant mineral resource areas on the
Mineral Resources Map, and contains policies to protect these areas from incompatible
development, while ensuring that extraction and reclamation activities are compatible with other
development and that adverse environmental impacts are mitigated.
The Santa Clarita Valley also contains other mineral resources which have been extracted
historically, including gold, natural gas, and oil. Many older mines and oil wells have been
abandoned, although several oil and natural gas wells are still in production (see Exhibit CO-2).
Policies have been included in the element to ensure that wells are properly capped and mines
sealed, and that any pollutants associated with extraction activities are remediated, in order to
ensure public safety after these operations are completed.
DRAFT May, 2011                                 CO-8
City of Santa Clarita General Plan Conservation and Open Space
                                                               CO-9 June, 2011
Conservation and Open Space                                             City of Santa Clarita General Plan
F.       Water Resources
California Government Code Section 65302(d) requires that the “portion of the conservation
element including waters shall be developed in coordination with any countywide water agency
and with all district and city agencies that have developed, served, controlled or conserved
water for any purpose for the county or city for which the plan is prepared.” Further, it requires
that the element address prevention and control of the pollution of streams and other waters,
regulation of the use of land in stream channels required for accomplishment of the
conservation plan, protection of watersheds, and flood control. In compliance with these
requirements, this section addresses the issues of surface water, groundwater, and long-term
water supply.
Surface Water Resources
The planning area is located within the Santa Clara River Valley basin, a watershed that
encompasses approximately 1,634 square miles. The Santa Clara River is the largest river
system in Southern California that remains in a relatively natural state. From its headwaters in
the San Gabriel Mountains to its terminus at the Pacific Ocean, the Santa Clara River flows
approximately 84 miles. Historically, the river has generally flowed year-round from the area
near Interstate 5 westerly into Ventura County (a noted exception is the “dry gap” area located
between the Los Angeles County/Ventura County line and Piru Creek). The upper reach of the
river, has been typically dry except in periods following storm events; this portion of the river
extends from the Bouquet Canyon Road overpass to Lang Station, located on Lang Station
Road south of Soledad Canyon Road and east of Lost Canyon Road. Flows within the river are
largely a result of stormwater runoff in the rainy months and wastewater treatment discharges in
the drier months. Effluent from the Saugus Water Reclamation Plant (WRP) and Valencia WRP
accounts for up to 40 percent of total stream flow within the Santa Clara River during the winter,
and up to 90 percent during summer months.
Principal tributaries to the upper Santa Clara River include creeks located in Mint, Bouquet, San
Francisquito, Castaic, Oak Spring, and Sand Canyons. The principal tributaries of the South
Fork of the river, which drains in a northerly direction toward its confluence with the main course
of the river, include Placerita Creek, Newhall Creek, and Pico Creek. At higher elevations these
creeks are typically perennial, flowing all year unless rainfall is below normal. Flow in the
stream canyons near the valley floor is normally limited to the rainy season.
Dry Canyon Reservoir is a 1,313-acre foot storage facility located in Dry Canyon between
Bouquet and San Francisquito Canyons, north of Saugus.1 The reservoir was placed in service
in 1913 to provide aqueduct storage and regulate flows in the Los Angeles Aqueduct, but was
taken out of service in 1966 due to seepage problems. Currently the reservoir impounds water
only during storms.
Castaic Lake is a 324,000 acre-foot storage facility created by an earth-filled dam across
Castaic Creek. The reservoir serves as the West Branch Terminus of the California Aqueduct.
In addition to its State Water Project (SWP) functions, the lake is operated to conserve local
floodwaters for use in water recharge of underlying groundwater basins. Castaic Lagoon is
located directly south and downstream of Castaic Dam, and was created by the California
1
  An acre foot is the amount of water required to fill one acre to the depth of one foot, equivalent to
325,000 gallons, and is estimated to be the amount of water needed to serve two families of four for one
year.
DRAFT May, 2011                                    CO-10

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                   Conservation and Open Space
Department of Water Resources (DWR) to provide recreational opportunities. The Lagoon has
a surface area of 197 acres and a capacity of 5,701 acre feet. Elderberry Forebay is also a part
of the Castaic Reservoir system, and is an enclosed section of Castaic Lake. Surface water
resources are shown on Exhibit CO-3.
Streams
Topographical maps prepared by the U. S. Geological Survey (USGS) show several types of
water courses and drainage areas with different symbols, and these symbols have changed
somewhat over time. Perennial streams (in which water typically runs year-round) and
intermittent streams (in which water runs for only part of the year) are both shown with blue lines
on most USGS maps, although some maps show intermittent streams with a brown dotted line
or with a different line width from perennial streams. Wide wash areas are shown with a brown
dot pattern. These symbols are used to delineate various topographic features, based on field
observation or aerial photos. However, USGS does not claim legal authority for the
classification of streams, and the stream classification used on the maps is a somewhat
subjective process based on the observations and judgment of personnel in the field, during a
limited period of time. Although USGS topographical maps are meant to be as accurate as
possible in providing the public with information about topography and other mapped features,
USGS does not perform scientific measurements to determine stream classifications.
This is an important point because of some confusion about the term “blue-line streams” as it
has been used in legislation and in general discussion of stream characteristics. The term is
sometimes used to refer to “jurisdictional waters,” meaning areas that are under the jurisdiction
of State and Federal agencies (“waters of the United States”). However, jurisdictional waters
can include more streams than are shown on USGS maps; conversely, streams that are shown
on topographical maps may no longer flow in the same location on the ground as what was
shown on the map. As development has occurred in many areas, streams may have been
diverted or channelized for flood control purposes, and drainage patterns may have changed.
Topographical maps are updated periodically, but may not reflect all changes to stream
courses. Therefore, topographical maps cannot be depended on as a final authority for
delineating possible streams, riparian areas, or wetlands.
For this reason, the General Plan does not use USGS topographical map information on blue
line streams as a basis for planning or land use decisions. The most recent information
available to the City and County on streambed locations are the Federal Insurance Rate Maps
from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) mapping program for flood control
hazard areas. These maps were most recently updated in 2008, and the information from these
maps has been included in the Safety Element as shown on Exhibit S-4, Floodplains.
It is not feasible to map all jurisdictional waters for the General Plan, because each stream must
be mapped individually by a trained specialist. Also, because streams change course over time,
jurisdictional waters surveys are valid for only five years. However, the Conservation and Open
Space Element contains policies to protect the Santa Clara River and its tributaries, as well as
other riparian areas, from the adverse impacts of development. Development proposals that
affect jurisdictional waters may also require permits from the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers, the
California Department of Fish and Game, and the Regional Water Quality Control Board.
                                                  CO-11                                 June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Groundwater Resources
Groundwater is concentrated into natural hydro-geological units called basins. An aquifer is a
subsurface area where water collects, concentrates, and can be extracted within a basin.
Multiple aquifers may be located within each basin. The three major groundwater basins
underlying the planning area are the Santa Clara River Valley Groundwater Basin, East
Subbasin (East Subbasin) and the Acton Valley Groundwater Basin. The East Subbasin
encompasses the upper Santa Clara River Valley and is comprised of two aquifer systems, the
Alluvium (also referred to as the Alluvial Aquifer), and the Saugus Formation. The Alluvial
Aquifer generally underlies the Santa Clara River and its tributaries, and the Saugus Formation
underlies nearly the entire Upper Santa Clara River area. Groundwater in the East Basin
generally flows from east to west, following the movement of the Santa Clara River. The East
Subbasin is the sole source of local groundwater for urban water supply in the Valley.
Groundwater basins are shown on Exhibit CO-3.
Because up to 80 percent of the average annual precipitation occurs between November and
March, most groundwater infiltration is in the form of winter-storm flow. However, the East
Subbasin is also replenished by deep percolation of agricultural land, urban irrigation,
percolation from septic tanks and leach field systems, and treated effluent from water
reclamation plants.
The Acton Valley Groundwater Basin encompasses about 17 square miles and is bounded by
the Sierra Pelona on the north and the San Gabriel Mountains on the south, east, and west.
Groundwater in the basin is unconfined and found in alluvium and stream terrace deposits. The
regional direction of groundwater flow is in a southwesterly direction toward Soledad Canyon.
Replenishment of this basin is achieved through percolation of direct rainfall and infiltration of
surface water runoff, agriculture and irrigation, and septic tanks. There is no pumping for urban
water supply and distribution from this basin, although individual users in the far eastern portion
of the planning area may have private wells in the Acton Valley Groundwater Basin.
Groundwater recharge areas are shown on Exhibit CO-3b.
Natural or soft bottom drainage channels and wide natural floodways and flood plains maximize
the groundwater recharge potential and help to replenish the aquifers. As an unchannelized
river, the Santa Clara River and its tributaries provide opportunities for groundwater recharge.
The best available evidence shows that no adverse impacts on basin recharge have occurred
due to the existing use of local groundwater supplies, consistent with the Castaic Lake Water
Agency (CLWA)/purveyor groundwater operating plan for the basin (see 2005 Basin Yield
Report). In addition, according to the memorandum prepared by CH2MHill (Effect of
Urbanization on Aquifer Recharge in the Santa Clarita Valley, February 22, 2004), urbanization
in the Santa Clarita Valley has been accompanied by long-term stability in pumping and
groundwater levels, and the addition of imported SWP water to the Valley, which together have
not reduced recharge to groundwater, nor depleted the amount of groundwater in storage within
the local groundwater basin.
DRAFT May, 2011                                CO-12
City of Santa Clarita General Plan Conservation and Open Space
                                                               CO-13 June, 2011
Conservation and Open Space       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
DRAFT May, 2011             CO-14
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                   Conservation and Open Space
March 2006, a technical memorandum specific to the recharge of the Saugus Formation, was
prepared by Luhdorff & Scalmanini Consulting Engineers. This technical memorandum,
Evaluation of Groundwater Recharge Methods for the Saugus Formation in the Newhall Ranch
Specific Plan Area, presented the following findings:
     •  Historical observations for several decades have shown that there have been no long-
        term changes in groundwater storage or levels and that natural recharge processes
        have sustained groundwater levels, including long-term, essentially constant, high
        groundwater levels – without the need for artificial recharge operations to augment
        natural recharge to the basin.
     •  The future operating plan for the basin has been evaluated in both the 2005 Urban
        Water Management Plan and the 2005 Basin Yield Report and neither document calls
        for attempts to artificially recharge the basin.
     •  The Saugus Formation is generally recharged in the east to central portion of the basin.
        Groundwater flow in the basin is generally east to west with resulting groundwater
        discharge at the western end of the basin.
     •  If artificial recharge of the Saugus Formation were to become desirable in the future, the
        recharge is hydro-geologically feasible through injection wells. This mechanism would
        alleviate the need to set aside land area for artificial recharge purposes, and would likely
        occur in the eastern portion of the Saugus Formation. There would be no need for
        artificial recharge in the western part of the basin.
Water Supply
The primary sources of water in the planning area include groundwater pumped from the
aquifers in the East Subbasin, supplemented by imported water from the State Water Project
(SWP). Completed in 1972, the SWP is the largest water diversion system in the world,
consisting of 22 dams and reservoirs; the largest of these is an earthen dam near Oroville which
holds 3.5 million acre feet of surface runoff from the northern Sierras. When released from the
Oroville Dam, SWP water flows down the Feather and Sacramento Rivers into the Sacramento-
San Joaquin Delta, where it is pumped across the Delta to prevent it from flowing into the
ocean. From the Delta, SWP water is conveyed 444 miles south through the Edmund G. Brown
California Aqueduct, which parallels Interstate 5 as far as the Tehachapi Mountains. The water
is raised 2,000 feet by the Robert D. Edmonston Pumping Plant, enabling it to be conveyed
across the Tehachapi Mountains and into the Antelope Valley. The water is then distributed to
SWP reservoirs in Castaic and Moreno Valley. At full capacity the SWP system can convey 4
million acre feet per year. About 30 percent of the water is used for agricultural irrigation,
primarily in the San Joaquin Valley, and 70 percent is used for residential, municipal, and
industrial use.
                                                 CO-15                                  June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                    City of Santa Clarita General Plan
The most southerly reservoir on the West Branch of the SWP California Aqueduct is Castaic
Lake. Castaic Lake Water Agency (CLWA) receives water from Castaic Lake and distributes it
to the local purveyors following treatment. CLWA was formed in 1962 for the purpose of
contracting with the California Department of Water Resources (DWR) to provide a
supplemental supply of imported water to the water purveyors in the Valley. CLWA serves an
area of 195 square miles in Los Angeles and Ventura Counties, with an annual contract for
95,200 acre feet of SWP water. The Agency treats and distributes a portion of SWP water to
four water purveyors (also referred to as retailers) in the planning area, which in turn provide
water to households and business customers in the City and unincorporated communities.
State law requires water utilities that serve over 3,000 customers to update and submit an
Urban Water Management Plan (UWMP) every five years. CLWA and the four local retail water
purveyors jointly prepared and adopted an UWMP for the Santa Clarita Valley in 2005. The
2005 UWMP was prepared for a 25-year planning horizon, through 2030, and addressed the
following question: Will there be enough water for the Santa Clarita Community in future years,
and what mix of programs should be explored for making this water available? The 2005
UWMP concluded that a reliable and high quality water supply would be available to Valley
water customers, based on conservative water demand and implementation of conservation
measures.
Although the 2005 UWMP acknowledged that SWP water will remain an important supplemental
water supply source for the Valley in the long term, it also emphasized the need for conjunctive
use of local groundwater, increased use of reclaimed water, and a substantial water
conservation effort. Local water retailers currently pump over 50 percent of the domestic water
supply from groundwater aquifers. This water is generally blended with SWP supplies prior to
distribution to domestic customers.
Another source of water comes from transfers, exchanges, and groundwater banking programs.
In 2007, CLWA completed acquisition of an 11,000 acre-foot per year supply of high-flow Kern
River water that is being delivered to Castaic Lake using SWP facilities. In addition, CLWA has
banked over 115,000 acre feet in groundwater banks in Kern County; this water will be used to
offset shortages during future dry years.
Due to the rapid growth in the Santa Clarita Valley, annual total water demand has more than
doubled between 1980 and 2004 (from about 37,000 acre feet to about 88,000 acre feet). The
UWMP projects annual increases in water usage of about 2.2 percent through 2030 without
conservation measures in place, and 1.3 percent annual water usage increases with
conservation measures. Projected 2030 demand is estimated at 138,300 acre feet. This
estimate is in line with population growth projections prepared for the update of the City’s
general Plan and the County’s Area Plan.
As part of the 2005 UWMP, water shortage contingency planning was also addressed by the
water agencies. These contingencies included continued drought, an interruption of SWP
delivery, and power outages. Plans for such contingencies include water conservation,
mandatory limits on use, and penalties for excessive use, among other measures. The amount
of SWP water supply delivered to the SWP contractors in a given year depends on the demand
for the supply, the amount of rainfall, snowpack, runoff, water in storage, pumping capacity from
the Delta, and legal and environmental constraints on SWP operation. According to the DWR,
water delivery reliability depends on three general factors: (1) the availability of water at the
source; (2) the ability to convey water from the source to the desired point of delivery; and (3)
the magnitude of demand for the water.
DRAFT May, 2011                              CO-16

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                      Conservation and Open Space
A topic of growing concern for water planners and managers is climate change and the potential
impacts it could have on California’s future water supplies. Current literature suggests that
climate change is likely to significantly impact the hydrological cycle, changing California’s
precipitation pattern and amount from that shown by the historical record. According to DWR,
there is evidence that some changes are already occurring, such as snowmelt beginning earlier
in the Sierras, an increase in water runoff as a fraction of the total runoff, and an increase in
winter flooding frequency. More variability in rainfall, wetter at times and drier at times, would
place more stress on the reliability of existing flood management and water supply systems,
such as the SWP. Local responses to climate change due to greenhouse gas emissions are
discussed in a later section of this element.
Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta Issues Affecting Water Supply
After adoption of the joint 2005 UWMP by Santa Clarita Valley water agencies, a 2007 judicial
decision concerning the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta temporarily reduced water allocations
by the SWP, pending further actions by the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) to mitigate
habitat impacts from water exports. As noted above, CLWA contracts with the DWR to
purchase SWP water, with an annual contract amount of 95,200 acre feet.                     SWP water
represents nearly half of the water used by Valley residents and businesses during a typical
year, with groundwater resources providing the rest. Because of the importance of SWP water
to continued growth and development in the Valley, a brief description of the issues pertaining to
the Delta, and their impact on water supply, is provided in this section.
The current issues with distribution of SWP supplies result from a legal decision on a court case
that concerned impacts of water pumping on fragile ecosystems of the Sacramento-San
Joaquin Delta. The Delta is a network of natural and artificial channels and reclaimed islands at
the confluence of the south-flowing Sacramento River and the north-flowing San Joaquin River,
just east of where they enter Suisun Bay, an upper arm of San Francisco Bay. Extending in
width more than 40 miles from Sacramento to Tracy, the Delta encompasses 1,600 square
miles, receives runoff from four major rivers, drains over 40 percent of the State, and carries
more water seaward than the Colorado River. The Delta provides habitat for numerous species
of fish and wildlife; nearly half of the State’s migrating waterfowl and shorebirds, and two thirds
of the State’s spawning salmon, pass through the Delta. Author William Fulton described the
multiple functions served by the Delta for both ecological and economic purposes:
      The Delta is a crossroads for all of California. Its flush of fresh water contains almost
      half the runoff in the state, and helps forestall saltwater intrusion that would harm
      people and wildlife. The Delta contains vital shipping channels that serve long-
      established industrial ports in Martinez, Pittsburg, Stockton…It is a heavily used
      recreation area prized by fishing interests, boaters, and others. It is home to several
      towns, including at least two below sea level. Thanks to a system of levees
      constructed over a century, the Delta has hundreds of thousands of acres in farmland,
      including some 150,000 acres that lie below sea level. And finally, the Delta is a
      switching station for California’s water. Most of the water used in the state – from
      municipal and federal dams to the east and state dams to the north – is stored, flushed,
      and pumped across the Delta to reach farm and urban customers to the west and
      south. Sixty percent of the state’s drinking water travels through the Delta, along with
      water to irrigate almost half the fruits and vegetables in the United States.2
2
  Fulton, William. The Reluctant Metropolis: the Politics of Urban Growth in Los Angeles. Point Arena
CA, Solano Press Books, 1997, pages 110-111.
                                                  CO-17                                      June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
In the spring of 2007, the State saw the first voluntary shutdown of the SWP pumps in the Delta
to protect fish. The goldfish-sized Delta smelt (Hypomesus transpacificus), a state- and
federally-listed endangered species, and some other pelagic (open water) fishes have been in
decline since the early 2000s for reasons that likely include the presence of invasive species,
which have altered the basic food web in the Delta, and the impacts of toxins, in-Delta
diversions, and water project operations. In 2007, SWP operational changes in the Delta
costing over 500,000 acre-feet were taken to help protect the endangered Delta smelt.
Unfortunately, these actions did not result in an increase in the abundance of Delta smelt in the
fall of 2007, suggesting that more than just water project operational changes in the Delta are
needed to increase Delta smelt abundance. In addition, another pelagic fish, the longfin smelt,
is now being considered for listing under the State Endangered Species Act. DWR states that a
more comprehensive approach to address the decline in pelagic fish is needed.
The Delta smelt is considered to be an “indicator species.” Because of its wide range and
historically large numbers throughout the Delta, some believe its health and abundance serve to
indicate the general health of the Delta as habitat for other species. Like the proverbial canary
in a mine shaft, Delta smelt populations react quickly to degradations of water quality, indicating
changes that may affect other species. In addition, smelt and other small fish in the Delta serve
as the foundation for the food chain that supports larger species of fish and marine life, including
striped bass, a popular fish for recreational fishermen. Populations of smelt have seriously
declined over the last twenty years. From a population of 800,000 during the 1960s and 1970s,
the smelt population has dropped to about 35,000 in the Delta. Of most immediate concern to
conservationists, smelt and other small fish are in danger of being sucked into the large pumps
that siphon water from the Delta into aqueducts that carry it to water customers located
hundreds of miles to the south. During 2007, new Delta planning efforts – including the Delta
Vision process established by Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and the Bay/Delta
Conservation Planning process – have reached important conclusions about the need to
change the way water is conveyed across or around the Delta to both better protect fish and
provide a sustainable and reliable water supply for the State. Those efforts are expected to
continue into 2008 and beyond.
As noted above, the Sacramento-San Joaquin Delta is the largest estuary on the West Coast. It
functions as the hub of California’s water system, as a vital resource in the fishing and
agricultural economies, serves as a recreational area, and is home to millions of Californians. A
2007 report by the Public Policy Institute of California concluded that “most Californians rely on
the Delta for something, whether they know it or not.” Numerous water agencies rely on the
State pumps in the Delta, and many would face water rationing within a few weeks if Delta
supplies become unavailable. Regions of the State that depend on imported water from the
Delta must consider the importance of this region for all Californians, and plan for contingencies
in the event water supplies from the Delta are temporarily or permanently reduced due to
competing demands.
DRAFT May, 2011                                CO-18

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                 Conservation and Open Space
As to the ability to convey source water to the desired point of availability, DWR reports that an
uncertainty factor exists with respect to SWP operations, because they are closely regulated by
Delta water quality standards established by the State Water Resources Control Board
(SWRCB) and set forth in Water Rights Decision 1641. DWR also reports other factors of
uncertainty due to the continuing unexplained decline in many pelagic fish species, including the
Delta smelt since the early 2000's, and the legal challenges to SWP operation and on-going
planning activities related to the Delta. Other uncertainties include future sea level rise
associated with global climate change, which could increase salinity in the Delta and the risk of
interruptions in SWP diversions from the Delta due to levee failures. The referenced litigation
challenges are described in more detail below.
As to estimating the future demand for SWP water, DWR has identified uncertainty factors
including population growth, water conservation, recycling efforts, other supply sources, and
global climate change. In addition to the above-identified factors affecting water delivery
reliability, DWR has reported other limitations and assumptions, all of which are explained in the
Draft State Water Project Delivery Reliability Report 2007. This report has also identified the
status of four major concurrent Delta planning efforts that are underway with objectives related
to providing a sustainable Delta over the long-term. These planning efforts may propose
changes to SWP operations, which in turn could affect SWP water supply availability. The
planning efforts are the Delta Vision, the Delta Risk Management Strategy, the CALFED
Ecosystem Restoration Program Conservation Strategy, and the Bay-Delta Conservation Plan.
According to DWR, each planning effort could affect SWP and Central Valley Project operations
in the Delta, and each is explained in detail in the Draft State Water Project Delivery Reliability
Report 2007.
Recent litigation has had an effect upon the availability and reliability of imported SWP supplies.
For example, in October 2006, plaintiff Watershed Enforcers, a project of the California
Sportfishing Protection Alliance, filed a lawsuit in Alameda County Superior Court alleging that
DWR was not in compliance with the California Endangered Species Act (CESA) and did not
have the required state incidental take permit to protect the Delta smelt as part of DWR’s
pumping operations at the Harvey O. Banks Pumping Plant located near the town of Tracy
(Watershed Enforcers, et al. v. California Department of Water Resources, et al. Alameda
County Superior Court No. RG06292124 [Watershed decision]). In April 2007, the court agreed
with the plaintiff and ordered a shutdown of pumping from the Delta if appropriate permits could
not be obtained in 60 days. In May 2007, the DWR filed an appeal of the trial court’s decision,
which automatically stayed the decision pending the outcome of the appeal. At the same time,
DWR entered into a Memorandum of Understanding with California Department of Fish and
Game (CDFG) to jointly work with the appropriate federal agencies to develop a federal
Biological Opinion that complies with CESA. During preparation of the new Biological Opinion,
DWR committed itself to actions related to protecting the Delta smelt and other species through
adaptive management provisions. Upon completion of this effort, DWR plans to submit a
request to CDFG for a consistency determination under CESA that would allow for incidental
take based on the new federal Biological Opinion.
On May 25, 2007, the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District, the Honorable Oliver W.
Wanger, presiding, found that the 2005 United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS)
Biological Opinion for Delta smelt was not consistent with the requirements of the federal
Endangered Species Act and must be rewritten. On August 31, 2007, Judge Wanger
established interim operating rules to protect Delta smelt until the USFWS rewrites the
Biological Opinion. The interim operating rules set in-Delta flow targets in Old and Middle
Rivers from late December through June that will restrict CVP and SWP pumping in 2008 and
                                               CO-19                                    June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
until the Biological Opinion is rewritten. Judge Wanger's restrictions on CVP/SWP operations
will last until a new Biological Opinion for Delta smelt is completed. The new Biological Opinion
is expected to impose restrictions that may continue reduced pumping operations in the
SWP/CVP until broader solutions are implemented for the Bay-Delta. Other implications are
described below based on the best available current information.
In terms of short-term water supply availability, there have been short-term effects related to
issues presented in the Watershed and Wanger decisions. There is also concern that the
remedy adopted by the District Court could ultimately become part of the conditions in the new
Biological Opinion and incidental take permit expected to be issued in the fall of 2008. These
concerns, if they materialize, could limit the amount of SWP water that can be delivered to SWP
contractors, including CLWA.
Governor Schwarzenegger directed DWR to take immediate action to improve conditions in the
Delta. According to the Office of the Governor, the Governor is building on his Strategic Growth
Plan, which consists of approximately $6 billion to upgrade California's water systems. The
Governor has also directed the Delta Vision Blue Ribbon Task Force to develop a delta
management plan. The Task Force has presented its findings and recommendations, and its
strategic plan is due by October 31, 2008. The Bay-Delta Conservation Plan is also underway.
This plan is intended to ensure compliance with federal and state Endangered Species Act
requirements in the Delta. The $1 billion proposed in the Governor’s comprehensive plan will
be used to fund recommendations from both the Delta Vision Task Force and the Conservation
Plan.
Over the long-term, water supply availability and reliability will continue to be assessed by DWR
in DWR's biennial SWP delivery reliability reports. These reports necessarily take into account
a myriad of factors in evaluating long-term water supply availability and reliability. These factors
include multiple sources of water, a range of water demands, timing of water uses, hydrology,
available facilities, regulatory restraints (including pumping constraints due to impacts on listed
fish species), water conservation strategies, and future weather patterns. The Watershed and
Wanger decisions highlight the regulatory restraints applicable to SWP supplies, which have
impacted DWR deliveries of SWP supplies in the past, and could curtail such deliveries in the
future.
Following the final court order issued in the Wanger decision, representatives of CLWA and the
four local retail water purveyors met with Los Angeles County and City of Santa Clarita planning
staff to coordinate water supply and land use planning activities for the Santa Clarita Valley. In
addition, DWR has issued its Draft State Water Project Delivery Reliability Report, 2007. Based
on this information, CLWA has determined that there are sufficient water supplies available for
pending and future development within the CLWA service area for the foreseeable future
through 2030, as set forth in the 2005 UWMP. The Valley’s water suppliers are presently
reviewing their projected service needs and water supply estimates, and will be jointly preparing
an amended UWMP beginnin in 2009.
Water Conservation
Water conservation has become an increasingly important factor in water supply planning
throughout California, especially in light of continuing drought conditions and the Delta issues
described above. A monthly newsletter issued by Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger’s office in
January, 2008 underscored the State’s concern about water availability:
DRAFT May, 2011                                  CO-20

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                        Conservation and Open Space
         Today California has more than 37 million people with a water system built for
         half that, and we are seeing the consequences. Businesses and homes are
         facing mandatory reductions in water use, and new developments that would
         provide good-paying jobs have been delayed because local governments don’t
         know if there will be enough water to go around.3
Adding to concerns about water supply are recent studies of the effect of climate change on
precipitation rates and snowpack in the western United States. A 2007 study by scientists at the
Scripps Institution of Oceanography showed that climate change from human activity is
disrupting water supplies in the region. “Trends in snowpack, river runoff and air temperatures –
three fundamental indicators of the status of the West’s hydrological cycle – point to a decline in
the region’s most valuable natural resource, water, as population and demand grows in the
West,” according to a Scripps press release describing the study’s conclusions.4 Through
extensive data analysis and multiple models, all of which yielded the same results, the study
forecasted a serious water supply problem for those dependent on the Colorado River drainage,
and substantial alterations to the hydrology of the Sacramento River Delta, home to many
sensitive ecosystems and economically important wildlife. Although the Santa Clarita Valley
does not use water imported from the Colorado River, this water source is critical to portions of
the Los Angeles basin served by the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California. Any
reduction in Colorado River water availability is likely to affect demands for water from the State
Water Project. The Colorado River basin is now in the eighth year of drought, and water levels
in Lakes Mead and Powell are at only about 50 percent of capacity.
One of the greatest opportunities for conservation is reduction of landscape irrigation through
greater efficiency and use of native, drought-tolerant plant materials. Grasses bred for use in
lawns are not native to North America, and require a large amount of water to promote growth.
Since the Santa Clarita Valley’s annual precipitation is only about 13 inches per year, much of
the water used for landscape irrigation must be imported. As much as 60-70 percent of the
water used by residential customers is typically for landscape irrigation. Water conservation by
residential customers through minimizing water-dependent landscaping and maximizing low-
water use landscaping (xeriscape) could contribute significantly to ensuring that long term water
needs are met in the Valley.
The term xeriscape was coined by the Denver Water Board in 1978 to mean “water
conservation through creative landscaping”. A well-designed xeriscape landscape can reduce
yard maintenance by as much as 50 percent, and requires less fertilizer and pesticides.
Watering efficiently and mulching can also save significantly on water usage. Xeriscape plants
use just one tenth of the water that a lawn of green grass uses. Each lawn that is replaced with
xeriscape plants can save up to 260 gallons of water per day.
Public agencies have an opportunity to set an example on water conservation in landscaping,
by replacing water-thirsty turf with xeriscape on street medians and parkways, around public
buildings, and on other public land that is not actively used for recreational purposes. CLWA
has installed a demonstration garden adjacent to its administration building, and provides
information on xeriscape landscaping techniques. In 2008, Los Angeles County adopted an
3
  State of California, Office of the Governor, External Affairs, Monthly Newsletter January, 2008.
4
  Scripps Institution of Oceanography/UC San Diego, “Climate Crisis in the West Predicted with
Increasing Certainty, December 17, 2007. Available on-line at
http://scrippsnews.ucsd.edu/Releases/?releaseID=856
                                                    CO-21                                       June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
ordinance limiting the amount of turf and requiring drought-tolerant landscaping on new
development. Included in the ordinance was a list of drought-tolerant plants suitable for various
climate zones within the County. Both the City and the County will show their commitment to
wise water use through converting turf to xeriscape on new capital projects. Policies have been
included in this element supporting these measures.
In other water conservation measures, CLWA and the retail water purveyors in the valley have
been aggressively implementing demand management measures and best management
practices. Activities include water audits and repairs, public outreach, conservation pricing,
residential plumbing retrofit, residential ultra low flush toilet replacement, large landscape
conservation, and conservation programs for commercial, industrial, and institutional accounts.
For new construction, the California plumbing code has instituted requirements that mandate
installation of low-flow toilets and showerheads. CLWA estimates that conservation will result in
a long-term reduction of water demand.
Water Recycling
State water policy identifies water recycling as a beneficial use of water, and recycled water is
an important component of water management planning. The Sanitation Districts of Los Angeles
County (LACSD) own and operate two water reclamation plants in the Valley, the Saugus WRP
(No. 26) and the Valencia WRP (No. 32). Wastewater is treated at these plants to tertiary levels
and discharged to the Santa Clara River. The primary sources of wastewater to the Saugus
and Valencia WRPs are domestic. Together, the WRPs have a design capacity of 28.1 million
gallons per day. Current plans call for recycled water from only the Valencia plant, located on
The Old Road near Magic Mountain Amusement Park, to be used as a source of recycled
water. Use of water from the Valencia WRP for landscaping purposes began in 2003, with
deliveries to the Westridge Golf Course. Recycled water from the Valencia WRP has also been
used by the City for landscape irrigation, and for construction applications via tanker truck.
The ability of CLWA to use recycled water is constrained by its rights to use the water available.
CLWA has been approved to use 1,700 acre feet per day of recycled water, but the ultimate
recycled water use is governed by various laws, court decisions, and water rights of
downstream users. Only “foreign” water, such as water imported from the State Water Project,
can be used for recycling purposes.
Developers of the Newhall Ranch Specific Plan are also planning to construct a water recycling
facility, and non-potable water from this source will be utilized for the Newhall Ranch
development. The proposed facility would be located south of SR-126 at the western edge of
the project site, with an ultimate capacity of 6.8 million gallons per day. Effluent from the
proposed WRP would be used to meet non-potable water demand within the project area. The
plant is projected to produce approximately 5,000 acre-feet per year on average.
Currently, CLWA serves approximately 448 acre-feet per year of recycled water to the Valencia
Water Company for irrigation purposes at Westridge Golf Course and other sites. CLWA has
identified a number of potential users of recycled water in the future. Demands for recycled
water are seasonal, with the highest demands occurring during the hot, dry summer months
when irrigation requirements are greatest. CLWA estimates that the total potential annual
recycled water demand that is cost effective to serve is approximately 17,400 acre-feet per year.
Implementation of the recycled water system is expected to occur over the next 25 years.
CLWA has identified various strategies to encourage the use of recycled water, including rate
reductions and working with the City to mandate recycled water use for certain applications.
DRAFT May, 2011                               CO-22

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                  Conservation and Open Space
AB 1881
The California State approved Assembly Bill 1881, which requires the Department of Water
Resources to create a model ordinance to improve the efficiency of water use in new and
existing urban irrigated landscape in California. A draft ordinance has been created and is
currently being utilized by the City. The County and the City of Santa Clarita will pursue
meeting its requirements including the implementation of water efficient irrigation and
landscaping on all future developments.
Water Quality
The federal Clean Water Act was adopted to restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and
biological integrity of the nation’s waters. The Act directs each state to establish water quality
standards for all “waters of the United States.” The Environmental Protection Agency has
delegated responsibility for implementation of portions of the Clean Water Act, including water
quality control planning, to the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) and nine
Regional Water Quality Control Boards (RWQCB). The SWRCB establishes statewide policies
and regulations for implementing water quality control programs. The RWQCBs develop and
implement Water Quality Control Plans (Basin Plans) that consider regional beneficial uses,
water quality characteristics, and water quality problems. Each Basin Plan also provides
strategies and implementation plans for the control of pollutants, remediation of pollution,
monitoring, and assessment of the region’s waters.
The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Program was established in the
Clean Water Act to regulate discharges of pollutants into surface waters of the United States.
Both point discharges (such as a municipal or industrial discharge at a specific location or pipe)
and nonpoint source discharges (such as diffuse runoff of surface water from streets and
parking lots) are regulated by the NPDES Program. In addition, construction activities which
may result in water-born erosion from grading or stockpiling are regulated through various
techniques called “best management practices.” Water quality management plans and
stormwater pollution prevention plans are required for development projects to meet the
requirements of the NPDES Program to maintain water quality.
Surface water quality within the planning area is affected by a variety of discharges from both
point and nonpoint sources. Wastewater treatment plant effluent is the largest and most
common point-source discharge. Urban runoff, erosion, agricultural runoff, and other natural
causes are common nonpoint sources. Pollutants from both point and nonpoint sources include
dissolved and suspended solids, oil, grease, nutrients, metals, bacteria, and pesticides.
The Santa Clarita Valley planning area is within the hydrological areas covered by the 1994
Water Quality Control Plan for the Santa Clara River Basin (California Department of Water
Resources Hydrological Unit No. 403.51). Portions of the Santa Clara River watershed have
been identified as an “impaired water body” by the SWRCB because waters in these areas
exceed adopted standards for various pollutants. Pollutants of concern include chloride,
coliform, ammonia, nitrates, nitrites, and various organics. In 2005, the Upper Santa Clara River
Chloride Total Maximum Daily Load (TMDL) became effective, outlining a 13-year plan to
reduce chloride levels in the river. Chloride sources include SWP water imported into the Valley
for drinking water, reclaimed water from the Valencia and Saugus WRPs, and domestic sources
(including water softeners and salt-water pools). The use of residential self-regenerating water
softeners installed prior to 2003 is the most significant controllable source of chloride entering in
to the community sewer system, accounting for approximately 30 percent of all chloride in the
                                                CO-23                                    June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
discharge. The WRPs have not been designed to remove chloride. Although installation of new
automatic water softeners was prohibited in 2003, it is estimated that thousands of self-
regenerating water softeners are still in use within the Santa Clarita Valley Joint Sewerage
System. The Sanitation District has initiated a public awareness and education program,
financial incentives for removal of water softeners, and a voluntary sales ban of salt and water
softeners in local business. In 2007, the Sanitation District entered into an agreement with a
water softener provider to remove nearly 600 rented water softeners from Valley residences in
order to protect water quality. If salt levels discharged into the river do not decrease due to
these compliance efforts, the Sanitation District may have to install additional costly treatment
equipment, resulting in higher rate charges to sewage customers. A referendum proposed by
the Santa Clarita Valley Sanitation Districts of Los Angeles County to ban existing water
softeners was passed in November 2008.
Both the County and the City are working closely with the SWRQCB to meet requirements for
the TMDL, through programs to provide pro-active public education and outreach, incentives for
residents and business owners, and implementation of new technologies. A policy has been
included in this element supporting cooperative efforts to address TMDL requirements, in order
to improve water quality in the Santa Clara River.
To ensure drinking water quality of SWP water, CLWA has two surface water treatment plants
that eliminate microbial contaminant, salts, minerals and algae. According to the 2005 UWMP,
groundwater from the East Subbasin does not have microbial water problems. Parasites,
bacteria, and viruses are filtered out as water percolates through soil, sand and rock on its way
to the aquifer. However, disinfectants are added to local groundwater when it is pumped by
wells to protect public health. All groundwater used for potable water meets or exceeds drinking
water standards.
Perchlorate contamination emanating from the former Whittaker-Bermite site in the central
portion of the Valley has been detected in the Saugus formation, and to a lesser extent, in the
Alluvium formation in the East Subbasin. As discussed in the 2005 UWMP, Chapter 5 and
Appendix D, there has been extensive investigation of the extent of perchlorate contamination,
which, in combination with groundwater modeling, has led to the current plan for integrated
control of contamination migration and restoration of impacted pumping (well) capacity.
The short-term response plan for the protection of other alluvial wells, down gradient from the
Whittaker-Bermite site, will be to promptly install wellhead treatment to ensure adequate water
supplies. This plan complements the longer-term source control actions being undertaken by
the Whittaker-Bermite property owner under supervision of the State Department of Toxic
Substances Control (DTSC) to address perchlorate contamination in the northern alluvium (to
the north of the former Whittaker-Bermite site). The long-term plan also includes the CLWA
groundwater containment, treatment and restoration project to prevent further downstream
migration of perchlorate, the treatment of water extracted as part of the containment process,
and the recovery of lost local groundwater production from the Saugus Formation.
DRAFT May, 2011                               CO-24
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                   Conservation and Open Space
There are four Saugus wells contaminated by perchlorate. The four contaminated wells consist
of one owned by Newhall County Water District, two owned by Santa Clarita Water District, and
Valencia Water Company well 157 which has been sealed and abandoned. These four wells
represent a total of 7,900 gallons per minute of pumping capacity (or full-time source capacity of
about 12,700 acre-feet per year) inactivated due to perchlorate contamination.
Low Impact Development
In the past, traditional planning and design techniques have often focused on particular
characteristics of a building site and the immediate area, rather than on the relationship of each
new development project to the surrounding regional environment. Even more holistic planning
concepts such as new urbanism and smart growth have often overlooked the implications of a
specific development project on environmental conditions in the greater watershed. Planners
now understand that development decisions cannot be limited to site specific conditions, but
must be made in consideration of broader environmental conditions such as regional water
quality.
The construction of impervious surfaces such as roads, parking lots, and rooftops leads to the
degradation of water quality by increasing runoff volume, stream sedimentation and water
acidity, altering regular stream flow and watershed hydrology, and reducing groundwater
recharge. According to the EPA, a one-acre parking lot produces a runoff volume almost 16
times as great as would an undeveloped meadow of the same size.
The concept of Low Impact Development (LID) was created to ensure that new development is
designed in consideration of overall environmental conditions, including regional water quality.
LID is a land-use planning approach that incorporates “green infrastructure” concepts such as
zero runoff, rainfall harvesting, groundwater recharge, biofiltration, native landscapes, green
streets, and other measures to promote water quality protection in new development. The goal
of LID is to protect a community’s natural, pre-development water flow in order to minimize
ecological impacts of urbanization.
The LID concept was created in the early 1990’s in Maryland, with support from the U. S.
Environmental Protection Agency, to improve water quality in Chesapeake Bay. LID was
designed to provide cost-effective alternatives to conventional stormwater management, which
is typically designed to transport heavily polluted stormwater and urban runoff through pipes and
concrete channels as quickly as possible into larger regional water bodies. LID principles were
developed to control runoff at the source. According to information from the Low Impact
Development Center, basic planning principles include the following:
       1. Stormwater management. In LID, stormwater is managed as in a natural system, by
           creating permeable surfaces to infiltrate stormwater and urban runoff into the
           underlying soil and reduce the amount of runoff from impervious surfaces. Design
           measures to manage stormwater at the source include trenches, drainfields, dry wells,
           and bio-retention areas. Rain gardens are shallow depressions filled with soil, sand
           and plants that retain, filter, and treat stormwater. Filter strips and bioswales provide
           pretreatment before waters an infiltrated area. Constructed wetlands are designed to
           remove pollutants from runoff and provide habitat and recreation value. Vegetated
           swales move runoff to infiltration systems, slow the erosive velocity, and filter
           pollutants.
                                                  CO-25                                  June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
       2. Urban runoff reduction. Urban runoff during dry weather is largely the result of too
           much water for landscape irrigation, and washing of driveways and sidewalks. This
           runoff mixes with fertilizer, pesticides, pollutants on roadways, and other contaminants
           to create some of the most polluted water entering creeks and rivers. LID measures
           include irrigation control and the use of native and compatible plant species that
           require less water.
       3. Site design and circulation. Minimizing the amount of asphalt and other impervious
           road and parking surfaces in site design and circulation decreases the amount of
           runoff and pollutants, while reducing both infrastructure and maintenance costs.
           Modifications to conventional design to reduce impervious surfaces area includes
           reduced street widths, reduced parking, use of porous materials in driveways and
           parking areas, and the use of traffic calming measures that include stormwater capture
           components. Mixed use development which allows pedestrian circulation and
           incorporates green belts, conserves open space, and protects natural features will also
           protect water quality.
Policies have been included in this element to require low impact development techniques in the
design of both private development and capital projects, for the purpose of managing
stormwater at the source, enhancing surface water quality, reducing runoff volumes, and
economizing on infrastructure costs for drainage systems and treatment facilities. In October
2008, the County Board of Supervisors adopted a LID ordinance.
G.       Biological Resources
Biological Setting
The Santa Clarita planning area encompasses the Santa Clara River Valley, the east extension
of the Santa Susana Mountains, the western reaches of the San Gabriel Mountains, and the
southern slopes of the Sierra Pelona range. Because of the range of ecosystems found in this
geographic setting, the planning area contains a wide variety of natural vegetation types.
Approximately 49 percent (237 square miles) of the planning area is located within National
Forest lands. Predominant vegetation within National Forest lands include mixed chaparral with
hardwood and conifer forests at higher elevations, and riparian vegetation along stream
channels. Much of the undeveloped portions of the Valley floor are vegetated with coastal scrub
interspersed with annual grasslands. Around and east of Agua Dulce, desert scrub components
and scattered junipers are found.
Wildlife within the planning area is also diverse. River channels and open upland areas of the
planning area provide habitat for movement and foraging, as does the adjacent National Forest
land. Species of bats, rodents, rabbits, weasels, badgers, skunks, raccoons, fox, bobcat, black
bear, and coyote are known to inhabit canyons throughout the planning area.
Various habitats within the planning area also support bird diversity for resident, migratory, and
seasonal species. Numerous species of raptors, sparrow, quail, hummingbirds, swallows, larks,
and owls have been identified, along with such federal and State special status species as
Southwestern Willow Flycatcher (Empidonax traillii extimus), and Least Bell’s Vireo (Vireo bellii
pusillus). The flycatcher typically occupies the unincorporated County portion of the planning
area near Castaic Creek just west of the City boundary, while the vireo is found in local riparian
habitats.
DRAFT May, 2011                                  CO-26

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                 Conservation and Open Space
Amphibians and reptiles are abundant and relatively diverse within certain portions of the
planning area. Snakes, toads, frogs, lizards, and salamanders are primarily found along the
Santa Clara River and its tributaries, as well as other riparian areas. The Unarmored
Threespine Stickleback (Gasterosteus aculeatus williamsoni), a Federal and State-listed
endangered species, has also been identified in the planning area.
As one of the last free-flowing natural riparian systems left in southern California, the Santa
Clara River supports a diversity of organisms by providing breeding sites, traveling routes, and
other resources for wildlife. Protection of the watershed for habitat preservation is a key
conservation goal. During the history of settlement and resource extraction in the Santa Clarita
Valley, the watershed has been damaged repeatedly by human activities. The rupture of the St.
Francis Dam in March, 1928 sent a 180-foot high wall of water crashing down San Francisquito
Canyon to its junction with the Santa Clara River, sweeping structures, farms, and people in its
path as well as wildlife habitat. Mining activities have degraded habitats through pollution of
surface and groundwater, crushing activities, roads, pipelines, and other infrastructure
constructed within the watershed. Agriculture has generated stormwater runoff that impacts
surface and groundwater quality with increased salts, nitrogen, and pesticides. Off-road vehicle
use within the watershed damages wildlife directly as well as through destruction of habitat and
introduction of exotic and invasive plants. Stormwater drainage systems have changed the path
and rate of flow for water entering the river, necessitating the construction of concrete banks for
stabilization that impact groundwater recharge. Many of the water conservation policies
contained in this element, including water conservation, promoting infiltration through pervious
surfaces, use of native landscaping, limiting use of invasive landscape species, and acquisition
of open space in the watershed for conservation purposes, will also protect the quality of the
Santa Clarita Watershed for habitat conservation purposes.
Sensitive Species
Sensitive biological resources are those habitats or species that have been recognized by
federal, State, and/or local agencies as being endangered, threatened, rare, or in decline
throughout all or part of their historical distribution. Numerous sensitive plant and animal
species and communities have been identified within the planning area, especially within
National Forest lands (see Exhibit CO-4). Sensitive communities include southern coast live
oak woodlands, valley oak woodland, southern mixed riparian, southern riparian scrub,
sycamore alder riparian woodland, and southern willow scrub. Vernal pools have also been
identified on Cruzan Mesa, in Plum Canyon, and within Fair Oaks Ranch. The federally
endangered Least Bell’s vireo and Southwestern Willow Flycatcher depend on nesting and
foraging habitat provided by vegetation communities within the planning area. Riparian habitats
along the Santa Clara River, Soledad Canyon, Bouquet Canyon, and San Francisquito Canyon
support the endangered Unarmored Threespine Stickleback.
                                                CO-27                                   June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Habitat for the following sensitive species is known to occur within the planning area or in forest
lands adjacent to the planning area, which should be protected from adverse impacts of
development:
    •  Gnatcatcher, coastal California (Polioptila californica californica);
    •  Frog, California red-legged (Rana aurora draytonii);
    •  Toad, arroyo (arroyo southwestern) (Bufo californicus microscaphus);
    •  Barberry, Nevin’s (Berberis nevinii);
    •  Stickleback, unarmored threespine (Gasterosteus aculeatus williamsoni);
    •  Flycatcher, southwestern willow (Empidonax trailli extimus).
DRAFT May, 2011                                CO-28

City of Santa Clarita General Plan Conservation and Open Space
                                                               CO-29 June, 2011
Conservation and Open Space                                      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Significant Ecological Areas
The County first began to inventory biotic resources and identify important areas of biological
diversity in the 1970s. These biologically important areas, such as the Santa Clara River, have
historically been identified in the City’s General Plan and Santa Clarita Valley Area Plan. The
primary mechanism used by the County to conserve biological diversity is a planning overlay
called Significant Ecological Areas (SEA). SEAs are defined as ecologically important land and
water systems that are valuable as plant or animal communities, often important to the
preservation of threatened or endangered species, and conservation of biological diversity in the
County. The SEA overlay, along with the SEA conditional use permit process, are referred to as
the SEA Program, which allows the County to implement its biotic resource goals through land
use regulations and biological resource assessments.
Conservation of the Valley’s biotic diversity is the main objective of the SEA Program, and
connectivity between important natural habitats plays an important role in maintaining biotic
communities. The preservation of large biologically diverse areas is also important because new
species may still be found within a few miles of major urban centers, such as the Xylotrechus
hovorei, a beetle recently discovered near the Placerita Nature Center. Within the Santa Clarita
Valley, the General Plan has designated the following SEAs, as shown on Exhibit CO-5. A
more comprehensive description of the Valley’s SEAs is contained in an Appendix of this
General Plan.
    • Cruzan Mesa Vernal Pools SEA
The Cruzan Mesa Vernal Pools SEA lies in the southeastern end of the Liebre Mountains, north
of the Santa Clara River and east of Bouquet Canyon. The SEA boundaries encompass the
watershed and drainages of the Cruzan Mesa and Plum Canyon vernal pools, considered as a
single ecosystem within the SEA. Vernal pools, which are rare in Southern California and
extremely rare in Los Angeles County, form seasonally in shallow, closed basins, usually where
a lens of heavy clay soil holds surface water following rainfall events.
    • Santa Clara River SEA
The Santa Clara River SEA encompasses the entire Los Angeles County reach of the Santa
Clara River, primarily within unincorporated areas of Los Angeles County. The Santa Clara
River SEA covers the length of the river and with the watershed extensions encompasses a
wide variety of topographic features and habitat types. The orientation and extent of the SEA
also consists of the surface and subsurface hydrology of the Santa Clara River, from its
headwater tributaries and watershed basin to the point at which it exits Los Angeles County.
    • Santa Felicia SEA
The Santa Felicia SEA includes a variety of topographic features and habitat types. The
orientation and extent of the SEA encompasses the surface and subsurface hydrology of the
Santa Felicia watershed, from its headwater, tributaries, and basin to the point at which it exits
Los Angeles County. The northernmost portion of the SEA is within the Angeles National
Forest. Capturing the watershed tributaries, the eastern boundary follows a predominate
ridgeline, the western boundary is the county border and the southern boundary captures two
other small tributaries that feed the Santa Felicia, to encompass the entire watershed that
ultimately drains into Lake Piru in Ventura County.
DRAFT May, 2011                               CO-30

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                Conservation and Open Space
    • Santa Susana Mountains/Simi Hills SEA
The Santa Susana Mountains/Simi Hills SEA is located northwest of the San Fernando Valley
within unincorporated areas of Los Angeles County and an incorporated area of the City of Los
Angeles west of Chatsworth. The area is south of State Route 126 and the Santa Clara River,
west of Interstate 5, and includes much of the Santa Susana Mountains in the north, the Santa
Susana Pass, Chatsworth Reservoir, and the eastern portion of the Simi Hills in the south.
    • Valley Oaks Savannah
The Valley Oaks Savannah SEA is located on the west side of Interstate 5, north of Pico
Canyon. The area contains one of the last remaining stands of valley oak in the Santa Clarita
Valley and a mixture of plants from the coastal sage scrub and chaparral communities, typical of
those found in the Santa Clarita Valley.
SEAs are not “preserves,” and limited development is allowed within these designated areas.
However, in order to conserve important biological resources, land-intensive development in
SEAs within County areas requires approval of a Conditional Use Permit and an additional level
of review by the SEA Technical Advisory Committee. These requirements ensure that
development is designed to be highly compatible with the biological resources present in a
manner that is consistent with the overall intent of the SEA program and that the impacts of
development are balanced with the conservation of natural resources. Exemptions from SEA
requirements include the construction of single-family residences, additions to existing single-
family residences, accessory structures to single-family residences, and agricultural uses such
as animal grazing and corrals.
Within the City, any development proposal in an SEA is required to include a biological study
evaluating impacts on biological resources from the proposed development, and appropriate
mitigation measures. In addition, the City’s Unified Development Code requires that any such
project be designed to be compatible with biological resources, maintain watercourses and
water bodies in a natural state, maintain wildlife corridors, preserve adequate buffer areas or
barriers between development and natural resources, and ensure that roads and utilities are
designed to mitigate impacts to biological resources.
                                              CO-31                                  June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
DRAFT May, 2011             CO-32
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                   Conservation and Open Space
Wildlife Corridors
Fragmentation of open-space areas by urbanization creates “islands” of wildlife habitat. In the
absence of linkages that allow movement between habitat areas, some wildlife species will not
be able to maintain viable populations. Wildlife corridors provide connections between habitat
areas that allow animals to move from one habitat area to another. Maintaining wildlife corridors
helps to compensate for the isolation and fragmentation of habitats resulting from natural and
man-made alterations to the environment; they link habitat areas that may otherwise be
separated by rugged terrain, changes in vegetation, or human disturbance. Wildlife use
corridors to move between remaining habitat areas in order to mate and replenish depleted
populations, to escape from fire and other natural or manmade hazards, and to seek food,
water, and other necessities.
The Santa Clara River Enhancement and Management Plan Study (SCREMP) identified several
key movement corridors within the Planning Area. These corridors are generally located in
undisturbed canyon and ravine stream habitat areas. The preservation of these areas is
essential for maintaining the wildlife diversity within the planning area.
The Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy (SMMC) and the Mountain Recreation and
Conservation Authority have also identified wildlife corridors in the Santa Clarita Valley,
including Elsmere Canyon, Towsley Canyon, Weldon/Bee Canyon, crossings along SR-14 near
Whitney Canyon, and crossings between Canyon Country and Sulphur Springs. Elsmere
Canyon is an integral part of the Rim of the Valley Trail Corridor and Wildlife Corridor, linking the
Santa Clarita Woodlands, Whitney, and Placerita Canyons. The Rim of the Valley Trail Corridor
traverses the Santa Monica, Santa Susana, and San Gabriel Mountains.
As mitigation to a major transportation project, the San Gabriel/Santa Susana Wildlife Corridor
and Open Space Acquisition Project identified key wildlife linkage corridors within the
mountainous areas along the high occupancy vehicle lanes proposed for State Route 14
between Newhall Avenue and Sand Canyon Road. The corridors include the Whitney Canyon
Movement Route and the highway underpass known as the Los Pinetos undercrossing. These
corridors link significant coastal sage scrub, oak woodland, and riparian woodland and scrub
habitats. To date, the City of Santa Clarita has secured and preserved more than 1,000 acres
of wildlife corridor lands.
A wildlife corridor linkage design has been developed for the San Gabriel-Castaic Connection
by the South Coast Wildland, in partnership with the Resources Agency, the U. S. Forest
Service, California State Parks, National Park Service, SMMC, and several other agencies. The
linkage design provides for a wildlife corridor connecting the two sections of Angeles National
Forest within the planning area. According to a report on this linkage design prepared by South
Coast Wildlands:
         The final Linkage Design has several branches to accommodate diverse species
         and ecosystems functions. The northwest branch is dominated by coastal sage
         scrub and chaparral and encompasses all or portions of Bee, Spring, Tapia, Tick,
         and Mint Canyons. It serves most of the focal species, including puma, mule
         deer, Pacific kangaroo rat, and California thrasher. The eastern branch connects
         a series of desert scrub and juniper woodland habitats, thereby linking habitat for
         species such as American badger, burrowing owl, and Bear sphinx moth that
         prefer open habitat that are prevalent in desert plant communities. The third
         distinct branch of the Linkage Design follows the Santa Clara River and Soledad
                                                 CO-33                                  June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
         Canyon and provides large stepping-stones of habitat for semi-aquatic species,
         such as the western pond turtle, two-striped garter snake, and mountain
         kingsnake; it also serves a suite of aquatic and riparian-dependent species (e.g.
         Unarmored three-spine stickleback, Santa Ana sucker, Arroyo chub, California
         red-legged frog, Arroyo toad) not addressed by our analysis. State Route 14 and
         Sierra Highway are major transportation routes and pose the greatest barriers to
         wildlife movement. Wildlife crossings should be located near the confluence of
         Spring Canyon, Bee Canyon, and the Santa Clara River; in Agua Dulce Canyon,
         and at both places where Escondido Creek crosses the freeway.
The City of Santa Clarita has purchased several parcels within the Linkage to protect as open
space, and will continue to seek ways to protect these important wildlife corridors.
National Forest Lands
The Angeles National Forest forms the northern and southern border of the Santa Clarita Valley
planning area. In terms of planning for future development, the National Forest is an important
part of the envisioned greenbelt surrounding the Valley. The mission of the U. S. Forest Service
is to “sustain the health, diversity, and productivity of the nation’s forests and grasslands to meet
the needs of present and future generations.” In 2005, the Forest Service updated its Land
Management Plan for the Angeles National Forest, which was amended by a Record of
Decision in 2006 selecting Alternative 4(a) as the Land Management Plan that will govern land
use and resource management decisions in the Angeles National Forest for the next 10-15
years. The final Land Management Plan identified four major threats to the health of the forest:
     1. Fire and fuels – decades of fuel buildup, coupled with drought and disease, have created
         a situation that poses a threat to the lives and property living in the communities of
         southern California. Fire is a fact; it is not a question if fires will burn, rather, it is a
         question of when and how intensively.
     2. Invasive species – invasive species are spreading at alarming rates, adversely affecting
         people and the ecosystems of the Angeles National Forest.
     3. Loss of open space – The loss of open space (also known as “fragmentation”) has three
         aspects that challenge effective land management: (1) habitat fragmentation, (2)
         ownership fragmentation, and (3) use fragmentation.
     4. Unmanaged recreation – The phenomenal increase in the use of national forests for
         recreational activities raises the need to manage most forms of recreation, particularly
         the use of off-highway vehicles (OHVs), including all-terrain vehicles (ATVs),
         snowmobiles, sport utility vehicles (SUVs), off-highway motorcycles, motorized trail
         bikes, and similar means of transportation.
In response to these identified threats, the Land Management Plan contains strategies to limit
motorized public access to designated areas of the forest; limit development to reduce the loss
of open space and retain the undeveloped character of the forest; protect adjacent communities
from wildfire; and emphasize plant and wildlife management in all program areas, including a
reduction in invasive species.
DRAFT May, 2011                                CO-34

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                Conservation and Open Space
It is recognized that effective forest management requires that City and County residents be
good forest neighbors. Of particular importance for City and County dwellers is the area known
as the Wildland/Urban Interface, in which urban and rural development abut the forest
boundaries. In these areas fuel modification and fire protection will be of prime importance to
reduce fire hazards and potential damage to lives and property from spreading forest fires.
These areas are also critical to limiting the spread of invasive species into forest areas, and
limiting unauthorized motor vehicle use within the forest. City staff reviewed and provided
extensive input on the Land Management Plan when it was being prepared, and has reiterated
the City’s commitment to ensuring that the forest is protected from off-road vehicles, invasive
species, and over-development.
Urban Forestry Program
Planting trees in urban environments delivers substantial economic, environmental, and
aesthetic benefits. Trees absorb rain, reducing runoff and decreasing stormwater impacts on
drainage facilities. Trees provide windbreaks and shade that lower energy costs in nearby
buildings. Green landscapes reduce carbon dioxide and absorb air pollutants, improving air
quality. Attractive, tree-lined streets improve property values. In terms of biological resources,
trees provide habitat for birds and other wildlife.
The City of Santa Clarita maintains an Urban Forestry program as part of its Public Works
Department. The Urban Forestry Division maintains all of the City's street, park, trail, and facility
trees, while planting many more each year. The Division is responsible for the maintenance of
50,000 trees, reforestation, weed abatement, the Neighborhood Leaf Out Program, the Arbor
Day celebration, and tree removal. Through its Neighborhood Leaf Out Program, the Division
provides education and public outreach to encourage tree planting throughout the City. The
Division also maintains recommended tree planting lists. Through these efforts, the City has
been recognized as a Tree City USA award winner for many years. The City has long
recognized the value of a healthy urban forest, and will continue to promote this program.
Development Impacts on Biological Resources
Urban development can have an impact on biological resources by reducing habitat and
foraging grounds, increasing nighttime lighting and noise, causing air and water pollution,
changing ambient air and water temperatures, introducing invasive species and household pets
into native habitats, and generating off-road vehicle use, among other impacts. Although not all
of these impacts can be reduced to insignificant levels within urbanized areas, it is possible to
minimize adverse impacts on the natural environment through good planning and sustainable
development practices.
Several strategies for new development have been recommended by the U. S. Green Building
Council as part of its LEED program. The (LEED) Green Building Rating System™ is the
nationally accepted benchmark for the design, construction, and operation of high performance
green buildings. LEED promotes a whole-building approach to sustainability by recognizing
performance in five key areas of human and environmental health: sustainable site
development, water savings, energy efficiency, materials selection, and indoor environmental
quality.
                                                 CO-35                                  June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                   City of Santa Clarita General Plan
With respect to minimizing impacts of new development on biological resources, LEED
recommends the following measures:
   •  Provide a high ratio of open space to development footprint to promote biodiversity.
      LEED recommends vegetated open space equal to 20 percent of the project’s site area,
      which may include vegetated roof areas (“green roofs”). Pedestrian-oriented hardscape
      areas may also be included, provided they use permeable paving or include vegetated
      open space. Wetlands, vegetated swales, and ponds may also be included to meet
      open space requirements. Open space provides habitat for vegetation, which in turn
      provides habitat for local wildlife. Even small open spaces in urban areas can provide
      refuges for wildlife populations, which have become increasingly marginalized. Plants
      that specifically support local species such as insects and other pollinators can help
      sustain populations up the food chain.
   •  Use vegetated open space to reduce the urban heat island effect, increase stormwater
      infiltration, and provide the human population on the site with a connection to the
      outdoors.
   •  Provide connections between vegetated open space areas within a site and between
      adjacent sites; avoid isolated landscaped areas surrounded by paving to the extent
      possible.
   •  Minimize nighttime lighting to the extent possible, while maintaining adequate security
      lighting. Outdoor lighting is necessary for illuminating connections between buildings
      and support facilities such as sidewalks, parking lots, and roadways. However, light
      trespass can affect the nocturnal ecosystem and light pollution limits night sky access.
      Establishing time limits and maximum illumination levels for nighttime hours when
      businesses are closed is recommended to cut light pollution.
   •  Prohibit new development within 100 feet of any wetlands as defined by federal, state or
      local regulations, or within 50 feet of a water body, including lakes, rivers and streams;
      or within any areas identified as habitat for threatened or endangered species, including
      wildlife corridors.
   •  For new development proposed on previously undeveloped sites (“greenfields”), perform
      a site survey to identify biological resources, and plan for resource protection in the site
      design. On sites where habitat areas are to be protected, establish disturbance
      boundaries during construction; delineate stockpiles, lay- down, recycling and disposal
      areas. Use paved areas for staging, and erect construction fencing around the drip line
      of existing trees to protect them from soil compaction by construction vehicles.
   •  Minimize site disturbance to the extent feasible and restore previously degraded areas to
      their natural state. Preserve and enhance natural site elements, including water
      courses, trees and native vegetation, where possible.
DRAFT May, 2011                               CO-36

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                Conservation and Open Space
    •   Choose appropriate native or adapted plant materials, and prohibit invasive or noxious
        weed species. Native and adapted plants require minimal or no irrigation following
        establishment, do not require active maintenance such as mowing or chemical inputs
        such as fertilizers, pesticides or herbicides, and provide habitat value and promote
        biodiversity through avoidance of monoculture plantings. Replace turf-grass with native
        or adapted plantings to promote biodiversity and habitat.
    •   Reduce the amount of site area devoted to paving when not functional or necessary, and
        replace paving with landscaped areas.
    •   Use landscaping to shade buildings and impervious areas, decrease cooling loads and
        energy expenditures, and reduce the heat-island effect. The term heat island refers to
        urban air and surface temperatures higher than nearby rural areas. Many cities have air
        temperatures up to 10 degrees (Fahrenheit) warmer than the surrounding natural
        landscape. Heat islands form as cities replace natural landscape with pavement,
        buildings, and other infrastructure. The heat island effect can be lowered by reducing
        the amount of surface parking lots and by replacing heat-absorbing surfaces with plants,
        groundcover, small trees, and green roofs. Some cities have developed parking areas
        below green space to reduce the overall heat island effect and provide for greater
        pedestrian connectivity.
    •   Local landscape ordinances should be revised to avoid any landscape requirements that
        are not sustainable and horticulturally sound. “No lawns” should become the norm.
    •   Minimize erosion to protect habitats and reduce stress on natural water systems by
        preserving vegetation and limiting development on any slopes greater than 15 percent.
Issues for biological resource protection within the planning area will continue to be the
reduction of open space and habitat due to urbanization, the separation of habitat areas into
disconnected, isolated islands, and other impacts of development. However, measures such as
those listed above can be taken to make urban development less harmful to the natural
environment. Policies have been included in this element to protect biological resources as
described in this section.
H.      Cultural and Historical Resources
Historical Overview of the Santa Clarita Valley
The earliest physical evidence of human occupation in the Upper Santa Clara River area dates
from 7,000 to 4,000 years ago, and was recovered from two sites near Vasquez Rocks. The
identity of the area’s first inhabitants is unknown. The Tataviam peoples, Uto-Aztecan speakers
of Shoshonean descent, began to reach the planning area in approximately A. D. 450. They
were described as a distinct linguistic group when they were first encountered in 1776 by
Spanish explorer Pedro Fages.
The Tataviam lived primarily on the upper reaches of the Santa Clara River, east of Piru Creek
and extending from the Antelope Valley to the San Gabriel Mountains. Archaeological data
indicate that subsistence patterns and ritual practices were similar to neighboring Chumash and
Gabrielino culture groups; these groups were hunter-gatherers, subsisting on acorns, yucca,
juniper berries, seeds, and small game. Tataviam village sites with known names were located
                                                 CO-37                                June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
at San Francisquito, Piru, Camulos, Castaic Reservoir, Piru Creek, Elizabeth Lake, and in the
Newhall environs; additional archaeological sites have been recorded along the Santa Clara
River and Vasquez Rocks. The Native American Heritage Commission (NAHC) has identified
three sites of Native American cultural significance near the Santa Clara River including CA-
LAN-361, CA-LAN-366, and CA-LAN-367. Many of the place names in the valley, such as
Castaic, Piru, Camulos, and Hasley, reflect a Tataviam linguistic origin. One site of extreme
cultural significance, Bowers Cave near Val Verde, yielded one of the most significant
assemblages of American Indian religious and ceremonial artifacts ever found in North America.
Discovered in 1884 by two local boys, many of the cave’s cultural artifacts were removed, but
most found their way to the Native American collection in the Peabody Museum of American
Ethnology at Harvard University.
Spanish explorer Gaspar de Portola’s chronicles of his 1769 expedition from San Diego to
Monterey provide the first European documentation of the Santa Clarita region. Father Juan
Crespi, who accompanied Portola, wrote that the peaceful Tataviam offered them food and
respite. The expedition passed north through the San Fernando Valley to Newhall and on to the
Castaic Junction area, then west along the Santa Clara River to San Buenaventura, and from
there north to Monterey. The trail blazed by Portola became known as El Camino Viejo (The
Old Road). In 1772, Pedro Fages, commander of the Presidio of San Diego, traveled through
Castaic Junction and Soledad Canyon in search of army deserters.
After establishment of the Mission San Fernando in 1797, much of the Santa Clarita Valley was
used by the Mission for ranching. Known as the Estancia de San Francisco Xavier, the estancia
buildings were constructed by Tataviam workers in 1804 near the confluence of Castaic Creek
and the Santa Clara River. In later decades the buildings fell into disrepair and were vandalized;
in 1937 their remnants were bulldozed into the ground. The archaeologically rich midden
remains a significant and protected site.
Following the establishment of the Mission San Fernando, the native peoples of the Santa
Clarita Valley were deprived of their lands and relocated to the mission grounds where they
were baptized and forced to work in the mission fields and vineyards. At the Missions San
Fernando and San Gabriel, they intermarried with other similarly dislocated tribes.
With the Mexican Revolution of the 1820s and 1830s came secularization of the former mission
lands. In 1839 the Rancho San Francisco, comprising 48,000 acres of the Santa Clarita Valley,
was granted to Ignacio Del Valle, mayor of Los Angeles and later a state legislator. However,
falling cattle prices and financial woes brought the ranch land back on the market in the 1860’s,
where it again changed hands several times before being purchased on January 15, 1875 by
Henry Mayo Newhall.
The first documented discovery of gold in California occurred in Placerita Canyon in 1842, near
what is now called the Oak of the Golden Dream. Nearly 1,300 pounds of gold was retrieved
from Placerita Canyon between 1842 and 1847. Anecdotal evidence has been found indicating
that placer gold mining occurred in Hasley Canyon and other areas of the Valley as early as the
1820’s.
DRAFT May, 2011                               CO-38

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                   Conservation and Open Space
Various mineral resources discovered throughout the Valley spurred development of mining
camps and settlements. San Francisquito Canyon was one of the first canyons to be mined and
settled. By 1860 copper was being mined in Soledad Canyon, and a small town developed near
the head of Williamson’s Pass. Both copper and gold bearing quartz veins were mined into the
20th Century, although the rush was over by about 1875. In addition to gold, the local canyons
yielded silver, lead, borates, manganese, titanium, gravel, agates and other gemstones and
minerals.
The upper Santa Clarita Valley was the first location of oil drilling in Southern California, after oil
seeps were discovered by American settlers in Pico Canyon in 1865. (The seeps had been
known for centuries to the Tataviam, who had used the raw asphaltum for waterproofing and
other purposes.) Mexican General Andres Pico and other investors sold their oil fields in Pico
Canyon in 1875, along with the oil company they had formed to extract and process the oil.
Their California Star Oil Company (CSO) later became part of the Standard Oil Company of
California. CSO’s new superintendent, Charles Alexander “Alex” Mentry, laid the groundwork
for an oil town that became known as Mentryville, after deepening an older well, Pico No. 4, to
produce a “gusher” on September 26, 1876. By the 1880s there were nearly 100 families living
in Mentryville, which included Mentry’s 13-room mansion known as the “Big House.” Pico No. 4
became the longest-running oil well in the world before it was taken out of service in 1990,
having pumped crude oil almost continuously for 114 years. In 1976 the well site was dedicated
as a California State Historic Landmark, and a plaque now marks the historic oil well’s location.
Although the Big House, the 1885 schoolhouse and certain other buildings remain, most of
Mentryville’s early homes and company structures were dismantled or removed in the early 20th
Century, ravaged by fire, or destroyed by the 1994 earthquake. The site is now overseen by the
Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy, which has begun renovation of the Big House.
The completion of the Southern Pacific Railroad through the area in 1876, along with the
development of the Pico oil field and construction of the Pioneer Oil Refinery in the mid-1870s,
spurred an oil boom in the Valley. Pico Canyon oil flowed to the refinery via a pipe, and was
refined into kerosene, lamp oil, naphtha and other petroleum derivatives. The remnants of the
Pioneer Oil Refinery, which was the first viable oil refinery in the State, were damaged in the
1994 earthquake. Now owned by the City of Santa Clarita, along with 4.5 acres of land donated
by Chevron Oil, the site is being evaluated for partial restoration as a historical depiction of an
early oil refinery.
American explorer John C. Fremont, who would later challenge Abraham Lincoln for the
Republican nomination for U.S. president, arrived at Castaic Junction with his “Buckskin
Battalion” in 1847, following the future route of SR-126 from Ventura. After camping for two
days in the Santa Clarita Valley, he crossed into the San Fernando Valley near the present
alignment of Sierra Highway. Near the current Universal Studios Hollywood, he accepted the
surrender of California from General Andres Pico. Fremont’s crossing point through the Santa
Susana Mountains occurred at what became known as Fremont Pass, and is now known as
Newhall Pass.
                                              CO-39                                      June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
In 1854, Phineas Banning made a 30-foot cut in the pass to allow the first stagecoach through.
The Butterfield Overland Stage took the “Great Southern” route from St. Louis to San Francisco
over Fremont Pass from 1858 until the outbreak of the Civil War in 1861. In 1863, under a
construction contract awarded by the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors, General
Edward F. Beale’s workers cut a 90-foot deep passageway through the pass between the
present alignments of SR-14 and Sierra Highway to improve the roadway. Beale also
constructed a toll house when the pass was widened, and collected toll for the right of passage
for 22 years before the County halted the practice. Beale’s Cut was a vital route that served the
Southern California area until it was bypassed by the Newhall Tunnel in 1910. By 1915, the
Ridge Route extended from downtown Los Angeles north through the Newhall Tunnel and into
the San Joaquin Valley.
In 1875 most of the Rancho San Francisco was purchased by Henry Mayo Newhall, a San
Francisco entrepreneur. Much of the Valley’s history from that time has been linked to the
activities of Newhall and the company formed by his heirs, The Newhall Land and Farming
Company. When Henry Newhall purchased the Rancho, he knew the Southern Pacific Railroad
intended to lay tracks north out of Los Angeles to join with the Central Pacific and its connection
to the Transcontinental Railroad. A rail route through his property would increase its value, so
he sold an alignment to the Southern Pacific for $1 and a square-mile townsite to the railroad’s
development company for another $1.
Three months after Newhall’s land purchase, the Southern Pacific began tunneling through the
mountains and the San Fernando and Santa Clarita Valleys. Built with Chinese labor, at 6,940
feet the San Fernando (Railroad) Tunnel was the third-longest tunnel in the United States when
it was completed on July 27, 1876. As the Southern Pacific extended track to the north, the
Central Pacific was coming south to meet it. The two companies joined track near Lang Station
in Canyon Country in a “golden spike” ceremony on September 5, 1876. The following month,
on October 18, 1876, the Southern Pacific began subdividing the town of Newhall.
Initially the town was located at Bouquet Junction, in what would later become Saugus, named
for Henry Newhall’s home town in Massachusetts. Little more than a year later, in January and
February 1878, the town moved three miles south to its present location at Old Town Newhall,
probably because of better water availability from a natural artesian spring. The Pioneer Oil
Refinery, which handled the oil piped from Pico Canyon and was initially set up along the wagon
route in the Newhall Pass, moved to present-day Pine Street in Railroad Canyon next to the
new train tracks. The earliest productive refinery on the West Coast, it operated until 1888.
A unique feature of Santa Clarita’s historical setting is the extent of early filming in the Valley,
due to its proximity to Hollywood and the presence of distinctive topographic and geologic
features used as settings for early Western films. The community of Newhall contains many
notable Hollywood movie sets and is the site of the Walk of Western Stars. Some of the
Western relics in downtown Newhall include the Tom Mix cottages, used as housing for the
early motion picture industry; the American Theater (originally the Tumbleweed Theater)
designed by Charles S. Lee and funded in large part by Actor William S. Hart in 1940; Melody
Ranch (aka Placeritos Ranch and Monogram Ranch), built in the early 1920s and owned from
1952 to 1990 by actor Gene Autry and used as a location for hundreds of Western films,
television series and commercials; and the Walt Disney Co.’s Golden Oak Ranch in nearby
Placerita Canyon. Heritage Junction on Main Street has been set aside for the preservation of
several local historic structures.
DRAFT May, 2011                               CO-40

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                 Conservation and Open Space
William S. Hart Park and Museum contains the 1927 retirement home of silent screen cowboy
star William S. Hart, along with original furnishings, Western art, mementos of early Hollywood,
and American Indian artifacts. The home and its contents were left to the people of Los
Angeles County by Hart upon his death in 1946. Today it is a part of the Los Angeles County
Natural History Museum system. In addition to the buildings, the site contains the 260-acre
Horseshoe Ranch property, operated by the Los Angeles County Department of Parks and
Recreation, and features picnic facilities, nature trails, and ranch animals, including bison
initially donated in 1962 by Walt Disney. Another early Western movie actor’s home that has
been preserved as a County-operated museum within the planning area is that of Harry Carey
Sr. and his actress-wife Olive Carey, who arrived in San Francisquito Canyon in 1916. Their
son, actor Harry Carey Jr., was born at the Saugus ranch in 1921.
The Santa Clarita Valley was also the location of the second-worst disaster in California history.
In 1908 the City of Los Angeles obtained rights to the watershed of the Owens Valley. Under
direction of William Mulholland, chief engineer for the Los Angeles Department of Water and
Power, the project was expanded in the 1920’s into San Francisquito Canyon, where the St.
Francis Dam was completed in 1926. From there the aqueduct traversed the eastern part of
Newhall Ranch and crossed over San Fernando Pass to the spillway above the San Fernando
Reservoir. In 1928 the concrete dam failed. The resulting flood of the river valley on March 12
and 13 caused at least 450 deaths and destroyed 990 homes and large areas of farmland. It
was America’s worst civil engineering failure of the 20th Century. In 1932-34, the Los Angeles
Department of Water and Power built a new earthen dam in Bouquet Canyon.
Identification of Historical Sites
The Valley’s historical heritage has been preserved in numerous historical sites throughout the
planning area. When updated in 1999, the City’s General Plan listed dozens of significant
historical properties, sites and landmarks in the planning area, which have been included and
updated in this element (see Table CO-1 and Exhibit CO-6). Of these sites, one is listed on the
National Register of Historic Places and 13 are recognized by the State of California. The
remaining sites are designated as City Points of Historical Interest.
In addition to the listed historic sites, a literature search indicates that almost 70 Native
American archeological sites have been identified near the Santa Clara River within the
planning area. Native American settlements and ceremonial sites were often located in river
valleys. Development in proximity to the River and its major tributaries may impact Native
American heritage sites, and should be evaluated for historic resources as part of the review
process.
Historic Preservation Efforts
The Santa Clarita Valley Historical Society was formed in 1975 to identify, preserve and protect
the unique historical sites and structures throughout the Valley. The City and County have both
worked cooperatively, along with the Historical Society, to protect significant sites. For example,
the County has provided a portion of Hart Park to be set aside as “Heritage Junction,” and the
City and Historical Society have cooperated on relocating structures to that location for
renovation and preservation. The County has also been instrumental in setting aside Harry
Carey Ranch Historic District and providing funding to preserve the Placerita Canyon Park and
Nature Center, where a historic cabin has been preserved and is open to the public. The City
has worked cooperatively with the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy and the Mountains
Recreation and Conservation Authority to preserve artifacts related to the oil history and cultural
                                                CO-41                                    June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
lifeways of Mentryville in Pico Canyon. In addition, the City routinely conditions commercial and
residential developers to halt work in the event that cultural resources are encountered during
grading.
The City of Santa Clarita is evaluating the adoption of a Historic Preservation Ordinance, and
will pursue completion of this ordinance as a General Plan objective. The City has also adopted
the Downtown Newhall Specific Plan, with architectural guidelines that acknowledge the
importance of the historic buildings within the Downtown Newhall planning area. The City has
consistently involved the Historic Society in review of development proposals in areas
containing historic sites and resources, and has required projects to mitigate impacts to historic
resources as a condition of development approval.
DRAFT May, 2011                               CO-42
City of Santa Clarita General Plan Conservation and Open Space
                                                               CO-43 June, 2011
Conservation and Open Space                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                                      Map Legend
            Map Reference                Cultural or Historical Site
               Number
                  1         22502-22510 Fifth Street
                  2         22506 Sixth Street
                  3         22614 Ninth Street
                  4         22621 Thirteenth Street
                  5         24148 Pine Street
                  6         24238 Main Street
                  7         24244 Walnut Street
                  8         24247-24251 Main Street
                  9         24287 Newhall Avenue
                  10        24307 Railroad Avenue
                  11        24311-24313 Main Street
                  12        24522 Spruce Street
                  13        Asistencia/Rancho San Francisco
                  14        Beale’s Cut
                  15        Bowers Cave
                  16        Harry Carey Ranch
                  17        Heritage Junction Historic Park
                                • Newhall Ranch House
                                • Mitchell Adobe Schoolhouse
                                • Kingsburry House
                                • Callahan’s School House
                                • Ramona Chapel
                                • Edison House
                                • Pardee House/Good Templars
                                • Saugus Depot
                  18        La Puerta
                  19        Lang Station
                  20        Lyon Station/Eternal Valley
                  21        Melody Ranch
                  22        Mentryville
                  23        Oak of the Golden Dream
                  24        Old Ridge Route
                  25        Pico #4 Oil Well
                  26        Pioneer Oil Refinery
                  27        Railroad Tunnel
                  28        St. Francis Dam Disaster Site
                  29        Sterling Borax Works in Tick Canyon
                  30        Vasquez Rocks
                  31        Walker Cabin
                  32        William S. Hart Park and Museum
DRAFT May, 2011                          CO-44

 City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                     Conservation and Open Space
 Table CO-1 contains a listing of known sites and structures in the Santa Clarita Valley that have
 been identified as having historical or cultural significance based on building characteristics,
 events that took place at the site, or the site’s role in the historical or cultural development of the
 community. The list is a compilation of sites that were known at the time this document was
 prepared. In order to ascertain whether additional sites exist within the community that should
 be protected due to their historical or cultural significance, the City will continue to identify any
 additional sites that should be added to the list.
          Table CO-1: Historical Resources in the Santa Clarita Valley Planning Area
               Site                                        Historic Significance
Oak of the Golden Dream            Site of the first discovery of gold in California in 1842
Placerita Canyon                   State Historic Landmark #168
Pioneer Oil Refinery               Oldest continuously operated oil refinery in the world; first
23552 Pine Street, Newhall         refinery in State, producing illuminating oil. Donated to City in
                                   1998, restored in 1930 and 1950s and 1976, but damaged in
                                   1994 earthquake.
                                   State Historic Landmark #172
Pico #4                            First successful oil well in California and longest-producing
27201 West Pico Canyon             commercial oil well in the world; developed in 1876 by
                                   California Star Oil Company, a predecessor of Standard Oil
                                   Company of California. Located in Mentryville/Pico Canyon.
                                   National Register of Historic Places
                                   State Historic Landmark #516
Mentryville                        Oil boom town that grew around Pico #4 for derrick workers.
27201 West Pico Canyon             Four buildings remain, and many others have been relocated
                                   to Newhall. Located in Santa Clarita Woodlands Park,
                                   maintained by Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy, and
                                   open to the public.
                                   State Historic Landmark #516-2
Asistencia/Rancho San              The Santa Clara River Valley was a part of Mission San
Francisco                          Fernando in 1797. A granary and estancia (outpost) were
West of Magic Mountain             established on this site in 1804. Historic plaque located at
Parkway near SR-126                Castaic Junction.
                                   State Historic Landmark #556
Lang Station                       A health spa, hotel, and freight station were established on this
East of Lang Station Road          site in 1871. In 1876, a golden spike was driven connecting
                                   San Francisco and Los Angeles by rail. Only relics of the
                                   station remain.
                                   State Historic Landmark #590
Lyons Station/Eternal Valley       A stage stop was built here in 1852. It was used by the
Cemetery                           Butterfield Overland Stage line from 1857 to 1861 as a resting
23287 Sierra Highway,              place for soldiers and camel caravans from Fort Tejon. Many
Newhall                            pioneers are buried in the Eternal Valley Cemetery.
                                   State Historic Landmark #688
St. Francis Dam Disaster Site      On March 12, 1928, the dam, which was a part of the Los
DWP Power Plant 2                  Angeles Aqueduct system, collapsed, spilling more than 12
San Francisquito Canyon            billion gallons of water into the Valley and killing at least 450
Road                               people.
                                   State Historic Landmark #919
                                                  CO-45                                      June, 2011

 Conservation and Open Space                                 City of Santa Clarita General Plan
             Site                                   Historic Significance
22621 Thirteenth Street      Single-family dwelling built in February 1873 for Adam
Newhall                      Malinzewski at Lyons Station; moved by J. O. Newhall to San
                             Fernando Road in Newhall about 1879. At the turn of the
                             century it was acquired by the Frew family, who were pioneer
                             blacksmiths, and later Ed Jauregui, who moved it to its present
                             location.
                             City Point of Historical Interest
24148 Pine Street            Single-family dwelling constructed in 1878 by California Star
Newhall                      Oil Company as a guest house for visiting executives and
                             politicians. Standard Oil later sold it to Josh Woodbridge, who
                             lived there until his death in 1950.
                             City Point of Historical Interest
24522 Spruce Street          Commercial structure once known as the “hoosegow”. Initially
Newhall                      planned as a wooden structure on this site in 1888, bids for a
                             jailhouse were opened February 20, 1906, resulting in the
                             construction of this building in the Spanish Mission style. It
                             served as a jail/constable’s office until 1926, when a sheriff’s
                             substation opened. The structure still retains the original cell
                             doors and barred windows.
                             City Point of Historical Interest
24311-24313 Main Street      Commercial structure in historic downtown Newhall built by
Newhall                      Thomas M. Frew in 1910 for his blacksmith shop. Originally
                             built in Mission Revival style, the building was expanded in
                             1924 when his son, Thomas Frew Jr, modified the structure
                             into a welding and machine shop. In 1935, concurrent with the
                             widening of San Fernando Road (Main Street), it was
                             remodeled into its present Spanish Mission style.
                             City Point of Historical Interest
22502-22510 Fifth Street     Commercial structure used by Newhall Ice Company. The
Newhall                      structure was built in 1922 by Fred Lamkin as a warehouse
                             and storage yard. Lamkin came to Newhall in 1917, opening a
                             garage facing San Fernando Road. Shortly after construction
                             the warehouse was converted into an ice house, which is still in
                             operation.
                             City Point of Historical Interest
24244 Newhall Ave            Church building erected in 1940 under the direction of pastor
Newhall                      Leroy Hux, for First Baptist Church of Newhall. The building
                             was later used by several religious groups, and is now known
                             as Queen of Angels Catholic Church.
                             City Point of Historical Interest
22616 Ninth Street           Single-family dwelling built circa 1908 as a residence for Ray
Newhall                      Osborne, Superintendent of the Sterling Borax Works in Tick
                             Canyon. The house was originally located in the small mining
                             town of Lang in Canyon Country, and was moved to its present
                             location in 1928.
                             City Point of Historical Interest
 DRAFT May, 2011                          CO-46

 City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                    Conservation and Open Space
              Site                                          Historic Significance
24287 Newhall Avenue              Single-family dwelling, commonly known as the Erwin house,
Newhall                           built in the California bungalow style around 1910. Unusual in
                                  design, the structure is one of the last remaining bungalows in
                                  Santa Clarita.
                                  City Point of Historical Interest
22506 Sixth Street                Commercial building originally erected on San Fernando Road
Newhall                           by Albert Swall in 1902. Swall also developed other
                                  commercial properties along San Fernando Road to establish a
                                  business district. In 1925 the structure was moved to its
                                  present location. The building was later used as the circulation
                                  office for the Newhall Signal newspapers from the 1960’s until
                                  1986.
                                  City Point of Historical Interest
24238 Main Street                 Commercial building constructed by the Sheriff’s department in
Newhall                           1926 as Substation #6. The building housed a company of
                                  eight Sheriff’s deputies commanded by Captain Jeb Steward,
                                  and served as the community’s second jail after closing of the
                                  old constabulary/jail building on Spruce Street. The Newhall
                                  Signal newspaper used the building from 1968-1986.
                                  City Point of Historical Interest
24307 Railroad Avenue             Commercial building commonly known as “Ye Olde
Newhall                           Courthouse.” The Newhall Masonic Building Company, Ltd.
                                  was incorporated in 1931 and completed this two-story project
                                  in 1932. The County Courthouse occupied the ground floor,
                                  and the Masonic Lodge the second story. Lumber from the old
                                  Mayhue building was later used, including the floor of the Hap-
                                  A-Lan dance hall which previously occupied the site. The
                                  County relocated the court to Valencia and the first floor was
                                  renovated into office uses.
                                  City Point of Historical Interest
24247-24251 Main Street           Seven commercial structures commonly known as the Tom Mix
Newhall                           Cottages. The small building at 24247 was built by Halsey W.
                                  Russell in 1919. In 1922 the other six cottages were added,
                                  forming a motor court catering to drivers on the old Ridge
                                  Route. These structures were also used by people in the
                                  motion picture industry for lodging during filming in the area.
                                  Tom Mix used one as a dressing room on several occasions,
                                  and the area was known as a “Mixville” – earlier albeit smaller
                                  than his primary Mixville studio in Glendale.
                                  City Point of Historical Interest
William S. Hart Park and          The mansion on this property was built for western film actor
Museum                            William S. Hart in 1927, and Hart filled it with Western art and
                                  artifacts. Many Western movies were filmed here. The William
                                  S. Hart Residence, Bunk House, Garage and Chauffeur’s
                                  Quarters, Pool House, Gate Tower, Sundeck and Tea Room,
                                  Barns and Pet Cemeteries are all eligible as contributors to a
                                  district for listing in the National Register of Historical Places.
                                  The property is currently listed as a State Point of Historical
                                  Interest (#564)
                                                  CO-47                                     June, 2011

 Conservation and Open Space                                    City of Santa Clarita General Plan
             Site                                      Historic Significance
Heritage Junction Historic Park City Point of Historical Interest located within William S. Hart
24151 Newhall Avenue            Park, and containing the following structures:
Newhall
1. Newhall Ranch House          1. Built around 1865 as a small house with a basement, this
                                building served as the headquarters of the Rancho San
                                Francisco, the original land grant comprising 48,000 acres of
                                the Santa Clara River Valley. This ranch was owned after
                                1875 by Henry Mayo Newhall and was administered by his son
                                George, who expanded the Ranch House in 1893. Originally
                                located in sight of the Estancia de San Francisco Xavier (on
                                what is now Six Flags Magic Mountain property), the structure
                                was relocated to Heritage Junction in 1990.
2. Mitchell Adobe               2. Colonel Thomas Finley Mitchell, an officer of the Mexican-
   Schoolhouse                  American War, homesteaded Sulphur Springs in the 1860’s,
                                building an adobe that served as his family’s home. One room
                                of the adobe was used as a schoolhouse for the local children,
                                the first in the area and home of the second oldest school
                                district in Los Angeles County. In 1986 the adobe was rescued
                                from destruction and moved brick-by-brick to Heritage
                                Junction, where it was rebuilt.
3. Kingsburry House             3. This house was built in 1878 as a residence at 8th Street
                                and San Fernando Road (Main Street). In 1883 it was occupied
                                by Lyman Steward, a founder of the Union Oil Company. In
                                1911 it was moved to Walnut Street near Market. It is a one-
                                story Colonial Revival cottage with a porch supported by four
                                turned columns. This house is largely intact with original
                                features, including double-hung windows. It was moved to
                                Heritage Junction in 1987, and decorated in historic style by
                                the Questers.
4. Callahan’s Schoolhouse       4. This 1927 structure originated at Robert E. Callahan’s
                                Western town/amusement area that operated in the 1920’s in
                                Santa Monica as the Mission Village, and was relocated to Mint
                                Canyon (Saugus) when the freeway was built in 1963 and
                                renamed Callahan’s Old West. The structure was built to
                                house six antique school desks which came from a mining
                                camp in Vallejo, along with a speaker’s podium and blackboard
                                representative of a one-room schoolhouse. The building was
                                donated by Callahan’s widow, Marion, and moved to Heritage
                                Junction in 1987.
5. Ramona Chapel                5. Designed by noted composer Carrie Jacobs Bond, this
                                chapel was based on the chapel at Rancho Camulos made
                                famous in Helen Hunt Jackson’s novel Ramona. It was built in
                                1926 as part of Robert E. Callahan’s Mission Village in Santa
                                Monica, later operated as Callahan’s Old West, and was
                                relocated in 1963 due to freeway construction. Wall paintings
 DRAFT May, 2011                               CO-48

 City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                  Conservation and Open Space
              Site                                       Historic Significance
                                  in the chapel are by Frank Tinney Johnson. The altar is said to
                                  be over 200 years old, and the wooden pews date back to
                                  1858. The chapel was donated by Callahan’s widow, Marion,
                                  and moved to Heritage Junction in 1987.
6. Edison House                   6. This Bavarian-style structure was built in 1919 and modified
                                  in 1925 as part of a group of houses provided for Edison
                                  workers assigned to the Saugus substation. When the St.
                                  Francis Dam broke and flooded the area in 1928, these
                                  structures escaped damage. After years of use by Edison
                                  employees, the cottages were acquired by Newhall Land and
                                  Farming Company, which demolished six of the cottages. This
                                  house, being in the best condition, was preserved and
                                  relocated to Heritage Junction in 1989.
7. Pardee House/Good              7. Built in 1890 on Pine Street in Newhall by Henry Clay
Templars                          Needham, a prominent orator and later a prohibitionist
24275 Walnut Street, Newhall      candidate for president, as a Good Templar’s Lodge. Moved in
                                  1893 by Ed Pardee, local oilman and police constable, who
                                  expanded the structure and used it as his residence. The
                                  structure was later used as a telephone exchange by Pacific
                                  Bell; as a teen center by the Santa Clarita Valley Boys Club; as
                                  the Newhall-Saugus-Valencia Chamber of Commerce office;
                                  and as a movie set by Tom Mix in the 1920’s. Donated to the
                                  historical society and moved to Heritage Junction in 1992.
                                  State Point of Historical Interest
8. Saugus Depot                   8. The last remaining railroad station in the Santa Clarita
Newhall, Hart Park Site           Valley, this structure was built in 1887 by Southern Pacific
                                  Railroad when completing the spur line to Ventura. The station
                                  was used until 1978, and was moved to Heritage Junction at
                                  Hart Park in 1980, where it is used by the SCV Historical
                                  Society as a general history museum. Next to the station is a
                                  historic Mogul steam locomotive, built in New York in 1900 and
                                  donated to the Historical Society by Gene Autry in 1982.
                                  City Point of Historical Interest
Beale’s Cut Stagecoach Pass       In 1862-63, General Edward Beale improved the wagon route
Adjacent to Sierra Highway        through the present-day Newhall Pass between the current
near Newhall Avenue               locations of SR-14 and Sierra Highway to a depth of 90 feet.
Newhall                           Beale installed a toll booth at this location, which he continued
                                  to operate for 20 years. The Newhall Tunnel, part of the Ridge
                                  Route, bypassed Beale’s Cut in 1910.
                                  State Point of Historic Interest #1006
                                                CO-49                                     June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                  City of Santa Clarita General Plan
             Site                                 Historic Significance
Old Ridge Route             First opened in 1915, the narrow, curvy 30-mile Ridge Route is
                            a 20-foot wide roadway, carved out using horse-drawn dirt
                            scrapers that zigzagged across the ridges of the western San
                            Gabriel Mountains. The road was named for the way it
                            followed the ridgeline of the mountains. Paved in 1919, the
                            Ridge Route Highway, officially named the Castaic-Tejon
                            Route, became the first direct road connecting Los Angeles
                            and Bakersfield. Often referred to as the original Grapevine
                            route, the nickname stems from the fact that early wagoners
                            had to hack their way through thick patches of Cimarron
                            grapevines that inhabited “La Canada de Las Uvas” (“Canyon
                            of the Grapes”). Without this road, California may have
                            become two separate states. In 1933 the State opened the
                            Ridge Route Alternate, a three-lane road with fewer curves that
                            would eventually be designated California Route 99. This
                            alternate was widened to four lanes in the 1950s, then
                            realigned and rebuilt in the 1960s as a high-speed interstate
                            freeway. The original Ridge Route was abandoned, but parts
                            of the old road are still visible north of Castaic.
                            National Register of Historic Places
Melody Ranch                Historic ranch set used for western films. The buildings were
Placerita Canyon Road and   originally developed by pioneer filmmakers Ernie Hickson and
Oak Creek Canyon Road,      Trem Carr about 1922 and consisted of authentic Western
Newhall                     buildings located at the present location of Golden Oak Ranch.
                            In 1936 the buildings were moved to their current location. The
                            site at that time was also known as the Monogram Ranch, as
                            so many of the company’s Westerns were filmed there. From
                            1949 to 1951 the site was the scene of Newhall’s Old West 4th
                            of July celebration, when it became “Slippery Gulch.”
                            Purchased by western actor Gene Autry in 1952, the site was
                            renamed Melody Ranch and used for many early television
                            programs, including the long-running “Gunsmoke.” Most of the
                            structures burned down in a valleywide brush fire on August
                            26, 1962; however, the trademark Spanish-style arches and
                            parts of the main street and Mexican village are still intact. In
                            1990 the ranch was purchased by the Veluzat family of
                            Newhall and rebuilt. Today it remains a working movie ranch
                            and the site of the City’s annual Cowboy Festival.
                            City Point of Historical Interest
DRAFT May, 2011                            CO-50

 City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                     Conservation and Open Space
              Site                                       Historic Significance
Harry Carey Ranch Historic        This complex contains historic buildings associated with
District                          western film actor Harry Carey, who purchased the property for
28515 San Francisquito            a residence and filming in 1916. Nine buildings of the complex
Canyon Road                       comprise the Harry Carey Historic District. Harry and Olive
                                  Carey had the ranch house and its various outbuildings built
                                  during the 1920s and 1930s, a period when they and their
                                  children lived at the ranch. Carey’s 20-year career included
                                  more than 200 films. In 2005, the County accepted the
                                  donation from the property owner as part of the approval
                                  process for an adjacent housing development. The
                                  significance of the district is based not only on its role in the
                                  early film industry, but on the character and quality of the ranch
                                  buildings and the main residence known as the Tesoro Adobe.
                                  The property is maintained as a museum by the County of Los
                                  Angeles. The property, currently known as the Tesoro Adobe
                                  Historic Park, is not officially listed on the National Register of
                                  Historic Places, it has been determined to be eligible for this
                                  status.
Railroad Tunnel                   Completed in 1876 by the Southern Pacific Railroad with
Newhall Pass                      Chinese immigrant labor, the 6,940-foot tunnel was the third
                                  longest tunnel in the world at that time. The tunnel is still used
                                  for freight rail and Metrolink commuter rail service.
                                  California Register of Historical Resources.
Bowers Cave                       Discovery site of significant Native American cultural artifacts,
Near Val Verde                    the cave is located at the entry to Chiquita Canyon Landfill.
La Puerta                         The “door of The Old Road” is located in the southwestern
Elsmere Canyon                    portion of Elsmere Canyon. Identified as both a natural
                                  physical and visual resource, La Puerta also figures as a
                                  significant anthropological, military, religious, and cultural
                                  resource in the planning area. La Puerta served as a
                                  geographic landmark for local Native Americans, Spanish
                                  explorers, and American pioneers crossing the Valley.
Walker Cabin                      Built by Frank Walker around 1920, the cabin served as the
Placerita Canyon Natural Area     family’s second home for about 10 years. The cabin has been
                                  fully restored and refurnished as part of the County-maintained
                                  Visitor’s Center.
                                                 CO-51                                     June, 2011

 Conservation and Open Space                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
               Site                                       Historic Significance
Borax Mine                          In the spring of 1905 gold prospectors Henry Shepard and
Tick Canyon                         Louis Ebbenger found a rich deposit of borates in Tick Canyon.
                                    They sold the claim to Thomas Thorkildson and Steven Mather
                                    for $30,000. Sterling Borax Works was formed to mine the
                                    claim, and began operations in 1908. A large mill was
                                    constructed north of what is now Davenport Road, and a
                                    narrow-gauge train line connected the mine to Lang Station, six
                                    miles away. Borax was hauled along this rail line by engine
                                    “Sterling No. 2” for 70 years. The mining camp, called Lang,
                                    included a boarding house, offices, company store, a dozen
                                    residences, corral, and warehouses. The Sterling Mine was
                                    never a big producer, generating about 20,000 tons per year of
                                    borates during peak production. Borax Consolidated, a
                                    forerunner of U.S. Borax, bought the Sterling Mine in 1911 for
                                    $1.8 million. For many years, the corporate headquarters were
                                    located in Valencia.
Vasquez Rocks                       This 745-acre park of unique geological rock formations is
Agua Dulce                          located near Agua Dulce Springs. The park features a history
                                    trail tour about the Tataviam Indians and early Spanish settlers.
                                    Located on the San Andreas fault, the sandstone rock
                                    formations were uplifted during the Cenozoic era,
                                    approximately 25 million years ago. In 1873-74, one of
                                    California’s most notorious bandits, Tiburcio Vasquez, used
                                    these rocks as a hiding place to evade law enforcement. His
                                    name has since been associated with the geologic feature.
                                    National Register of Historic Places (Item #72000228, 1972)
 Sources: Santa Clarita Valley Historical Society, State of California Office of Historic
 Preservation, The Signal, and City of Santa Clarita
 I.      Scenic Resources
 The Value of Scenic Resources
 For many people, the primary sensory experience of a place is visual. A community’s
 appearance and scenic resources contribute to a sense of place and influence residents’
 perceptions about their quality of life. Memorable and distinctive images provide residents with
 spatial orientation and identity, heightening their feeling of belonging to the place, and instilling a
 sense of civic pride.
 “Aesthetic value” refers to the perception of the natural beauty of an area, as well as the
 elements that create or enhance its visual quality. While aesthetic value is subjective, it is one
 of the elements that contribute to people’s experience of an area. Most communities identify
 scenic resources as an important asset, although what is considered “scenic” may vary
 according to its environmental setting. For example, a valley community has distinctive scenic
 resources that differentiate it from a coastal or mountain community.
 DRAFT May, 2011                                 CO-52

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                     Conservation and Open Space
“Scenic resources” can include natural open spaces, topographic formations, and landscapes
that contribute to a high level of visual quality. These are significant resources that can be
maintained and enhanced to promote a positive image in the community. Many people
associate natural landforms and landscapes with scenic resources, such as lakes, rivers and
streams, mountain meadows, and oak woodlands. These areas, generally felt by residents to
possess natural beauty, provide a positive visual experience and help to define the aesthetic
character of an area. Scenic resources can also include man-made open spaces and the built
environment, such as parks, trails, nature preserves, sculpture gardens, and similar features.
“Viewsheds” constitute the range of vision in which scenic resources may be observed. They
are defined by physical features that frame the boundaries or context of one or more scenic
resources. A region’s topography can lend aesthetic value through the creation of public view
corridors of ridgelines, and through the visual backdrop created by mountains and hillsides.
Viewsheds and scenic vistas may include views of both natural and built environments, and are
also considered important scenic resources.
Scenic resources in the Santa Clarita Valley are described below and shown on Exhibit CO-7.
Scenic Mountains and Canyons
Due to its diverse topography, including mountain backdrops, hillsides and ridgelines, canyons
and streams, and a broad river valley, the planning area contains a wide range of scenic views
and resources. Natural areas range from grasslands to forest, contributing to the variety of
scenic experiences. Within the built environment, greenbelts and parkways, trail systems, and
parks provide scenic amenities.
The mountains surrounding the Valley provide a sense of form and containment. Well-defined
ridgelines, slopes and canyons provide a visual backdrop to the urban environment, create a
sense of place for each neighborhood or district, and provide opportunities for residents
throughout the Valley to experience the natural environment.
Ridgelines project from the lower foothills of the San Gabriel and Sierra Pelona mountain
ranges to the Valley floor. The City and County have designated specific ridgelines and
established land use policies designed to preserve the views of these ridgelines, as described in
the Land Use Element. Sloping from the ridgelines are numerous canyons that give local
identity to neighborhoods within the planning area. These foothill and canyon zones are
important scenic resources that, because of inherent slope constraints, have remained
undeveloped and support a variety of natural habitats. Major scenic canyon areas are
described below.
    •   Placerita Canyon, running east and west in the southerly portion of the planning area, is
        characterized by shaded oak groves, a seasonal stream lined with cottonwoods, willows
        and sycamores, sandstone formations, and many other plant and animal communities.
        Its historic “Oak of the Golden Dream” is the site of California’s first gold discovery in
        1842, and is a designated State Historic Landmark. The Canyon contains a seasonal
        waterfall and hiking trails, including a trail leading to the top of the Santa Clara Divide in
        the San Gabriel Mountains. From this vantage point one can view the entire Santa
        Clarita Valley to the north and the San Fernando Valley to the south, with long-range
        views beyond. The Placerita State Park and Nature Center is located within the canyon.
                                                 CO-53                                    June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                   City of Santa Clarita General Plan
   •  Whitney Canyon is located at the intersection of Sierra Highway and Newhall Avenue,
      just east of SR-14, and serves as the gateway to Angeles National Forest and the Rim of
      the Valley Trail Corridor. Due to its location between Elsmere and Placerita Canyons,
      Whitney Canyon is the middle link for the continuation of the Rim of the Valley Trail
      Corridor and the natural wildlife corridor through these canyons into Towsley Canyon
      and the Santa Clarita Woodlands. The canyon area contains oak forests, waterfalls,
      chaparral, coastal sage scrub, and a riparian watershed area; 442 acres are publicly
      owned for preservation as natural open space, through a partnership between the City
      and a conservation authority.
   •  Elsmere Canyon lies within the Angeles National Forest, near the intersection of Sierra
      Highway and Newhall Avenue, east of SR-14. Encompassing 2,700 acres, about half
      the canyon area is within the National Forest. Like other canyons in the planning area,
      Elsmere Canyon has served as a popular film site for western movies. A proposal to
      locate a landfill in the Canyon was withdrawn in 2004 based on public concerns about
      environmental quality, and in 2007 the property owner donated 400 acres of Elsmere
      Canyon to the Mountains and Recreation Conservation Authority for use as an open
      space preserve.
      Elsmere Canyon contains abundant wildlife, riparian habitat, coastal sage, and oak
      woodlands, and provides a wildlife corridor from the Santa Susana Mountains to the San
      Gabriel range.
   •  Bouquet Canyon, in the northerly portion of the planning area, follows the course of
      Bouquet Creek, generally from Bouquet Reservoir south to the junction of Bouquet
      Canyon Road and Soledad Canyon Road. The canyon contains oak, willow, and
      sycamore groves, and the development character north of Saugus is rural.
   •  San Francisquito Canyon runs north and south from Saugus to Green Valley, and is a
      rural environment supporting numerous horse ranches. The Canyon also contains sites
      of historic significance, such as the Harry Carey Historic Ranch.
   •  Sand Canyon, located in the eastern portion of the planning area, runs northward from
      the steep slopes in the Angeles National Forest to the Santa Clara River floodplain. The
      character of the canyon ranges from heavy woodland to large, rustic rural estates with
      abundant trees. Views from the upper reaches of the canyon include the valley floor.
   •  Pico Canyon, located in the northern portion of the Santa Clarita Woodlands Park in the
      western portion of the planning area, has been used extensively for oil extraction. The
      canyon was once occupied by Mentryville, an oil boomtown, and now contains valley
      and coast live oaks and views of the valley floor. The Mentryville historic site is
      contained within a State Park.
   •  Towsley Canyon, located in the central portion of the Santa Clarita Woodlands Park,
      offers visitors a diverse natural area. Evidence of Native American heritage and early
      California oil interests are visible, along with spectacular geologic formations in “The
      Narrows”. The Canyon contains numerous hiking trails along with Ed Davis Park.
DRAFT May, 2011                              CO-54

City of Santa Clarita General Plan Conservation and Open Space
                                                               CO-55 June, 2011
Conservation and Open Space                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
    •   Tick Canyon lies in the Soledad Basin and is a tributary of the Santa Clara River
        channel, between Mint Canyon to the west and Tapia and Spring Canyons to the east.
        The Canyon was mined for various minerals during early settlement of the Valley.
    •   Wiley Canyon forms a portion of the pass through which Interstate 5 passes as it enters
        the planning area from the south. The upper reaches of the canyon provide a sense of
        enclosure and include views of scrub-filled hillsides and stands of oak trees, while the
        northerly portion of the canyon offers expansive views of the Santa Clarita Valley.
    •   Rice Canyon is located south of Wiley Canyon in the southwestern portion of the
        planning area, and offers views of rugged topography, coastal sage scrub, and stands of
        oak trees.
Scenic Woodlands
Protected forest land within the Angeles and Los Padres National Forests surround the planning
area. Oak woodlands within these forests also extend into rural portions of the planning area,
contributing to its rural and scenic character. Oak woodlands occur in scattered locations,
primarily in the southerly portions of the planning area, and contain a diverse habitat including
six species of oak. Cottonwood-willow riparian forests are found primarily along the Santa Clara
River and its tributaries. Several of the County’s Significant Ecological Areas (described above)
have been adopted to protect oak woodland and cottonwood-willow riparian forest areas.
Scenic Water Bodies
Rivers and streams located in canyon bottoms provide scenic visual relief from urbanization as
well as habitat for wildlife. The most significant river feature in the Valley is the Santa Clara
River, which flows approximately 100 miles from its headwaters near Acton to the Pacific
Ocean, and is one of only two natural river systems remaining in Southern California. The river
flows east to west through a beautiful valley formed between the Santa Susana Mountains and
the Transverse Ranges. Over 4,000 acres of high quality riparian habitat have been preserved
in a natural state along the length of the River.
Some of the major tributaries to the Upper Santa Clara River watershed include Castaic Creek,
San Francisquito Canyon, Bouquet Canyon, Sand Canyon, Mint Canyon, Sand Canyon, Oak
Springs Canyon, and the South Fork of the Santa Clara River. Newhall Creek, Placerita Creek,
and Towsley Creek are tributaries to the South Fork. Castaic Lake, in the northern portion of
the planning area, provides scenic views as well as recreational opportunities. The west side of
the lake is surrounded by parkland and sandy beaches.
Vasquez Rocks
Vasquez Rocks County Park, located in the community of Agua Dulce west and north of SR-14,
is an area of unique geologic formations that has been the site of hundreds of film shoots.
Sculpted by earthquake activity along the Elkhorn fault, the rock formations were compressed,
folded, and tilted up to a height of nearly 150 feet. Erosion has shaped the coarse-grained
yellow sandstone into jutting and sweeping formations interspersed with shale and basalt layers.
Vasquez Rocks are both a visual and historical landmark in the community.
DRAFT May, 2011                                CO-56

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                Conservation and Open Space
Impacts of Development on Scenic Views
Urban development has the potential to impair scenic resources if not carefully planned and
controlled. Increasing development pressures could impact the quantity, quality, and variety of
scenic vistas in the Valley through increased smog and light pollution, development on
prominent ridgelines and hillsides, obstruction of scenic views along various roadways, signage
and streetscape clutter, and aesthetically deficient development. Policies have been added to
the element to address the goal of protecting the scenic and aesthetic beauty of the Valley.
J.       Air Resources
The planning area is located within the South Coast Air Basin, a 6,745-square mile area
encompassing Orange County and the non-desert portions of Los Angeles, San Bernardino,
and Riverside Counties. The regional climate within the Basin is semi-arid, characterized by
warm summers, mild winters, infrequent seasonal rainfall, moderate daytime onshore breezes,
and moderate humidity. Bounded by the Pacific Ocean to the west, and mountains to the north,
east, and south, and with abundant sunshine and frequent inversions, the South Coast Air Basin
is naturally conducive to the formation of air pollution.
The Santa Clarita Valley is surrounded by the Santa Susana and San Gabriel mountain ranges
on the south, east and west, and the Sierra Pelona Mountains on the north. The Valley lies in a
transitional microclimatic zone of the Basin between the “valley marginal” and “high desert”
climate types. Situated far enough from the ocean to escape coastal influences, the Valley’s
climate is generally mild with hot summers and sunny, warm winters. Average annual
precipitation is about 13 inches, usually received between November and March, although some
mountain areas south of the Valley may receive up to 24 inches of precipitation per year.
Predominant wind patterns for the Santa Clarita Valley generally follow those of a
mountain/valley regime. During the day, effects of the onshore flow reach inland and are
enhanced by a localized up-valley or mountain pass wind. During the night, surface radiation
cools the air in the mountains and hills, which flows down-valley producing a gentle “drainage
wind.” The predominant wind patterns in the Valley are broken by occasional winter storms and
episodes of Santa Ana winds, which are strong winds that originate in the desert. Usually warm
and often carrying dust and sand, the Santa Ana winds occur 5-10 times per year between
September and March, and are particularly strong in mountain passes and at canyon outlets.
Air pollution emissions within air basins are generated by stationary, mobile, and natural
sources. Stationary sources are further classified as point or area sources, with point sources
occurring at an identified location such as a manufacturing plant, and area sources comprised of
multiple dispersed emissions such as use of paints, generators, lawn mowers, aerosol cans,
and agriculture. Mobile sources refer to emissions from motor vehicles, aircraft, trains, and
construction equipment. Air pollution can also be generated by the natural environment, such
as when fine dust particles are pulled off the ground surface and suspended in the air during
high winds.
                                                CO-57                                 June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                    City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Both the federal and State governments have established ambient air quality standards for
outdoor concentrations of various pollutants in order to protect public health. These standards
have been set at levels that could be generally harmful to human health and welfare, and to
protect the most sensitive persons from illness or discomfort with a margin of safety. The South
Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) is responsible for bringing air quality within
the South Coast Air Basin into conformity with these standards. SCAQMD defines typical
sensitive receptors as residences, schools, playgrounds, child care centers, athletic facilities,
hospitals, long-term health care facilities, rehabilitation centers, convalescent centers, and
retirement homes.
The air pollutants which are most relevant to air quality planning and regulation in the planning
area include ozone, carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, fine suspended particulate matter,
sulfur dioxide, and lead. Ozone is a gas formed when volatile organic compounds and nitrogen
oxides, byproducts of internal combustion engine exhaust, undergo photochemical reactions in
the presence of sunlight. The most frequent transport route for ozone into the planning area is
from the Los Angeles Basin and San Fernando Valley, borne by daily wind patterns through the
Santa Clara River Valley. Carbon monoxide is a colorless, odorless gas produced by
incomplete combustion of fuels, with the highest concentrations generally found near congested
transportation corridors. Major sources of fine suspended particulate matter are diesel engines,
tires and brakes.
The greatest source of air pollutants in the basin is from mobile sources. Because of its
geographical location and meteorological conditions, the Santa Clarita Valley records some of
the highest ozone readings in the Basin. The data indicate that local ozone concentrations
usually result from pollutants transported from outside the valley. However, locally-generated
air pollutants are also an issue for Valley residents, due to increased growth and automobile
traffic. Localized carbon monoxide concentrations are found at congested intersections,
especially in winter. Concentrations of fine airborne particulates result from locally generated
emissions, such as increased truck traffic. Stationary sources include oil and gas producers
and industrial uses.
Land use patterns and the density of development directly affect the amount of air pollution that
is generated within a community. Land uses that are segregated increase the number of motor
vehicle trips and associated air pollutant emissions, because it is inconvenient or impossible for
residents to walk or bicycle between destinations, or public transit is not available. Higher
density communities that mix residential with commercial, business, and employment uses are
designed to reduce reliance on motor vehicle use, or reduce the trip length and frequency
needed. In addition, communities in which the ratio of jobs to housing units is not balanced
result in additional vehicle miles traveled by commuters who must drive to employment centers.
The SCAQMD is the agency principally responsible for comprehensive air pollution control in
the South Coast Air Basin. However, the City and the County, like all other local planning
agencies, have an important role to play in controlling air pollution through their land use and
transportation policies. Local agencies have a shared responsibility to promote strategies for
trip reduction, congestion management, low emission vehicle infrastructure, transit accessibility,
and energy conservation.
DRAFT May, 2011                                CO-58
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                 Conservation and Open Space
The California Air Resources Board (CARB) has prepared guidelines for local jurisdictions to
consider incorporating into planning documents such as this General Plan to protect residents,
particularly sensitive receptors, from harmful air pollutants. Sensitive individuals refer to those
segments of the population most susceptible to poor air quality (i.e. children, the elderly, and
those with pre-existing serious health problems affected by air quality). The health of these
individuals can be seriously impacted by continuous or repeated exposure to air pollution, which
can increase the risk of cancer, asthma, impaired lung function in children, bronchitis, and
cardiovascular disease. The CARB guidelines recommend minimum spacing requirements
between sensitive uses and individuals, and sources of air pollution. Policies have been
included in the element to require adequate separation of uses to protect public health.
In addition to pollutants, some land uses generate odors which are irritating or have the
potential to cause headaches, nausea or other health effects. Examples of uses which have the
potential to generate odors include sewage treatment plants, landfills, recycling facilities, waste
transfer stations, auto body shops, coating operations, fiberglass operations, and uses that
process or store chemicals or petroleum products. Control and regulation of odors in the
planning area is the responsibility of the SCAQMD. However, adequate separation between
uses which have the potential to generate odors and sensitive land uses has been considered in
preparation of the land use map.
Land uses that have the potential to be sources of air-borne dust and particulates include rock
crushing and gravel operations, quarrying, mining, and recycling of construction debris. In
addition, diesel engines have been identified as a source of toxic particulate matter. According
to CARB, diesel particulates represent 70 percent of the known potential cancer risk from air
toxics in California. CARB recommends that planning documents such as General Plan Land
Use and Circulation Elements consider air quality and public health issues by locating
residences and other sensitive land uses away from sources of air pollution, and by ensuring
that circulation facilities such as truck routes and truck stops are not located near sensitive
uses.
Another major issue in terms of air quality is climate change associated with carbon emissions.
This issue is discussed in the next section.
K.      Climate Change
Background and Legal Requirements
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) was established under the auspices of
the United Nations to produce a global consensus on the science and economics of climate
change. The IPCC does not conduct any research nor does it monitor climate related data. Its
role is to assess the latest scientific, technical and socio-economic literature produced
worldwide relevant to the understanding of the risk of human-induced climate change. In 2007,
the IPCC issued a series of reports. The first report provided a summary of the science of what
is causing climate change (Physical Science Basis), and the second report (Summary for Policy
Makers) outlined the expected impacts, adaptation, and vulnerability of the environment to
climate change. The conclusions of these two reports were:
    •   The global atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases (including methane, carbon
        dioxide and nitrous oxide) have increased due to human activity since 1750.
    •   The increase in these concentrations is primarily due to the consumption of fossil fuels.
                                               CO-59                                    June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
    •   The global mean temperature is likely to increase between 1.8ºC and 4.0ºC by the end
        of the century.
    •   Sea levels are likely to rise between 0.2 and 0.6 meters by the end of the century.
    •   Heat waves, thaw events, and heavy precipitation are likely to become more intense.
The third IPCC report (Mitigation of Climate Change) addressed mitigation measures that can
be taken to address climate change. This report concluded that although climate change
threatens the global environment if unchecked, catastrophic impacts of climate change can be
avoided if immediate and consistent actions are taken to reduce global greenhouse gas
emissions.
The term “greenhouse gases” (GHG) refers to gases in the Earth’s atmosphere that act to
absorb long-wave radiation from the sun. These gases act like an insulating blanket and may
result in an increase in global temperatures. The primary GHGs are water vapor, carbon
dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide,
“Climate Change” is a term that refers to changes in the global temperature over time. Global
temperature is generally determined by three different methods, or “forcings”:
    •   Changes in how the Earth receives incoming solar radiation
    •   Changes in the way solar radiation is reflected by the Earth
    •   Changes in the way solar radiation is absorbed by the Earth
Each of these forcings occurs naturally and have influenced global climate for billions of years
resulting in a series of gradual warm periods and cold periods. The concept of man-made, or
“anthropogenic”, climate change is contained within the third forcing listed above. As previously
stated an increase in the concentration of GHG affects how the earth absorbs solar radiation
and, can lead to an increase in global temperature.
According to the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the leading causes of GHG
emissions in the United States are the generation of electricity, primarily by coal burning power
plants, and tailpipe emissions from vehicles, primarily passenger cars. The United States emits
over seven billion tons of GHG annually and has the highest per-capita GHG emission in the
world. By contrast, California is the twelfth largest emitter of carbon dioxide in the world. A
study completed in 2007 by the Netherlands Environmental Assessment agency concluded,
however, that China has superseded the United States in total annual carbon dioxide emissions.
California leads the nation in vehicle miles traveled. In California, over 70 percent of GHG
emissions come from burning fossil fuels, and over 50 percent of the total GHG emissions in the
State are from vehicle exhaust. GHG emissions are created by vehicle transit in three ways5:
      •  The fuel efficiency of the vehicle
      •  The carbon content of the fuel itself
      •  The amount of vehicle miles travelled over a given amount of time
5
  Reid Ewing, et al., Growing Cooler: The Evidence on Urban Planning and Climate Change.
(Washington, D.C.: ULI – The Urban Land Institute, 2008) 2.
DRAFT May, 2011                                 CO-60

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                 Conservation and Open Space
The United States Department of Transportation estimates that the national per-capita vehicle
miles travelled (VMT) exceeded 10,000 miles in 2005. Since 1980 VMT has increased three
times faster than the national population and twice as fast as vehicle registration. Municipalities
have an opportunity to impact VMT through land use policy.
A 2006 report to Governor Schwarzenegger prepared by the California Action Team concludes
that the climate in California will likely increase between 3ºF and 10ºF by the end of the century.
Consequences of this temperature rise in the State of California would include substantial loss
of snowpack, increased risk of large wildfires, impacts to local air quality, increased demand for
the generation of electricity, reduced agricultural yield and negative impacts on tourism. The
State Department of Water Resources has identified the following projected impacts to
California’s water from climate change:
    •   By 2050, a loss of at least 25 percent of the Sierra snowpack, an important source of
        urban, agricultural and environmental water;
    •   Variable weather patterns, with more severe winters and spring flooding, and longer
        droughts;
    •   Flood levels on many California rivers exceeding design flows and causing levees, dams
        and other infrastructure to fail;
    •   Rising sea level, threatening many coastal communities as well as the Sacramento-San
        Joaquin Delta, which supplies 25 million Californians with drinking water;
    •   Rising water temperatures and changes in runoff patterns that may affect aquatic
        species and agriculture;
    •   Lower groundwater tables due to hydrologic changes and greater demand.
The third IPCC report outlines a series of steps that should be taken to reduce the effects of
climate change. Many of these steps can be taken with no or very little cost, such as improving
building insulation and banning incandescent light bulbs. Other low-carbon technologies may
increase expense, but are considered feasible. For example, enhancing the effectiveness of
wind and solar power would require improvements in technology and infrastructure, but these
costs may be outweighed by the benefits of reducing carbon emissions from coal generation
plants. Overall, the IPCC report recommends stabilizing GHG at 550 parts per million, a level
that would limit the increase in global temperature to acceptable levels.
                                                  CO-61                                 June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                            City of Santa Clarita General Plan
The Obama Administration is in the process of developing a carbon dioxide “cap-and-trade”
system for regulating carbon emissions from point sources. This cap-and-trade system (as
opposed to a carbon dioxide tax) would work by first establishing a total emission cap for GHG
and then permitting companies to emit a specific amount of GHG. Companies would be able to
sell any excess credits to other companies for a profit if they emit less than their permitted
amount. Given its link to climate change, the United States Environmental Protection Agency is
also exploring the inclusion of carbon dioxide under the Federal Clean Air Act, thereby
subjecting carbon dioxide to regulations under the Clean Air Act.
Responding to the threat of global warming, Governor Schwarzenegger signed Executive Order
S-3-05 in June, 2005, recognizing global climate change and its impacts on California, and
creating the Governor’s Climate Action Team. In September, 2006, the Governor signed
Assembly Bill 32 (AB 32) into law, mandating the reduction of GHG emissions in California. AB
32 requires reduction of the State’s GHG emissions to 1990 levels by 2020, a cap equal to a 25
percent reduction from current levels. Over 400 cities in the United States have signed
commitments to reduce GHG emissions by at least 7 percent below 1990 levels by 2012.
The State of California strongly encourages local planning agencies to respond to the threat of
global warming by implementing carbon reduction measures at the local level,. Letters from the
State Attorney General’s Office to various jurisdictions throughout the State have emphasized
the need to incorporate mitigations to reduce GHG emissions in local policy documents, such as
General Plans, stating:
        AB 32 requires both reporting of greenhouse gas emissions and their reduction
        on a brisk time schedule, including a reduction of carbon dioxide emissions to
        1990 levels by 2020. Local governments will be called upon to help carry out the
        legislation’s provisions, and the General Plan revision is the appropriate place to
        identify both carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas sources, as well as
        actions for mitigation of the increases in emissions in greenhouse gases resulting
        from actions set forth in the General Plan revision.
The Governor’s Office of Planning and Research (OPR) is expected to release guidelines to
assist lead agencies in defining thresholds of significance for GHG emissions as a part of the
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) review process. Senate Bill 97 required OPR to
adopt these guidelines by January 1, 2010.
On December 12, 2008 the California Air Resources Board (CARB) adopted the Climate
Change Draft Scoping Plan (Scoping Plan). The Scoping Plan details how the mandates
established by AB 32 will be implemented. The plan recommends sixteen “reduction measures”
that will result in a state-wide emission reduction target of 174 million metric tons (mmt) of
carbon dioxide.6 CARB estimates that achieving this target will reduce GHG emissions in
California to 1990 levels.
6
  The Scoping Plan identifies all emission targets in “millions of metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent”.
This was done to provide a standardized measurement for greenhouse gas emissions given the
enormous variety of individual types and characteristic properties of greenhouse gases including
methane, nitric oxide, etc..
DRAFT May, 2011                                   CO-62

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                 Conservation and Open Space
One of the recommended reduction measures identified by the Scoping Plan is the GHG
emission reduction target within future Regional Transportation Plans (RTP). This measure sets
an emission reduction target of 5 mmt to be derived from RTP policies regarding VMT that will
be implemented by Municipal Planning Organizations (MPO) and local governments regarding
vehicle miles travelled (VMT). Specifically, the regional MPO’s and local governments across
the State will be required to reduce VMT through the creation of regional Sustainable
Community Strategies (SCS) and local land use policy. Senate Bill 375 (SB 375) was approved
by the Governor on September 30, 2008 and provides the legislative framework for this target to
be achieved. CARB is the regulating agency. The new SCS’s will be a part of the next state-
wide Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) process which must be completed by 2012.
Actions to Address Climate Change in the Santa Clarita Valley
The City of Santa Clarita and County of Los Angeles have been working cooperatively on the
One Valley One Vision General Plan Update since 2000, well before climate change was
identified as a local planning issue and before adoption of AB 32. However, the land use plan
developed for the Santa Clarita Valley was designed to address the related issues of urban
sprawl, traffic congestion, air quality, watershed management, and open space preservation, in
a manner that also addresses some of the issues of global warming. Specifically, the General
Plan elements for land use, circulation, open space and conservation set forth the following
programs and objectives for the Valley:
1. Delineation of areas designated for urban use and non-urban (rural) use in order to limit
    urban sprawl into outlying hillside areas and to encourage urban infill development;
2. Provision of incentives for infill development and revitalizing older commercial areas,
    through adoption of a Mixed Use designation, and by increasing standards for density and
    floor area ratio in urban areas, which will allow greater land use intensity and mixing of
    residential with commercial and service uses;
3. Designation of Mixed Use designations adjacent to transit centers, including Metrolink
    stations and the McBean Transfer Facility, in order to concentrate mixed use, higher
    intensity development within walking distance of public transit;
4. Inclusion of non-residential “activity areas” within urban residential land use designations, to
    allow location of uses serving a local clientele, such as small groceries, dry cleaners, and
    personal services, within walking distance of adjacent neighborhoods without approval of a
    General Plan Amendment;
5. Development of continuous and connected paseo and bikeway systems that link
    neighborhoods to public transit, parks, schools, business and community service areas;
6. Incorporation of planning policies to increase local bus service and improve pedestrian
    access to transit stops;
7. Preservation of the Santa Clara River watershed through acquisition of open space along
    the river and its tributary streams, and designation of low-intensity uses within the 100-year
    flood plain;
                                                CO-63                                   June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
8. Continuation of the City’s urban forestry program that has resulted in the planting of 50,000
    trees to date and will continue to provide for tree planting and maintenance throughout the
    Valley;
9. Adoption of a goal to create two jobs for every new dwelling unit, and to balance job growth
    with housing growth in various locations throughout the Santa Clarita Valley to reduce
    commuting distances to employment;
10. Continuation of the City’s open space acquisition policies to create a continuous greenbelt
    around the Valley and along the Santa Clara River, supported by a City voter-approved
    ballot measure to provide funding for land purchases;
11. Adoption by Los Angeles County of ordinances to promote use of green building materials
    and techniques, low impact development for stormwater control at the source, and drought-
    tolerant landscaping.
Additional Programs and Policies to Address Climate Change
The challenge of addressing climate change at the local level is being met by cities and
communities throughout the country, and more information about successful programs is
becoming available. Response to climate change by local jurisdictions will require a two-
pronged approach: first, adopting measures to reduce energy consumption and GHG
emissions; and second, identifying measures to adapt to changing climatic conditions, which
may include water and power shortages in combination with drought. The California
Department of Water Resources (DWR) has urged a state-wide reduction in water consumption
as a means of reducing energy expended to pump, treat, heat, de-salt, and discharge water.
According to the California Energy Commission, conserving one acre foot of water (enough to
serve two families of four for one year) reduces GHG emissions by approximately one metric
ton. Scientific evidence indicates that even if GHG emissions were to cease immediately, the
atmosphere will continue to warm for the greater part of this century, resulting in changes to
snowpack, runoff, drought conditions, fires, and other impacts as discussed above. At the same
time, California’s population is expected to grow to 48 million people by 2030. Due to these
factors, DWR will continue to emphasize water conservation and water banking throughout the
State as primary tools to protect the state’s water supply in response to global warming.
A large portion of the GHG emissions in California are associated with buildings, because they
use so much energy for lighting, cooling and heating, and water for landscape irrigation.
Several new laws are pending in the California Legislature to mandate green building practices
in new building construction. Economists have calculated that buildings could cut 30 percent of
their emissions and save money at the same time, through use of low-energy light bulbs,
intelligent lighting systems, enhanced insulation, energy-efficient heating and cooling systems,
and use of recycled steel. One way to decrease cooling costs is through installation of shade
trees around buildings and parking lots to reduce the “heat island” effect of pavement and hard
surfaces.
A necessary step for the Santa Clarita Valley jurisdictions to comply with AB 32 will be
completion of separate GHG Emissions inventories. The purpose of these inventories is to
identify and categorize the major sources and quantities of greenhouse gas emissions being
produced by the City’s and County’s residents, businesses, and municipal operations. Based
on the requirements of AB 32, 1990 will be used as the baseline year for the inventory, and will
serve as a reference against which to measure the City’s and County’s progress towards
DRAFT May, 2011                                CO-64

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                 Conservation and Open Space
reducing greenhouse gas emissions over time. Goals and policies have been included in this
Element to address the issues of GHG emissions and climate change, and implementation
measures have been included in outlining steps to complete a Climate Action Plan for the Santa
Clarita Valley
L.      Park and Recreation Resources and Facilities
County and State Parks
The County owns and operates 13 parks in the planning area, totaling 578 acres and serving
various communities throughout the Valley. County parks are classified as follows:
   •   Neighborhood parks, generally from five to 10 acres in area, provide active recreational
       areas intended to serve a population of up to 5,000 within a half-mile radius. There are
       seven County-owned neighborhood parks in the planning area (Chesebrough, Del Valle,
       Hasley Canyon, Jake Kuredjian, Pico Canyon, Plum Canyon/David March, and
       Northbridge).
   •   Community parks are generally 10-40 acres, provide both passive and active recreation
       facilities, and are intended to serve a population of up to 20,000 within a two-mile radius.
       There is one County-owned community park in the planning area (Richard Rioux Park).
   •   Regional parks are generally over 50 acres, and offer a wide range of specialized
       recreational activities to serve the a population within a one-hour’s drive. There are two
       County regional parks in the planning area: Val Verde Park and William S. Hart Park.
             o    Originally built in the 1920s, Val Verde Park provides a focal point for many
                  community activities. The County has recently undertaken an expansion of Val
                  Verde Park by purchasing a lot near the park entrance, and providing new
                  football fields, basketball courts, tennis courts, restrooms, playground, and
                  landscaping.
             o    Part of the Natural History Museum of Los Angeles County, William S. Hart Park
                  is the former home and ranch of William S. Hart, silent film cowboy star and
                  director. The park includes a museum within a Spanish Colonial Revival style
                  mansion, which contains original furnishings, a collection of western art,
                  mementos of early Hollywood, and Native American artifacts. In addition, there is
                  a furnished 1910 ranch house which is open for unguided tours.
   •   Recreation parks are generally at least 50 acres and are designed to handle large-scale
       multiple participant sports programs and tournaments. Within the planning area, Castaic
       Sports Complex is the only County park in this category.
   •   Reservations are lands set aside in order to protect scenic resources, biologic resources,
       geological features and/or open space, and provide only passive recreational facilities
       such as hiking and picnicking. Within the planning area, Vasquez Rocks is a County
       facility in this category.
                                                 CO-65                                 June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Due to growth pressures in County areas, particularly in and around Castaic, the need for
additional playfields for youth sports has been identified as a significant park planning objective.
With over 1,000 children involved in youth sports in the Castaic area, the community has only
two places for sports practice: one five-acre park and the Castaic Regional Sports Complex.
The County is making plans to expand facilities at the Sports Complex to include more play
fields, in addition to adding an aquatic center there. Pending development projects in the area
will also be required to provide sports fields to meet future facility needs.
There are three State parks located within the planning area, which are operated by the County:
Castaic Lake Recreation Area, Placerita Canyon State Park, and Vasquez Rocks State Park.
State parklands total approximately 13,476 acres within the planning area. County and State
parks are listed on Table CO-2 and shown on Exhibit CO-8.
City Parks and Recreation Planning
The City’s first General Plan after incorporation, adopted in 1991, contained a Parks and
Recreation Element as an optional element. At that time the City owned and operated 10 parks
encompassing 67.25 acres; in addition, the 15-acre William S. Hart Park, owned and operated
by Los Angeles County, was located within the City limits. The element established standards
for community and neighborhood parks, included an inventory of parks and other public
recreational facilities, established a trail plan, included a needs assessment, and established
goals and policies for park planning.
The City adopted a Parks, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan in 1995, setting forth
specific strategies for upgrading existing facilities and developing new parks and trails. The
1995 plan identified park classifications for neighborhood parks, metro/community parks, and
special use parks, and proposed a goal of four acres of parkland per 1,000 residents.
In 2007, the City initiated an update of a Parks, Recreation and Open Space Master Plan
(MasterPlan). Since the first Master Plan was adopted in 1995, the City had added 240 acres to
the park system, constructed 165 acres of improved parkland, and secured land for Central
Park. New parks included an activities center, aquatic center, gymnasium, and community
center. The City also constructed 33 miles of trails, and set aside over 3,000 acres of open
space.
The City and the County have adopted park fee ordinances pursuant to the State’s Quimby Act
(Government Code 66477), which allows local agencies to collect impact fees from residential
subdividers to finance development of new parks to serve residents. In order to collect these
fees, state law requires that the agency have an adopted General Plan with standards for park
and recreational facilities. Section 16.15 of the City’s Municipal Code allows developers to
dedicate and build parks to serve residents of a new development, or to pay in-lieu fees to the
City for parkland acquisition and development.
DRAFT May, 2011                                 CO-66

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                Conservation and Open Space
In conformance with the Quimby Act, the City’s park fee ordinance requires dedication or
payment of in-lieu fees for a minimum of three acres of parkland for each 1,000 residents.
However, the City’s General Plan standard calls for parks to be provided at a ratio of five acres
per 1,000 residents. The City’s General Plan standard will remain five acres per 1,000 in this
General Plan update through the One Valley One Vision planning effort, and additional funding
sources will be identified to acquire and develop parkland above that financed from park impact
fees in order to meet the General Plan standard. Based on current parks facilities in the City,
there are approximately 1.5 to two acres of developed parkland per 1,000 residents in the City
as of 2007, with 246 acres of developed park space and about 173 acres of passive park land.
In addition, the City has purchased land for preservation of natural open space along the Santa
Clara River and as a greenbelt surrounding urban areas.
The City of Santa Clarita Parks, Recreation and Community Services Department operates 20
City parks totaling 246 acres and ranging in area from about 0.5 to 80 acres, which provide a
wide range of recreational facilities. City standards for neighborhood and community parks are
similar to the categories used by the County, described above. Based on these categories,
there are 12 neighborhood parks within the City and five community parks, including Bouquet
Canyon, Bridgeport, Canyon Country, Valencia Heritage, and Newhall Parks. Special use and
passive parks are also included in the City’s Master Plan, and are generally used for open
space greenbelts and vista points. These parks include Rivendale, Sand Canyon River Park,
Lost Canyon Park, Pioneer Park, and several others. There are dozens of passive and special
use parks in the City. The City’s Central Park is a multi-use park intended to serve the entire
Santa Clarita Valley, and is classified as a regional park. This park provides facilities for league
sports, cultural enrichment, and passive open space. The Newhall Community Center, which
opened in 2006, is a special use facility.
In addition to acquiring and developing new park land, the City continues to expand and
upgrade sports and recreational facilities at its existing parks. In 2007, the City awarded a
design contract for a major expansion to the existing sports complex in the Centre Pointe
Business Park, which will include an 18,000-square-foot gymnasium, a remodeled and
expanded skate park, and multi-use fields on 15 acres.
The City’s updated Parks, Recreation, and Open Space Master Plan will serve as a guiding
document for park planning, identifying opportunities and strategies to meet service needs, and
outlining funding strategies in the City. Due to the concurrent planning efforts on this Master
Plan, this Element will not serve as the City’s Master Plan but will instead focus on broad policy
issues relating to park planning and more particularly on joint goals for the City and County to
pursue in order to coordinate efforts on open space preservation and park development.
A summary of existing park and open space land is included in Table CO-2, and shown on
Exhibit CO-8. The City has also acquired almost 260 acres of additional land for future parks or
expansion of existing parks which are not yet fully developed. To supplement City and County
park facilities, 12 school facilities have been made available for community recreational
purposes through approval of joint use agreements. National Forest areas also provide
recreational facilities available to Valley residents, including hiking trails and campgrounds.
Privately-owned golf courses, which provide scenic open space as well as recreation, are also
listed.
                                                CO-67                                    June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                  City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Joint Park Planning Issues
Some of the future park planning needs that have been identified in public surveys and
meetings of Valley residents include more play fields for youth sports, sports complexes large
enough to accommodate lighted fields for tournaments, more community swimming pools and
water parks, and an amphitheater for outdoor concerts and theater festivals. In addition, a need
has been identified to provide additional parks and recreational facilities in some of the older,
underserved areas of the valley.
                                          Table CO-2
                          Inventory of Park and Open Space Lands
                                  Santa Clarita Valley - 2008
            Facility             Acreage          Location              Owner/Responsible
                                                                               Agency
City Parks:
Almendra                            4.3     Valencia                 City
Begonias Lane                       4.2     Canyon Country           City
Bouquet Canyon                     10.5     Saugus                   City
Bridgeport                           16     Valencia                 City
Canyon Country                     19.3     Canyon Country           City
Central Park                         80     Saugus                   City
Circle J Ranch                      5.3     Saugus                   City
Creekview                            5      Newhall                  City
Newhall                            14.3     Newhall                  City
North Oaks                          2.3     Canyon Country           City
Oak Spring Canyon                   5.7     Canyon Country           City
Old Orchard                         5.4     Valencia/Newhall         City
Pamplico                            7.6     Saugus                   City
Santa Clarita                       7.3     Saugus                   City
Valencia Glen                       7.3     Valencia                 City
Valencia Heritage                  17.2     Valencia                 City
Valencia Meadows                    6.1     Valencia                 City
Caravahlo/SC Sports                  22     Canyon Country           City
Complex
Todd Longshore                      5.6     Canyon Country           City
Veterans Historical Plaza           0.5     Newhall                  City
County Parks
Chesebrough                         5.1     Valencia                 County
Del Valle                           5.8     Castaic                  County
Hasley Canyon                       5.4     Castaic                  County
Jake Kuredjian                       5      Stevenson Ranch          County
Northbridge                         9.8     Valencia                 County
Pico Canyon                          18     Stevenson Ranch          County
David March (Plum Canyon)          12.9     Stevenson Ranch          County
Richard Rioux                      15.5     Stevenson Ranch          County
Val Verde                          57.6     Val Verde                County
Castaic     Regional    Sports     51.0     Castaic                  County
Complex
William S. Hart Park               224.3    Newhall                  County
DRAFT May, 2011                             CO-68
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                            Conservation and Open Space
            Facility              Acreage       Location           Owner/Responsible
                                                                          Agency
Tesoro Adobe Park                    2.2  Valencia               County
Ed Davis Park                       168   Towsley Canyon         County/Santa Monica
                                                                 Mountains Conservancy
Passive parks
Chevron-Pioneer                      4.6  Newhall                City
Lost Canyon                         41.2  Canyon Country         City
Mint Canyon                         18.6  Canyon Country         City
Rivendale                            64   Towsley Canyon         City
River Park                          24.3  Canyon Country         City
Sand Canyon River                    20   Canyon Country         City
Summit Park                        46.16  Valencia               Summit      Homeowners
                                                                 Association
State parks/recreation areas
Castaic Lake Rec. Area             8700   Castaic                State/County
Placerita Canyon Nature Area.       341   Placerita Canyon       State/County
Vasquez Rocks                       905   Agua Dulce             State/County
Nature preserves and Other
Open Space
Santa Clarita Woodlands            4000   Towsley                Santa Monica Mountains
(includes Ed Davis Park)                  Canyon/Santa           Conservancy (SMMC)
                                          Susana Mountains
Whitney Canyon                      442   Entrance at end of     City and Mountains and
                                          San Fernando Road      Recreation Conservation
                                          near Highway 14        Authority (MRCA)
Elsmere Canyon                      400   Near intersection of   (SMMC)
                                          Newhall Avenue and
                                          Sierra Hwy
Mentryville                         800   Pico Canyon            MRCA
Santa Clara River Open             2,000  Along   Santa   Clara  City
Space                                     River
Wagoner Open Space                  412   Canyon Country (1      City
                                          mile east of City
                                          boundary, bisected
                                          by SR-14)
Quigley Canyon Open Space           158   East Newhall           City
Golden Valley Ranch                 901   East of SR-14 from     County
                                          Golden Valley Road
                                          to Placerita Canyon
                                           CO-69                                June, 2011
Conservation and Open Space                           City of Santa Clarita General Plan
             Facility        Acreage        Location            Owner/Responsible
                                                                      Agency
                                     Road
Placerita Canyon Open Space    140   Adjacent to Placerita    City
                                     Canyon State Park
Michael D. Antonovich Open     480   East/Rice     Canyon.    MRCA
Space                                Trailhead along Old
                                     Road
Castaic Open Space             335   Castaic                  MRCA
Wilson Canyon Ranch            240   Castaic                  MRCA
Newhall High Country Open      140   South of Newhall         SMMC/SCWRCA
Space
Round Mountain                136.4  Valencia near I-5 and    City
                                     Magic Mtn. Parkway
National Forest land         151,827 North and southeast      United States     Forest
Angeles National Forest              of developed portions    Service
Los Padres National Forest           of Valley
Planned Communities Open
Space
Newhall Ranch                 6,000  High country west of     Newhall Ranch High
                                     I-5, south of SR-126     Country Recreation and
                                                              Conservation       Joint
                                                              Powers Agency
Private Golf Courses
Valencia Country Club          194   Valencia                 Private
Vista Valencia                  51   Valencia                 Private
Robinson Ranch                 344   Santa Clarita            Private
TPC at Valencia                226   Valencia                 Private
Utility facilities/corridors
Castaic Lake Water Agency      48.7  Saugus                   Castaic   Lake    Water
Conservatory Garden and                                       Agency
Learning Center
Cemeteries
Eternal Valley Memorial         56   Santa Clarita            Private
DRAFT May, 2011                      CO-70
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                 Conservation and Open Space
M.       Open Space Resources
Legal Requirements for Open Space Preservation
State law contains extensive provisions directing preservation of open space by local
jurisdictions. In enacting these statutes, the Legislature made the following findings: (1) the
preservation of open-space land is necessary not only for the maintenance of the economy of
the state, but also for the assurance of the continued availability of land for the production of
food and fiber, for the enjoyment of scenic beauty, for recreation and for the use of natural
resources; (2) discouraging premature and unnecessary conversion of open-space land to
urban uses is a matter of public interest and will be of benefit to urban dwellers because it will
discourage noncontiguous development patterns which unnecessarily increase the costs of
community services to community residents; (3) the anticipated increase in the population of the
state demands that cities, counties, and the state at the earliest possible date make definite
plans for the preservation of valuable open-space land and take positive action to carry out such
plans by the adoption and strict administration of laws, ordinances, rules and regulations as
authorized by this chapter or by other appropriate methods; (4) in order to assure that the
interest of all its people are met in the orderly growth and development of the state and the
preservation and conservation of its resources, it is necessary to provide for the development of
statewide coordinated plans for the conservation and preservation of open-space lands; (5)
cities and counties must recognize that open-space land is a limited and valuable resource
which must be conserved wherever possible.
Based on these findings, the California Legislature added the requirement for an Open Space
Element to state law in 1970. Government Code Section 65302(e) states: [The general plan
shall include] an Open Space Element as provided in Article 10.5 (commencing with
[Government Code] Section 65560). Along with the housing element, the open-space element
has a clear statutory intent and, next to land use, is broadest in scope. Because of this breadth,
open space issues overlap those of several other elements. For example, the Land Use
Element's issues of agriculture, natural resources, recreation, enjoyment of scenic beauty and
public lands are covered by open space provisions. "Open space for the preservation of natural
resources" and "open space used for the managed production of resources" encompass the
concerns of the Conservation Element. "Open space for public health and safety" covers issues
similar to those found in the Safety Element.
As explained in the introductory section of this Element, the State-mandated Elements of Open
Space and Conservation have been combined into a single element in the Santa Clarita Valley
General Plan update, because of the close relationship between the needs to conserve natural
resources and open space. In various sections of this element dealing with biological, historical,
scenic, water, and other resources, the need to establish adequate open space to meet
conservation goals has been discussed. Therefore, it was determined to be beneficial to plan
open space protection in a coordinated manner with resource conservation and to include goals
and policies for each of these issues into a single document.
Open Space Designations in the Santa Clarita Valley
State law defines "open-space land" as any parcel or area of land or water which is essentially
unimproved and devoted to specified open-space uses and which is designated on a local or
regional open space plan. Within the Santa Clarita Valley, the following types of areas have
been designated for open space preservation pursuant to State law:
                                               CO-71                                   June, 2011
Conservation and Open Space                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
(1)     Open space for the preservation of natural resources including, but not limited to, areas
        required for the preservation of plant and animal life, including habitat for fish and wildlife
        species; areas required for ecologic and other scientific study purposes; rivers, streams,
        lake shores, banks of rivers and streams, and watershed lands.
(2)     Open space used for the managed production of resources, including but not limited to,
        forest lands, rangeland, agricultural lands and areas of economic importance for the
        production of food or fiber; areas required for recharge of groundwater basins; and areas
        containing major mineral deposits, including those in short supply.
(3)     Open space for outdoor recreation, including but not limited to, areas of outstanding
        scenic, historic and cultural value; areas particularly suited for park and recreation
        purposes, including access to lake shores, beaches, and rivers and streams; and areas
        which serve as links between major recreation and open-space reservations, including
        utility easements, banks of rivers and streams, trails, and scenic highway corridors.
 (4)    Open space for public health and safety, including, but not limited to, areas which
        require special management or regulation because of hazardous or special conditions
        such as earthquake fault zones, unstable soil areas, flood plains, watersheds, areas
        presenting high fire risks, areas required for the protection of water quality and water
        reservoirs and areas required for the protection and enhancement of air quality.
State law also requires that every local open-space plan shall contain an action program
consisting of specific programs which the legislative body intends to pursue in implementing its
open-space plan. Within the planning area, both the City and County have taken numerous
actions to preserve open space land for preservation of historic and cultural resources,
biological resources, park and recreation use, visual and aesthetic resources, aggregate
resources, flood control and watershed protection, and protection of the public from hazardous
conditions. These measures have been described in the previous sections of this element, and
in the Land Use and Safety Elements. In addition to the open space lands set aside by the City
and County, there are several State parks and recreation areas located within the planning
area.
DRAFT May, 2011                                CO-72
City of Santa Clarita General Plan Conservation and Open Space
                                                               CO-73 June, 2011
Conservation and Open Space                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Open Space Preservation Efforts
The City of Santa Clarita began planning for preservation of open space shortly after its
incorporation in 1987. The Santa Clara River Recreation and Water Feature Study was
adopted by the City in 1991. This document was the City’s first step in planning for recreational
use of the Santa Clara River, and formed the basis for development of the current Santa Clara
River trail. The plan envisioned a continuous river environment encompassing active and
passive parks, natural open space, and riverfront community centers and retail establishments,
linked by a system of bikeways, paseos, and multi-use trails. The plan also identified the City’s
goal to coordinate with adjacent jurisdictions to develop a trail network along the Santa Clara
River that would link the San Gabriel Mountains to the Pacific Ocean.
In 1995 the City adopted a Parks, Recreation and Community Services Master Plan, containing
an inventory of existing facilities and establishing a plan for park development through 2005.
The City began updating this plan in 2007.
The City of Santa Clarita’s Open Space Acquisition Plan (OSAP) was adopted in 2002 to create
a systematic and objective mechanism for evaluating and acquiring open space. This plan was
intended to assist in the creation of a “green belt” surrounding the City of Santa Clarita to
improve and expand wildlife habitat and corridors, and to provide a framework for the City to
evaluate, acquire, and maintain the most beneficial parcels within and surrounding the Santa
Clarita Valley for preservation as open space. The OSAP also identified a goal of acquiring
open space to augment the Rim of the Valley open space and trail system.
Since its incorporation in 1987, the City of Santa Clarita has acquired more than 3,000 acres of
land for the purpose of preservation of natural habitat and open space. The City Council has
focused on preserving a greenbelt of open space around the City’s incorporated boundaries,
and about 50 percent of that greenbelt was completed as of 2007. The City also partnered with
the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy (SMMC) to pool resources for open space
acquisition, as in the 2002 joint acquisition of 442 acres of land in Whitney Canyon, adjacent to
Elsmere Canyon at the end of Newhall Avenue near Highway 14. Preservation of this land will
contribute to the open space greenbelt around the Valley, provide for extension of the Rim of
the Valley Trail Corridor, and preserve this canyon in perpetuity for future generations. In 2005,
the City required dedication of the 907-acre Golden Valley Ranch open space area from
PacSun, Inc., as a condition of approval on the developer’s projects. This land is located east
and south of State Road 14 and runs generally from Golden Valley Road south to Placerita
Canyon Road. Other examples of preserved open space are listed on Table CO-2.
In another innovative partnership, the County teamed with the developer to preserve the 6,000
acres of the Newhall Ranch high country, located between the City limits and the Ventura
County line. The Newhall Ranch High Country Recreation and Conservation Joint Powers
Agency was formed to maintain this open space land.
DRAFT May, 2011                                CO-74

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                  Conservation and Open Space
On March 7, 2007, the donation by the property owner of 400 acres of Elsmere Canyon to the
Mountains and Recreation Conservation Authority (MRCA) for use as an open space preserve
received final approval. Elsmere Canyon is a natural, riparian area that contains vital links
between the Angeles National Forest, Placerita Canyon Nature Center and Whitney Canyon for
the wildlife corridor, connecting the San Gabriel, Santa Susana and Santa Monica mountains.
The canyon contains waterfalls, rolling hills, riparian habitats, coastal sage and oak woodlands,
and significant ecological, cultural and historical treasures. Another 800 acres of the canyon are
deemed in need of protection in the future.
The SMMC and its affiliate agency, the MRCA, own and manage more than 55,000 acres of
public land in Southern California, of which over 7,000 acres are located within the planning
area. One of these properties is the historic town of Mentryville and more than 3,000
surrounding acres, which was donated to the Mountains Recreation and Conservation Authority
by Chevron USA in 1995.
The Santa Clarita Watershed Recreation and Conservation Authority was formed in 1997 by the
SMMC and the City of Santa Clarita as an independent government agency to improve and
maintain 442-acre Whitney Canyon Park, which includes park improvements, shutting of old oil
wells, and enhancing habitat use as a wildlife corridor. This Authority may be used to maintain
other joint acquisitions of open space land in the future.
In 2005, a proposed Open Space and Parkland Preservation district was voted down by the
City’s voters by a narrow margin. However, open space proponents continued to promote the
measure throughout the community, with a successful measure passing two years later. In July,
2007 the voters of the City of Santa Clarita voted by a margin of 69 percent to 31 percent to
support formation of a new Open Space Preservation District within the City. The City Council
had proposed the district formation to help increase the amount of preserved open space in and
around the Santa Clarita Valley. The voters approved an annual assessment to be levied on
each homeowner and property owner within the City, with an average single family home paying
$25 per year, which is estimated to generate about $1.5 million per year for the next 30 years.
The vote also included possible future increases to be approved by City Council after a public
hearing. The District will allow the City to purchase land to be held in perpetuity for the purpose
of open space preservation. Funds generated from the annual assessments will be overseen
by five-member Financial Accountability and Audit Panel to be appointed by the City Council.
The City plans to use bond funding supported by revenue from the annual open space
assessments to purchase up to $34 million in open space lands throughout the Santa Clarita
Valley. Plans for open space acquisition include more community parks, preservation of
biological habitat and geological resources, and creation of open space. In addition, the City
plans to acquire land to complete an open space greenbelt around the Santa Clarita Valley.
The City hopes to work cooperatively with the County, land conservancies, and other agencies
to effectively leverage open space funds with State grants and other funding sources to provide
for shared open space opportunities to benefit residents of the entire Valley. An example of
such a successful partnership in the past was the purchase of the 442-acre Whitney Canyon
Ranch, a partnership between the City and the SMMC operating as a joint powers authority with
State bond funds.
Table CO-2 contains an inventory of existing open space land within the Santa Clarita Valley,
including both City and County parkland, resource protection areas, private open space, and
open space land controlled by other agencies.
                                                 CO-75                                   June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                           City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Future Directions for Open Space
The City and the County will continue to pursue their goal of creating an open space greenbelt
encircling the Santa Clarita Valley, protecting important river and canyon habitats, maintaining
the scenic hillsides and ridgelines that enhance community character in the Santa Clarita Valley,
and conserving the Santa Clara River watershed. The 2007 Open Space District formation will
be a powerful funding tool in achieving these goals. In addition, the City and County will
continue to seek partnerships with the State, conservation agencies, and other entities as
deemed appropriate in order to maximize funding opportunities and benefit all citizens in the
Valley through preservation of open space.
N. Recreational Trails
Public Resources Code Section 5076 requires that “In developing the open-space element of a
general plan as specified in subdivision (e) of Section 65302 of the Government Code, every
city and county shall consider demands for trail-oriented recreational use and shall consider
such demands in developing specific open-space programs. Further, every city, county, and
district shall consider the feasibility of integrating its trail routes with appropriate segments of the
state system.”
In compliance with this State requirement, both the City and the County have developed trail
plans for adoption as part of their General Plans. In 2007, the County Board of Supervisors
approved an updated trails map for the Santa Clarita and Antelope Valleys. The map was five
years in the making, and was developed based on input from the Santa Clarita Valley Trails
Advisory Committee. Members of the Advisory Committee walked, biked, drove and rode
horses on potential trails with global positioning systems to finalize recommendations for trails to
be included on the map. The trails were planned to connect different communities and link with
other trails across county and city lines, including trails in Kern and Ventura Counties and within
U. S. Forest Service land.
The County has been a strong proponent of trail use and development. For the last 15 years,
Supervisor Michael D. Antonovich has sponsored annual trail rides to raise awareness about
County trails that are available to all residents. Areas such as Towsley Canyon and Placerita
Canyon have miles of trails that link City and County areas and are available to equestrians as
well as hikers and non-motorized mountain bikes. In 2006, the City received a $150,000 grant
from Supervisor Antonovich’s District's Competitive Trails and Cities Grant Program to finance
an extension of the Sand Canyon multi-use trail to connect north toward the planned extension
of the 14.5-mile-long Santa Clara River Trail.
The City has been planning for an interconnected trail system since shortly after its
incorporation in 1987. In 1991, even before adoption of its first General Plan, the City adopted
the Santa Clara River Recreation and Water Feature Study, which emphasized the need for a
multi-use trail system along the Santa Clara River that would serve as “a continuous trail system
that connects recreational features along the river corridor, as well as local and regional
destination points.” In addition to recommending the river trail system, the plan recommended
removing fences and barriers along the river to provide public access to the river trail, planning
bicycle routes and pedestrian walkways from residential neighborhoods to the river, directional
signs for pedestrians, and providing pedestrian and trail links between the north and south sides
of the river. The plan envisioned a river trail that would extend from the San Gabriel Mountains
to the Pacific Ocean. The Santa Clara River runs along the bottom of the Santa Clarita Valley,
DRAFT May, 2011                                   CO-76

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                  Conservation and Open Space
and about seven and a half miles are within the city limits. The City had about five miles of the
trail completed or under construction as of 2007, and is planning to extend the trail further to the
east and west. All of the other trails within the City are planned to connect to the river trail,
which also functions as a wildlife corridor. The City successfully petitioned the State
Recreational Trails Committee to include the Santa Clara River as a trail corridor on the State
trail plan, which has increased the project’s success in competing for grant funding.
The City also included trail plans in the 1991 General Plan and 1995 Parks, Recreation and
Community Services Master Plan. The City has developed standards for hard surface trails,
equestrian trails, soft surface trails, pedestrian bridges, and connection and access points.
(Trail standards are discussed further in the Circulation Element). The City has developed
public information brochures with maps, available on the City’s website, for residents seeking
information on paseo systems and regional recreational trails. City trails are open from sunrise
to 10:00 p.m., and bike lockers provided at the three Metrolink stations are available for trail
users. The City has also developed trailheads with parking and services to provide convenient
access to trails.
The City funds trail construction on a project-by-project basis by combining general fund money
with grant applications. Since 1995 the City has received $12-$13 million in grants used for trail
construction, including both State and federal funds. For example, an MTA grant was used to
fund design and construction of the continuation of the Santa Clara River trail from the South
Fork to Interstate 5. The City and County also require developers to dedicate trail easements
and construct trail segments within the project boundaries of new development, based on
adopted trail plans, and to provide connections to regional trails where required.
City staff coordinates with County and federal agencies and developers on projects outside the
City limits, including U.S. Forest Service lands, to ensure that the City’s trail systems connect
with regional trails. One of the city's specific goals is to tie its trail system in with the Pacific
Crest Trail, which passes through Agua Dulce near Vasquez Rocks on its north-south path from
the U.S.-Canada border to the U.S.-Mexico border. The City and County will continue to
cooperate with neighboring agencies and stakeholders to create additional regional trail
segments.
With wildfires, floods, and general forest growth conditions, trail maintenance is a constant need
throughout the City’s trail systems. The City and County are fortunate to benefit from the labors
of a dedicated volunteer trail maintenance crew that helps staff maintain nature trails.
Exhibit CO-9 shows regional recreational trails within City and County areas throughout the
planning area.
                                               CO-77                                      June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
DRAFT May, 2011             CO-78
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                   Conservation and Open Space
O.      Summary of Conservation and Open Space Needs in the Santa Clarita Valley
Based on the existing conditions and issues outlined in the background sections of the
Conservation and Open Space Element, planning needs for the Santa Clarita Valley are
summarized below. Policies and objectives in Part 2 of the element have been developed to
address these needs.
    1. Strive to balance the needs of new residents, businesses and employment centers with
        the community’s goals for retention of open space and preservation of natural resources.
    2. Limit losses of valuable topsoil by erosion, construction, and development practices.
    3. Maintain and protect the scenic backdrop of hills and ridgelines around and within the
        valley, to preserve community character.
    4. Protect the scenic beauty of the Valley’s canyons, woodlands, water bodies, and unique
        geological features, to enhance the sense of place.
    5. Allow recovery of aggregate resources while minimizing impacts to the community and
        environment, and ensuring reclamation of mined lands.
    6. Protect sensitive habitat, including wildlife corridors, endangered species, and the
        National Forest, from the adverse impacts of development, including noise, pollution,
        light, pets, off-road vehicles, and invasive species.
    7. Effectively manage stormwater at the source, to promote infiltration into local aquifers,
        minimize flood impacts downstream, and reduce drainage infrastructure costs.
    8. Require water conservation in all aspects of development, with particular emphasis on
        landscape irrigation.
    9. Work with local water agencies to increase opportunities for use of reclaimed water.
    10. Protect and enhance water quality within the Santa Clara River and watershed.
    11. Cooperate with landowners and affected districts to assist in mitigating perchlorate
        contamination in the East Subbasin.
    12. Protect culturally significant sites and districts throughout the valley, including Native
        American sites and those associated with exploration, settlement, and filming.
    13. Contribute to a regional reduction in greenhouse gas emissions through land use
        planning and transportation strategies, and through reductions in energy consumption in
        buildings and site development, with a focus on older and existing buildings.
    14. Recognizing that air quality is regional in nature, protect residents, especially sensitive
        receptors, from the harmful health effects of air pollution, to the extent feasible
    15. Ensure that Santa Clarita Valley residents have access to adequate park and recreation
        facilities, and provide adequate facilities for all age groups.
                                                 CO-79                                     June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
    16. Develop a continuous network of multi-use trails within the Valley and connecting to
        adjacent forest and river areas, integrating both recreational and mobility components.
    17. Preserve and protect open space throughout the Valley, focusing on completion of the
        open space greenbelt surrounding urbanized areas, and along the Santa Clara River.
    18. Reduce vehicle miles traveled to locations outside the Santa Clarita Valley, as well as
        the number of vehicle trips within the Valley through the application of land use
        strategies that incorporate a sustainable mix of land uses and transit and pedestrian
        opportunities.
PART 2:         CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE GOALS AND POLICIES
Responsible Management of Environmental Systems
Goal CO.1: A balance between the social and economic needs of Santa Clarita Valley
residents and protection of the natural environment, so that these needs can be met in the
present and in the future.
        Objective CO 1.1: Protect the capacity of the natural “green” infrastructure to absorb
        and break down pollutants, cleanse air and water, and prevent flood and storm damage.
                Policy CO 1.1.1: In making land use decisions, consider the complex, dynamic,
                and interrelated ways that natural and human systems interact, such as the
                interactions between energy demand, water demand, air and water quality, and
                waste management.
                Policy CO 1.1.2: In making land use decisions, consider the impacts of human
                activity within watersheds and ecosystems, to maintain the functional viability of
                these systems.
                Policy CO 1.1.3: In making land use decisions, encourage development
                proposals that preserve natural ecosystem functions and enhance the health of
                the surrounding community.
        Objective CO 1.2:         Promote more sustainable utilization of renewable resource
        systems.
                Policy CO 1.2.1: Improve the community’s understanding of renewable
                resource systems that occur naturally in the Santa Clarita Valley, including
                systems related to hydrology, energy, ecosystems, and habitats, and the
                interrelationships between these systems, through the following measures:
                    a. Through the environmental and development review processes, consider
                         development proposals within the context of renewable resource systems
                         and evaluate potential impacts on a system-wide basis (rather than a
                         project-specific basis), to the extent feasible;
                    b. In planning for new regional infrastructure projects, consider impacts on
                         renewable resources within the context of interrelationships between
                         these systems;
DRAFT May, 2011                                  CO-80

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                   Conservation and Open Space
                    c. Provide information to decision-makers about the interrelationship
                        between traffic and air quality, ecosystems and water quality, land use
                        patterns and public health, and other similar interrelationships between
                        renewable resource systems in order to ensure that decisions are based
                        on an understanding of these concepts.
                Policy CO 1.2.2: Working with other agencies as appropriate, develop and
                apply models and other tools for decision-making to support the sustainability of
                renewable systems.
        Objective CO 1.3: Conserve and make more efficient use of non-renewable resource
        systems, such as fossil fuels, minerals, and materials.
                Policy CO 1.3.1: Explore, evaluate, and implement methods to shift from using
                non-renewable resources to use of renewable resources in all aspects of land
                use planning and development.
                Policy CO 1.3.2: Promote reducing, reusing, and recycling in all Land Use
                designations and cycles of development.
                Policy CO 1.3.3: Provide informational material to the public about programs to
                conserve non-renewable resources and recover materials from the waste stream.
                Policy CO 1.3.4: Promote and encourage cogeneration projects for commercial
                and industrial facilities, provided they meet all applicable environmental quality
                standards including those related to air and noise and provide a net reduction in
                greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions associated with energy production.
        Objective CO 1.4: Minimize the long-term impacts posed by harmful chemical and
        biological materials on environmental systems.
                Policy CO 1.4.1: In cooperation with other appropriate agencies, identify
                pollution sources and adopt strategies to reduce emissions into air and water
                bodies.
                Policy CO 1.4.2: In cooperation with other appropriate agencies, abate or
                remediate known areas of contamination and limit the effects of any such areas
                on public health.
                Policy CO 1.4.3: Encourage use of non-hazardous building materials, and non-
                polluting materials and industrial processes, to the extent feasible.
                Policy CO 1.4.4: In cooperation with other appropriate agencies, continue to
                develop and implement effective methods of handling and disposing of
                hazardous materials and waste.
        Objective CO 1.5: Manage urban development and human-built systems to minimize
        harm to ecosystems, watersheds, and other natural systems, such as urban runoff
        treatment trains that infiltrate, treat and remove direct connections to impervious areas.
                                                  CO-81                                  June, 2011
Conservation and Open Space                                      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
              Policy CO 1.5.1: Promote the use of environmentally-responsible building
              design and efficiency standards in new development, and provide examples of
              these standards in public facilities.
              Policy CO 1.5.2: Design and manage public urban infrastructure systems to
              reduce impacts to natural systems.
              Policy CO 1.5.3: Consider life-cycles for buildings, development patterns, and
              uses, and their long-term effects on natural systems, through the following
              measures:
                  a. Through the environmental review and development review processes,
                       consider the impacts of new development on renewable systems through
                       various phases including construction, use and operation, potential reuse,
                       cessation of use, demolition, and reuse or restoration of the development
                       site.
                  b. Ensure that mitigation measures and conditions of approval intended to
                       protect natural systems are adequately funded and monitored for the
                       required timeframe.
              Policy CO 1.5.4: Seek ways to discourage human behavior that may be
              detrimental to natural systems and to encourage environmental responsibility,
              through education, incentives, removing barriers, enforcement, and other means
              as practicable and feasible.
              Policy CO 1.5.5: Promote concentration of urban uses within the center of the
              Santa Clarita Valley through incentives for infill development and rebuilding, in
              order to limit impacts to open space, habitats, watersheds, hillsides, and other
              components of the Valley’s natural ecosystems.
              Policy CO 1.5.6: Through the development review process, consider the
              impacts of development on the entire watershed of the Santa Clara River and its
              tributaries, including hydromodification.
              Policy CO 1.5.7: Consider the principles of environmental sustainability, trip
              reduction, walkability, stormwater management, and energy conservation at the
              site, neighborhood, district, city, and regional level, in land use decisions.
              Policy CO 1.5.8: Consider environmental responsibility in all procurement
              decisions, including purchasing policies and capital projects.
      Objective CO 1.6: To the extent feasible, minimize long-term effects of development on
      natural systems and adjust development strategies as needed to promote sustainability.
              Policy CO 1.6.1: Identify environmental conditions that represent a healthy,
              sustainable community.
DRAFT May, 2011                                CO-82

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                     Conservation and Open Space
                 Policy CO 1.6.2: Use Geographic Information Systems, modeling, and other
                 tools to indicate the locations of natural systems such as groundwater recharge
                 areas, floodplain and floodway areas, oak tree woodlands, Significant Ecological
                 Areas, and plant and animal species habitat.
                 Policy CO 1.6.3: Provide information on the condition of natural systems to
                 decision makers as part of the decision-making process regarding land use and
                 development.
Geological Resources
Goal CO 2: Conserve the Santa Clarita Valley’s hillsides, canyons, ridgelines, soils, and
minerals, which provide the physical setting for the natural and built environments.
        Objective CO 2.1: Control soil erosion, waterway sedimentation, and airborne dust
        generation, and maintain the fertility of topsoil.
                 Policy CO 2.1.1: Review soil erosion and sedimentation control plans for
                 development-related grading activities, where appropriate, to ensure mitigation of
                 potential erosion by water and air.
                 Policy CO 2.1.2: Promote conservation of topsoil on development sites by
                 stockpiling for later reuse, where feasible.
                 Policy CO 2.1.3: Promote soil enhancement and waste reduction through
                 composting, where appropriate.
        Objective CO 2.2: Preserve the Santa Clarita Valley’s prominent ridgelines and limit
        hillside development to protect the valuable aesthetic and visual qualities intrinsic to the
        Santa Clarita Valley landscape.
                 Policy CO 2.2.1: Locate development and designate land uses to minimize the
                 impact on the Santa Clarita Valley’s topography, minimizing grading and
                 emphasizing the use of development pads that mimic the natural topography in
                 lieu of repetitive flat pads, to the extent feasible.
                 Policy CO 2.2.2: Ensure that graded slopes in hillside areas are revegetated
                 with native drought tolerant plants or other approved vegetation to blend
                 manufactured slopes with adjacent natural hillsides, in consideration of fire safety
                 and slope stability requirements.
                 Policy CO 2.2.3: Preserve designated natural ridgelines from development by
                 ensuring a minimum distance for grading and development from these ridgelines
                 of 50 feet or more if determined appropriate by the reviewing authority based on
                 site conditions, to maintain the Santa Clarita Valley’s distinctive community
                 character and preserve the scenic setting.
                 Policy CO 2.2.4: Identify and preserve significant geological and topographic
                 features through designating these areas as open space or by other means as
                 appropriate.
                                                    CO-83                                June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                       City of Santa Clarita General Plan
               Policy CO 2.2.5: Promote the use of adequate erosion control measures for all
               development in hillside areas, including single family homes and infrastructure
               improvements, both during and after construction.
               Policy CO 2.2.6: Encourage building and grading designs that conform to the
               natural grade, avoiding the use of large retaining walls and build-up walls that are
               visible from offsite, to the extent feasible and practicable.
       Objective CO 2.3: Conserve areas with significant mineral resources, and provide for
       extraction and processing of such resources in accordance with applicable laws and
       land use policies.
               Policy CO 2.3.1: Identify areas with significant mineral resources that are
               available for extraction through appropriate zoning or overlay designations.
               Policy CO 2.3.2: Consider appropriate buffers near mineral resource areas that
               are planned for extraction, to provide for land use compatibility and prevent the
               encroachment of incompatible land uses.
               Policy CO 2.3.3: Through the review process for any mining or mineral
               extraction proposal, ensure mitigation of impacts from mining and processing of
               materials on adjacent uses or on the community, including but not limited to air
               and water pollution, traffic and circulation, noise, and land use incompatibility.
               Policy CO 2.3.4: Ensure that mineral extraction sites are maintained in a safe
               and secure manner after cessation of extraction activities, which may include the
               regulated decommissioning of wells, clean-up of any contaminated soils or
               materials, closing of mine openings, or other measures as deemed appropriate
               by the agencies having jurisdiction.
               Policy CO 2.3.5: Promote remediation and restoration of mined land to a
               condition that supports beneficial uses, which may include but are not limited to
               recreational open space, habitat enhancement, groundwater recharge, or urban
               development.
Biological Resources
Goal CO 3: Conservation of biological resources and ecosystems, including sensitive habitats
and species.
       Objective CO 3.1:          In review of development plans and projects, encourage
       conservation of existing natural areas and restoration of damaged natural vegetation to
       provide for habitat and biodiversity.
               Policy CO 3.1.1: On the Land Use Map and through the development review
               process, concentrate development into previously developed or urban areas to
               promote infill development and prevent sprawl and habitat loss, to the extent
               feasible.
DRAFT May, 2011                                 CO-84
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                 Conservation and Open Space
               Policy CO 3.1.2: Avoid designating or approving new development that will
               adversely impact wetlands, floodplains, threatened or endangered species and
               habitat, and water bodies supporting fish or recreational uses, and establish an
               adequate buffer area as deemed appropriate through site specific review.
               Policy CO 3.1.3: On previously undeveloped sites (“greenfields”), identify
               biological resources and incorporate habitat preservation measures into the site
               plan, where appropriate. (This policy will generally not apply to urban infill sites,
               except as otherwise determined by the reviewing agency).
               Policy CO 3.1.4: For new development on sites with degraded habitat, include
               habitat restoration measures as part of the project development plan, where
               appropriate.
               Policy CO 3.1.5: Promote the use of site-appropriate native or adapted plant
               materials, and prohibit use of invasive or noxious plant species in landscape
               designs.
               Policy CO 3.1.6: On development sites, preserve and enhance natural site
               elements including existing water bodies, soil conditions, ecosystems, trees,
               vegetation and habitat, to the extent feasible.
               Policy CO 3.1.7: Limit the use of turf-grass on development sites and promote
               the use of native or adapted plantings to promote biodiversity and natural habitat.
               Policy CO 3.1.8: On development sites, require tree planting to provide habitat
               and shade to reduce the heat island effect caused by pavement and buildings.
               Policy CO 3.1.9: During construction, ensure preservation of habitat and trees
               designated to be protected through use of fencing and other means as
               appropriate, so as to prevent damage by grading, soil compaction, pollution,
               erosion or other adverse construction impacts.
               Policy CO 3.1.10: To the extent feasible, encourage the use of open space to
               promote biodiversity.
               Policy CO 3.1.11: Promote use of pervious materials or porous concrete on
               sidewalks to allow for planted area infiltration, allow oxygen to reach tree roots
               (preventing sidewalk lift-up from roots seeking oxygen), and mitigate tree-
               sidewalk conflicts, in order to maintain a healthy mature urban forest.
        Objective CO 3.2: Identify and protect areas which have exceptional biological
        resource value due to a specific type of vegetation, habitat, ecosystem, or location.
               Policy CO 3.2.1: Protect wetlands from development impacts, with the goal of
               achieving no net loss (or functional reduction) of jurisdictional wetlands within the
               planning area.
               Policy CO 3.2.2: Ensure that development is located and designed to protect
               oak, and other significant indigenous woodlands.
                                                CO-85                                   June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
              Policy CO 3.2.3: Ensure protection of any endangered or threatened species or
              habitat, in conformance with State and federal laws.
              Policy CO 3.2.4: Protect biological resources in the designated Significant
              Ecological Areas (SEAs) through the siting and design of development which is
              highly compatible with the SEA resources. Specific development standards shall
              be identified to control the types of land use, density, building location and size,
              roadways and other infrastructure, landscape, drainage, and other elements to
              assure the protection of the critical and important plant and animal habitats of
              each SEA. In general, the principle shall be to minimize the intrusion and
              impacts of development in these areas with sufficient controls to adequately
              protect the resources.
      Objective CO 3.3:           Protect significant wildlife corridors from encroachment by
      development that would hinder or obstruct wildlife movement.
              Policy CO 3.3.1: Protect the banks and adjacent riparian habitat along the
              Santa Clara River and its tributaries, to provide wildlife corridors.
              Policy CO 3.3.2: Cooperate with other responsible agencies to protect,
              enhance, and extend the Rim of the Valley trail system through Elsmere and
              Whitney Canyons, and other areas as appropriate, to provide both recreational
              trails and wildlife corridors linking the Santa Susana and San Gabriel Mountains.
              Policy CO 3.3.3: Identify and protect one or more designated wildlife corridors
              linking the Los Padres and Angeles National Forests through the Santa Clarita
              Valley (the San Gabriel-Castaic connection).
              Policy CO 3.3.4: Support the maintenance of Santa Clarita Woodlands Park, a
              critical component of a cross-mountain range wildlife habitat corridor linking the
              Santa Monica Mountains to the Angeles and Los Padres National Forests.
              Policy CO 3.3.5: Encourage connection of natural open space areas in site
              design, to allow for wildlife movement.
      Objective CO 3.4: Ensure that development in the Santa Clarita Valley does not
      adversely impact habitat within the adjacent National Forest lands.
              Policy CO 3.4.1: Coordinate with the United States Forest Service on
              discretionary development projects that may have impacts on the National
              Forest.
              Policy CO 3.4.2: Consider principles of forest management in land use
              decisions for projects adjacent to the National Forest, including limiting the use of
              invasive species, discouraging off-road vehicle use, maintaining fuel modification
              zones and fire access roads, and other measures as appropriate, in accordance
              with the goals set forth in the Angeles National Forest Land Management Plan.
              Policy CO 3.4.3: On the Land Use Map, maintain low density rural residential
              and open space uses adjacent to forest land, and protect the urban-forest
              interface area from overdevelopment.
DRAFT May, 2011                                 CO-86
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                    Conservation and Open Space
                Policy CO 3.4.4: Participate as a stakeholder in planning efforts by the United
                States Forest Service for land uses within the National Forest, providing input as
                appropriate.
        Objective CO 3.5: Maintain, enhance, and manage the urban forest throughout
        developed portions of the Santa Clarita Valley to provide habitat, reduce energy
        consumption, and create a more livable environment.
                Policy CO 3.5.1: Continue to plant and maintain trees on public lands and within
                the public right-of-way to provide shade and walkable streets, incorporating
                measures to ensure that roots have access to oxygen at tree maturity, such as
                use of porous concrete.
                Policy CO 3.5.2: Where appropriate, promote planting of trees that are native or
                climactically appropriate to the surrounding environment, emphasizing oaks,
                sycamores, maple, walnut, and other native species in order to enhance habitat,
                and discouraging the use of introduced species such as eucalyptus, pepper
                trees, and palms except as ornamental landscape features.
                Policy CO 3.5.3: Pursuant to the requirements of the zoning ordinance, protect
                heritage oak trees that, due to their size and condition, are deemed to have
                exceptional value to the community.
        Objective CO 3.6: Minimize impacts of human activity and the built environment on
        natural plant and wildlife communities.
                Policy CO 3.6.1: Minimize light trespass, sky-glow, glare, and other adverse
                impacts on the nocturnal ecosystem by limiting exterior lighting to the level
                needed for safety and comfort; reduce unnecessary lighting for landscaping and
                architectural purposes, and encourage reduction of lighting levels during non-
                business nighttime hours.
                Policy CO 3.6.2: Reduce impervious surfaces and provide more natural
                vegetation to enhance microclimates and provide habitat. In implementing this
                policy, consider the following design concepts:
                    a. Consideration of reduced parking requirements, where supported by a
                        parking study and/or through shared use of parking areas;
                    b. Increased use of vegetated areas around parking lot perimeters; such
                        areas should be designed as bioswales or as otherwise determined
                        appropriate to allow surface water infiltration;
                    c. Use of connected open space areas as drainage infiltration areas in lieu
                        of curbed landscape islands, minimizing the separation of natural and
                        landscaped areas into isolated “islands”;
                    d. Breaking up large expanses of paving with natural landscaped areas
                        planted with shade trees to reduce the heat island effect, along with
                        shrubs and groundcover to provide diverse vegetation for habitat.
                                                CO-87                                   June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                   City of Santa Clarita General Plan
              Policy CO 3.6.3: Restrict use of unauthorized off-road vehicles within sensitive
              habitat areas through signage, fencing, or other means as appropriate.
              Policy CO 3.6.4: Provide public information and support with demonstration
              sites at City facilities on gardening and landscaping techniques to reduce spread
              of invasive species and pollution from pesticides and fertilizers that threaten
              natural ecosystems.
              Policy CO 3.6.5: Ensure revegetation of graded areas and slopes adjacent to
              natural open space areas with native plants (consistent with fire prevention
              requirements).
       Objective CO 3.7: Provide public access to and education about natural habitats and
       ecosystems.
              Policy CO 3.7.1: Support the public education programs offered at the Placerita
              Canyon Nature Center and Ed Davis Park (Sonia Thompson Nature Center).
              Policy CO 3.7.2: Seek opportunities for partnerships with schools, non-profit
              organizations, and volunteers, to increase public access to and information about
              natural areas.
Water Resources
Goal CO 4: An adequate supply of clean water to meet the needs of present and future
residents and businesses, balanced with the needs of natural ecosystems.
       Objective CO 4.1: Promote water conservation as a critical component of ensuring
       adequate water supply for Santa Clarita Valley residents and businesses.
              Policy CO 4.1.1: In coordination with applicable water suppliers, adopt and
              implement a water conservation strategy for public and private development.
              Policy CO 4.1.2: Provide examples of water conservation in landscaping
              through use of low water use landscaping in public spaces such as parks,
              landscaped medians and parkways, plazas, and around public buildings.
              Policy CO 4.1.3: Require low water use landscaping in new residential
              subdivisions and other private development projects, including a reduction in the
              amount of turf-grass.
              Policy CO 4.1.4: Provide informational materials to applicants and contractors
              on the Castaic Lake Water Agency’s Landscape Education Program, and/or
              other information on xeriscape, native California plants, and water-conserving
              irrigation techniques as materials become available.
              Policy CO 4.1.5: Promote the use of low-flow and/or waterless plumbing fixtures
              and appliances in all new non-residential development and residential
              development of five or more dwelling units.
DRAFT May, 2011                               CO-88

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                Conservation and Open Space
               Policy CO 4.1.6: Support amendments to the building code that would promote
               upgrades to water and energy efficiency when issuing permits for renovations or
               additions to existing buildings.
               Policy CO 4.1.7: Apply water conservation policies to all pending development
               projects, including approved tentative subdivision maps to the extent permitted
               by law. Where precluded from adding requirements by vested entitlements,
               encourage water conservation in construction and landscape design.
               Policy CO 4.1.8: Upon the availability of non-potable water services, discourage
               and consider restrictions on the use of potable water for washing outdoor
               surfaces.
               Policy CO-4.1.9: Support the development of additional facilities to store or
               bank stormwater, particularly on lands located outside the groundwater recharge
               areas that are depicted on Exhibit CO-3b.
               Policy CO-4.1.10: Support emerging methods and technologies for the onsite
               capture, treatment, and infiltration of stormwater and greywater, and amend the
               City Code to allow these methods and technologies when they are proven to be
               safe and feasible.
        Objective CO 4.2: Work with water providers and other agencies to identify and
        implement programs to increase water supplies to meet the needs of future growth.
               Policy CO 4.2.1: In cooperation with the Sanitation District and other affected
               agencies, expand opportunities for use of recycled water for the purposes of
               landscape maintenance, construction, water recharge, and other uses as
               appropriate.
               Policy CO 4.2.2: Require new development to provide the infrastructure needed
               for delivery of recycled water to the property for use in irrigation, even if the
               recycled water main delivery lines have not yet reached the site, where deemed
               appropriate by the reviewing authority.
               Policy CO 4.2.3: Promote the installation of rainwater capture and gray water
               systems in new development for irrigation, where feasible and practicable.
               Policy CO 4.2.4: Protect areas with substantial potential for groundwater
               recharge as depicted on Exhibit CO-3b, and promote recharge of groundwater
               basins throughout the watershed (excluding the river bed) to assure water quality
               and quantity. The greatest consideration should be given to the Alluvial Aquifer
               and Saugus Aquifer groundwater recharge areas, followed by groundwater
               recharge areas for other groundwater basins that are designated by the State of
               California.
               Policy CO 4.2.5: Participate and cooperate with other agencies to complete,
               adopt, and implement an Integrated Regional Water Management Plan to build a
               diversified portfolio of water supply, water quality, and resource stewardship
               priorities for the Santa Clarita Valley.
                                                CO-89                                June, 2011
Conservation and Open Space                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
              Policy CO 4.2.6: Require that all new development proposals demonstrate a
              sufficient and sustainable water supply prior to approval.
      Objective CO 4.3: Limit disruption of natural hydrology by reducing impervious cover,
      increasing on-site infiltration, and managing stormwater runoff at the source.
              Policy CO 4.3.1: On undeveloped sites proposed for development, promote
              onsite stormwater infiltration through design techniques such as pervious paving,
              draining runoff into bioswales or properly designed landscaped areas,
              preservation of natural soils and vegetation, and limiting impervious surfaces.
              Policy CO 4.3.2: On previously developed sites proposed for major alteration,
              provide stormwater management improvements to restore natural infiltration, as
              required by the reviewing authority.
              Policy CO 4.3.3: Provide flexibility for design standards for street width,
              sidewalk width, parking, and other impervious surfaces when it can be shown
              that such reductions will not have negative impacts and will provide the benefits
              of stormwater retention, groundwater infiltration, reduction of heat islands,
              enhancement of habitat and biodiversity, saving of significant trees or planting of
              new trees, or other environmental benefit.
              Policy CO 4.3.4: Encourage and promote the use of new materials and
              technology for improved stormwater management, such as pervious paving,
              green roofs, rain gardens, and vegetated swales.
              Policy CO 4.3.5: Where detention and retention basins or ponds are required,
              seek methods to integrate these areas into the landscaping design of the site as
              amenity areas, such as a network of small ephemeral swales treated with
              attractive planting.
              Policy CO 4.3.6: Discourage the use of mounded turf and lawn areas which
              drain onto adjacent sidewalks and parking lots, replacing these areas with
              landscape designs that retain runoff and allow infiltration.
              Policy CO 4.3.7: Reduce the amount of pollutants entering the Santa Clara
              River and its tributaries by capturing and treating stormwater runoff at the source,
              to the extent possible.
      Objective CO 4.4: Promote measures to enhance water quality by addressing sources
      of water pollution.
              Policy CO 4.4.1: Cooperate with the Los Angeles County Sanitation District and
              Regional Water Quality Control Board as appropriate to achieve Total Maximum
              Daily Load (TMDL) standards for chlorides in the Santa Clara River.
              Policy CO 4.4.2: Support the cooperative efforts of property owners and
              appropriate agencies to eliminate perchlorate contamination on the Whittaker-
              Bermite property and eliminate the use of any industrial chemicals or wastes in a
              manner that threatens groundwater quality.
DRAFT May, 2011                               CO-90
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                    Conservation and Open Space
               Policy CO 4.4.3: Discourage the use of chemical fertilizers, herbicides and
               pesticides in landscaping to reduce water pollution by substances hazardous to
               human health and natural ecosystems.
               Policy CO 4.4.4: Promote the extension of sanitary sewers for all urban uses
               and densities, to protect groundwater quality, where feasible.
Cultural and Historical Resources
Goal CO 5: Protection of historical and culturally significant resources that contribute to
community identity and a sense of history.
        Objective CO 5.1: Protect sites identified as having local, state, or national significance
        as a cultural or historical resource.
               Policy CO 5.1.1: For sites identified on the Cultural and Historical Resources
               Map (Exhibit CO-6), review appropriate documentation prior to issuance of any
               permits for grading, demolition, alteration, and/or new development, to avoid
               significant adverse impacts. Such documentation may include cultural resource
               reports, environmental impact reports, or other information as determined to be
               adequate by the reviewing authority.
               Policy CO 5.1.2: Review any proposed alterations to cultural and historic sites
               identified in Table Co-1 or other sites which are so designated, based on the
               guidelines contained in the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the
               Treatment of Properties (Title 36, Code of Federal Regulations, Chapter 1, Part
               68, also known as 36 CFR 68), or other adopted City guidelines.
               Policy CO 5.1.3: As new information about other potentially significant historic
               and cultural sites becomes available, update the Cultural and Historical
               Resources Inventory and apply appropriate measures to all identified sites to
               protect their historical and cultural integrity.
        Objective CO 5.2: Protect and enhance the historic character of Downtown Newhall.
               Policy CO 5.2.1: In keeping with the Downtown Newhall Specific Plan policies,
               ensurie that the scale and character of new development is compatible with and
               does not detract from the context of historic buildings and block patterns.
               Policy CO 5.2.2: Support expansion and enhancement of a City of Santa Clarita
               historical park adjacent to the Pioneer Oil Refinery to illustrate historic oil
               operations in the Santa Clarita Valley.
               Policy CO 5.2.3: Ensure that all aspects of community design in Newhall,
               including street furniture, lighting, trash collection and storage areas, seating, and
               other accessory structures, are of a design and scale appropriate for the historic
               character of the district, while maintaining a sense of authenticity.
               Policy CO 5.2.4: Continue to support “Heritage Junction” and the historical
               museum within William S. Hart Park as historical resources that illustrate the
               various phases of settlement within the Santa Clarita Valley.
                                                 CO-91                                    June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                    City of Santa Clarita General Plan
      Objective CO 5.3: Encourage conservation and preservation of Native American
      cultural places, including prehistoric, archaeological, cultural, spiritual, and ceremonial
      sites on both public and private lands, throughout all stages of the planning and
      development process.
              Policy CO 5.3.1: For any proposed general plan amendment, specific plan, or
              specific plan amendment, notify and consult with any California Native American
              tribes on the contact list maintained by the California Native American Heritage
              Commission that have traditional lands located within the City’s jurisdiction,
              regarding any potential impacts to Native American resources from the proposed
              action, pursuant to State guidelines.
              Policy CO 5.3.2: For any proposed development project that may have a
              potential impact on Native American cultural resources, provide notification to
              California Native American tribes on the contact list maintained by the Native
              American Heritage Commission that have traditional lands within the City’s
              jurisdiction, and consider the input received prior to a discretionary decision.
              Policy CO 5.3.3: Review and consider a cultural resources study for any new
              grading or development in areas identified as having a high potential for Native
              American resources, and incorporate recommendations into the project approval
              as appropriate to mitigate impacts to cultural resources.
Scenic Resources
Goal CO 6: Preservation of scenic features that keep the Santa Clarita Valley beautiful and
enhance quality of life, community identity, and property values.
      Objective CO 6.1: Protect the scenic character of local topographic features.
              Policy CO 6.1.1: Protect scenic canyons, as described in Part I of this element,
              from overdevelopment and environmental degradation.
              Policy CO 6.1.2: Preserve significant ridgelines, as shown on the Exhibit CO-7,
              as a scenic backdrop throughout the community by maintaining natural grades
              and vegetation.
              Policy CO 6.1.3: Protect the scenic quality of unique geologic features
              throughout the planning area, such as Vasquez Rocks, by including these
              features within park and open space land, where possible.
      Objective CO 6.2:       Protect the scenic character of view corridors.
              Policy CO 6.2.1: Where feasible, encourage development proposals to have
               varied building heights to maintain view corridor sight lines.
      Objective CO 6.3: Protect the scenic character of major water bodies.
              Policy CO 6.3.1: Support the efforts of Los Angeles County to protect the
              shores of Castaic Lake to preserve its scenic quality from development.
DRAFT May, 2011                               CO-92

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                Conservation and Open Space
                Policy CO 6.3.2: Protect the banks of the Santa Clara River and its major
                tributaries through open space designations and property acquisitions, where
                feasible, to protect and enhance the scenic character of the river valley.
        Objective CO 6.4: Protect the scenic character of oak woodlands, coastal sage, and
        other habitats unique to the Santa Clarita Valley.
                Policy CO 6.4.1: Preserve scenic habitat areas within designated open space or
                parkland, wherever possible.
                Policy CO 6.4.2: Through the development review process, ensure that new
                development preserves scenic habitat areas to the extent feasible.
        Objective CO 6.5: Maintain the scenic character of designated routes, gateways, and
        vista points along roadways.
                Policy CO 6.5.1: In approving new development projects, consider scenic views
                at major entry points to the Santa Clarita Valley, including gateways located at
                the Newhall Pass along Lake Hughes Road, Route 126, Bouquet Canyon Road,
                Sierra Highway, State Route 14, and other locations as deemed appropriate by
                the reviewing authority.
                Policy CO 6.5.2: Establish scenic routes in appropriate locations as determined
                by the reviewing agency, and adopt guidelines for these routes to maintain their
                scenic character.
        Objective CO 6.6: Limit adverse impacts by humans on the scenic environment.
                Policy CO 6.6.1: Enhance views of the night sky by reducing light pollution
                through use of light screens, downward directed lights, minimized reflective
                paving surfaces, and reduced lighting levels, as deemed appropriate by the
                reviewing authority.
                Policy CO 6.6.2: Improve views of the Santa Clarita Valley through various
                policies to minimize air pollution and smog, as contained throughout the General
                Plan.
                Policy CO 6.6.3: Restrict establishment of billboards throughout the planning
                area, and continue abatement efforts to remove existing billboards that impact
                scenic views.
                Policy CO 6.6.4: Where appropriate, require new development to be sensitive to
                scenic viewpoints or viewsheds through building design, site layout and building
                heights.
                Policy CO 6.6.5: Encourage undergrounding of all new utility lines, and promote
                undergrounding of existing lines where feasible and practicable.
                                                 CO-93                                   June, 2011
Conservation and Open Space                                    City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Air Quality
Goal CO 7: Clean air to protect human health and support healthy ecosystems.
       Objective CO 7.1: Reduce air pollution from mobile sources.
               Policy CO 7.1.1: Through the mixed land use patterns and multi-modal
               circulation policies set forth in the Land Use and Circulation Elements, limit air
               pollution from transportation sources.
               Policy CO 7.1.2: Support the use of alternative fuel vehicles.
               Policy CO 7.1.3: Support alternative travel modes and new technologies,
               including infrastructure to support alternative fuel vehicles, as they become
               commercially available.
       Objective CO 7.2: Apply guidelines to protect sensitive receptors from sources of air
       pollution as developed by the California Air Resources Board (CARB), where
       appropriate.
               Policy CO 7.2.1: Ensure adequate spacing of sensitive land uses from the
               following sources of air pollution: high traffic freeways and roads; distribution
               centers; truck stops; chrome plating facilities; dry cleaners using
               perchloroethylene; and large gas stations, as recommended by CARB.
       Objective CO 7.3: Coordinate with other agencies to plan for and implement programs
       for improving air quality in the South Coast Air Basin.
               Policy CO 7.3.1: Coordinate with local, regional, state, and federal agencies to
               develop and implement regional air quality policies and programs.
Greenhouse Gas Reduction
Goal CO 8: Development designed to improve energy efficiency, reduce energy and natural
resource consumption, and reduce emissions of greenhouse gases.
       Objective CO 8.1: Comply with the requirements of State law, including AB 32, SB 375
       and implementing regulations, to reach targeted reductions of greenhouse gas (GHG)
       emissions.
               Policy CO 8.1.1: Create and adopt a Climate Action Plan within 18 months of
               the OVOV adoption date of the City’s General Plan Update that meets State
               requirements and includes the following components:
               a. Plans and programs to reduce GHG emissions to State-mandated targets,
                    including enforceable reduction measures;
                    i. The CAP may establish goals beyond 2020, which are consistent with the
                    applicable laws and regulations referenced in this paragraph and based on
                    current science;
DRAFT May, 2011                                CO-94

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                  Conservation and Open Space
                   ii. The CAP shall include specific and general tools and strategies to reduce
                   the City’s current and projected 2020 inventory and to meet the CAPs target
                   for GHG reductions by 2020;
                   iii. The CAP shall consider, among other GHG reduction strategies, the
                   feasibility of development fees; incentive and rebate programs; and, voluntary
                   and mandatory reduction strategies in areas of energy efficiency, renewable
                   energy, water conservation and efficiency, solid waste, land use and
                   transportation.
               b. Mechanisms to ensure regular review of progress towards the emission
                   reduction targets established by the Climate Action Plan;
               c. Procedures for reporting on progress to officials and the public;
               d. Procedures for revising the plan as needed to meet GHG emissions
                   reduction targets; and,
               e. Allocation of funding and staffing for Plan implementation;
               After adoption of the Climate Action Plan, amend this General Plan if necessary
               to ensure consistency with the adopted Climate Action Plan.
               Policy CO 8.1.2: Participate in the preparation of a regional Sustainable
               Communities Strategy (SCS) Plan to meet regional targets for greenhouse gas
               emission reductions, as required by SB 375.
               Policy CO 8.1.3: Revise codes and ordinances as needed to address energy
               conservation, including but not limited to the following:
               a. Strengthen building codes for new construction and renovation to achieve a
                   higher level of energy efficiency, with a goal of exceeding energy efficiency
                   beyond that required by Title 24;
               b. Adopt a Green Building Program to encourage green building practices and
                   materials, along with appropriate ordinances and incentives;
               c. Require orientation of buildings to maximize passive solar heating during cool
                   seasons, avoid solar heat gain during hot periods, enhance natural
                   ventilation, promote effective use of daylight, and optimize opportunities for
                   on-site solar generation;
               d. Encourage mitigation of the “heat island” effect through use of cool roofs,
                   light-colored paving, and shading to reduce energy consumption for air
                   conditioning.
               Policy CO 8.1.4: Provide information and education to the public about energy
               conservation and local strategies to address climate change.
               Policy CO 8.1.5: Coordinate various activities within the community and
               appropriate agencies related to GHG emissions reduction activities.
                                               CO-95                                  June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                    City of Santa Clarita General Plan
      Objective CO 8.2: Reduce energy and materials consumption and greenhouse gas
      emissions in public uses and facilities.
              Policy CO 8.2.1: Ensure that all new City buildings, and all major renovations
              and additions, meet adopted green building standards, with a goal of achieving
              the LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) Silver rating or
              above, or equivalent where appropriate.
              Policy CO 8.2.2: Ensure energy efficiency of existing public buildings through
              energy audits and repairs, and retrofit buildings with energy efficient heating and
              air conditioning systems and lighting fixtures, with a goal of completing energy
              repairs in City facilities by 2012.
              Policy CO 8.2.3: Support purchase of renewable energy for public buildings,
              which may include installing solar photovoltaic systems to generate electricity for
              city buildings and operations and other methods as deemed appropriate and
              feasible, in concert with significant energy conservation efforts.
              Policy CO 8.2.4: Establish maximum lighting levels for public facilities, and
              encourage reduction of lighting levels to the level needed for security purposes
              after business hours, in addition to use of downward-directed lighting and use of
              low-reflective paving surfaces.
              Policy CO 8.2.5: Support installation of photovoltaic and other renewable
              energy equipment on public facilities, in concert with significant energy
              conservation efforts.
              Policy CO 8.2.6: Promote use of solar lighting in parks and along paseos and
              trails, where practical.
              Policy CO 8.2.7: Support the use of sustainable alternative fuel vehicles for
              machinery and fleets, where practical, by evaluating fuel sources, manufacturing
              processes, maintenance costs and vehicle lifetime use.
              Policy CO 8.2.8: Promote the purchase of energy-efficient and recycled
              products, and vendors and contractors who use energy-efficient vehicles and
              products, consistent with adopted purchasing policies.
              Policy CO 8.2.9: Reduce heat islands through installation of trees to shade
              parking lots and hardscapes, and use of light-colored reflective paving and
              roofing surfaces.
              Policy CO 8.2.10: Support installation of energy-efficient traffic control devices,
              street lights, and parking lot lights.
              Policy CO 8.2.11: Implement recycling in all public buildings, parks, and public
              facilities, including for special events.
              Policy CO 8.2.12: Provide ongoing training to appropriate City employees on
              sustainable planning, building, and engineering practices.
DRAFT May, 2011                                 CO-96
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                  Conservation and Open Space
                Policy CO 8.2.13: Support trip reduction strategies for employees as described
                in the Circulation Element.
                Policy CO 8.2.14: Reduce extensive heat gain from paved surfaces through
                development standards wherever feasible.
        Objective CO 8.3:          Encourage the following green building and sustainable
        development practices on private development projects, to the extent reasonable and
        feasible.
                Policy CO 8.3.1: Evaluate site plans proposed for new development based on
                energy efficiency pursuant to LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental
                Design) standards for New Construction and Neighborhood Development,
                including the following: a) location efficiency; b) environmental preservation; c)
                compact, complete, and connected neighborhoods; and d) resource efficiency,
                including use of recycled materials and water.
                Policy CO 8.3.2: Promote construction of energy efficient buildings through
                requirements for LEED certification or through comparable alternative
                requirements as adopted by local ordinance.
                Policy CO 8.3.3: Promote energy efficiency and water conservation upgrades to
                existing non-residential buildings at the time of major remodel or additions.
                Policy CO 8.3.4: Encourage new residential development to include on-site
                solar photovoltaic systems, or pre-wiring, in at least 50% of the residential units,
                in concert with other significant energy conservation efforts.
                Policy CO 8.3.5: Encourage on-site solar generation of electricity in new retail
                and office commercial buildings and associated parking lots, carports, and
                garages, in concert with other significant energy conservation efforts.
                Policy CO 8.3.6: Require new development to use passive solar heating and
                cooling techniques in building design and construction, which may include but
                are not be limited to building orientation, clerestory windows, skylights,
                placement and type of windows, overhangs to shade doors and windows, and
                use of light colored roofs, shade trees, and paving materials.
                Policy CO 8.3.7: Encourage the use of trees and landscaping to reduce heating
                and cooling energy loads, through shading of buildings and parking lots.
                Policy CO 8.3.8: Encourage energy-conserving heating and cooling systems
                and appliances, and energy-efficiency in windows and insulation, in all new
                construction.
                Policy CO 8.3.9: Limit excessive lighting levels, and encourage a reduction of
                lighting when businesses are closed to a level required for security.
                Policy CO 8.3.10: Provide incentives and technical assistance for installation of
                energy-efficient improvements in existing and new buildings.
                                                 CO-97                                   June, 2011
Conservation and Open Space                                      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                Policy CO 8.3.11: Consider allowing carbon off-sets for large development
                projects, if appropriate, which may include funding off-site projects or purchase of
                credits for other forms of mitigation, provided that any such mitigation shall be
                measurable and enforceable.
                Policy CO 8.3.12: Reduce extensive heat gain from paved surfaces through
                development standards wherever feasible.
       Objective CO 8.4: Reduce energy consumption for processing raw materials by
       promoting recycling and materials recovery by all residents and businesses throughout
       the community.
                Policy CO 8.4.1: Encourage and promote the location of enclosed materials
                recovery facilities (MRF) within the Santa Clarita Valley.
                Policy CO 8.4.2: Adopt mandatory residential recycling programs for all
                residential units, including single-family and multi-family dwellings.
                Policy CO 8.4.3:        Allow and encourage composting of greenwaste, where
                appropriate.
                Policy CO 8.4.4: Promote commercial and industrial recycling, including
                recycling of construction and demolition debris.
                Policy CO 8.4.5: Develop and implement standards for refuse and recycling
                receptacles and enclosures to accommodate recycling in all development.
                Policy CO 8.4.6: Introduce and assist with the placement of receptacles for
                recyclable products in public places, including at special events.
                Policy CO 8.4.7: Provide information to the public on recycling opportunities and
                facilities, and support various locations and events to promote public participation
                in recycling.
                Policy CO 8.4.8: Take an active role in promoting, incubating, and encouraging
                businesses that would qualify under the Recycling Market Development Zone
                program or equivalent, including those that manufacture products made from
                recycled products, salvage, and resource recovery business parks.
Park, Recreation, and Trail Facilities
Goal CO 9: Equitable distribution of park, recreational, and trail facilities to serve all areas and
demographic needs of existing and future residents.
       Objective CO 9.1: Develop new parklands throughout the Santa Clarita Valley, with
       priority given to locations that are not now adequately served, and encompassing a
       diversity of park types and functions (including passive and active areas) in
       consideration of the recreational needs of residents to be served by each park, based on
       the following guidelines:
DRAFT May, 2011                                 CO-98
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                 Conservation and Open Space
               Policy CO 9.1.1: Common park standards shall be developed and applied
               throughout the Santa Clarita Valley, consistent with community character
               objectives, with a goal of five acres of parkland per 1,000 population.
               Policy CO 9.1.2: A range of parkland types, sizes, and uses shall be provided to
               accommodate recreational and leisure activities.
               Policy CO 9.1.3: Provide local and community parks within a reasonable
               distance of residential neighborhoods.
               Policy CO 9.1.4: Explore and implement opportunities to share facilities with
               school districts, utility easements, flood control facilities, and other land uses,
               where feasible.
               Policy CO 9.1.5: Promote development of more playfields for youth and adult
               sports activities, in conjunction with tournament facilities, where needed.
               Policy CO 9.1.6: Continue to upgrade and expand existing facilities to enhance
               service to residents, including extension of hours through lighted facilities, where
               appropriate.
               Policy CO 9.1.7: Establish appropriate segments of the Santa Clara River as a
               recreational focal point, encouraging a beneficial mix of passive and active
               recreational uses with natural ecosystems by providing buffers for sensitive
               habitat.
               Policy CO 9.1.8: Make available easily accessible park and recreation facilities
               throughout the Santa Clarita Valley.
               Policy CO 9.1.9: Ensure that new development projects provide a fair share
               towards park and recreational facilities, phased to meet needs of residents as
               dwelling units become occupied, pursuant to the Quimby Act (California
               Government Code Section 66477) and local ordinances as applicable.
               Policy CO 9.1.10: Where appropriate, use flexible planning and zoning tools to
               obtain adequate park and open space land, including but not limited to specific
               plans, development agreements, clustering, and transfer of development rights.
               Policy CO 9.1.11: Locate and design parks to address potential adverse
               impacts on adjacent development from noise, lights, flying balls, traffic, special
               events, and other operational activities and uses.
               Policy CO 9.1.12: Establish minimum design standards for both public and
               private parks to provide for public safety and welfare through lighting, access,
               crime prevention through design, equipment, visibility, and other aspects of
               design.
               Policy CO 9.1.13: Provide passive areas for natural habitat, meditation, bird-
               watching, and similar activities in parks, where feasible and appropriate,
               including meditation gardens, wildflower and butterfly gardens, botanic gardens,
               and similar features.
                                                CO-99                                   June, 2011
Conservation and Open Space                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
               Policy CO 9.1.14: Ensure adequate park maintenance, and encourage
               programs for volunteers to assist in maintaining local parks, where feasible and
               appropriate.
               Policy CO 9.1.15: Provide a wide variety of recreational programs geared to all
               ages and abilities, including passive, active, educational, and cultural programs.
       Objective CO 9.2: Recognize that trails are an important recreational asset that, when
       integrated with transportation systems, contribute to mobility throughout the Santa
       Clarita Valley.
               Policy CO 9.2.1: Plan for a continuous and unified multi-use (equestrian,
               bicycling and pedestrian/hiking) trail network for a variety of users, to be
               developed with common standards, in order to unify Santa Clarita Valley
               communities and connect with County, regional, State trails and Federal such as
               the Pacific Crest Trail.
               Policy CO 9.2.2: Provide trail connections between paseos, bike routes,
               schools, parks, community services, streets and neighborhoods.
               Policy CO 9.2.3: Use the Santa Clara River as a major recreational focal point
               for development of an integrated system of bikeways and trails, while protecting
               sensitive ecological areas.
               Policy CO 9.2.4:          Ensure that new development projects provide trail
               connections to local and regional trail systems, where appropriate.
               Policy CO 9.2.5: Promote the expansion of multi-use trails within rural areas of
               the Santa Clarita Valley.
               Policy CO 9.2.6: Provide trails to scenic vistas and viewpoints.
               Policy CO 9.2.7: Explore joint use opportunities to combine trail systems with
               utility easements, flood control facilities, open spaces, or other uses, where
               feasible.
               Policy CO 9.2.8: Ensure that trails are designed to protect habitat, ecosystems,
               and water quality.
               Policy CO 9.2.9: Pursue funding for trail maintenance and encourage volunteer
               participation in trail maintenance programs, where appropriate.
Open Space
Goal CO 10: Preservation of open space to meet the community’s multiple objectives for
resource preservation.
       Objective CO 10.1: Identify areas throughout the Santa Clarita Valley which should be
       preserved as open space in order to conserve significant resources for long-term
       community benefit.
DRAFT May, 2011                                CO-100

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                   Conservation and Open Space
               Policy CO 10.1.1: Provide and protect a natural greenbelt buffer area
               surrounding the entire Santa Clarita Valley, which includes the Angeles National
               Forest, Santa Susana, San Gabriel, and Sierra Pelona Mountains, as a regional
               recreational, ecological, and aesthetic resource.
               Policy CO 10.1.2: The Santa Clara River corridor and its major tributaries shall
               be preserved as open space to accommodate storm water flows and protect
               critical plant and animal species, as follows:
               a.       Uses and improvements within the corridor shall be limited to those that
                        benefit the community’s use of the river in its natural state.
               b.       Development on properties adjacent to, but outside of the defined primary
                        river corridor shall be:
                        i.      Located and designed to protect the river’s water quality, plants,
                                and animal habitats by controlling the type and density of uses,
                                drainage runoff (water treatment) and other relevant elements;
                                and
                        ii.     Designed to maximize the full range of river amenities, including
                                views and recreational access, while minimizing adverse impacts
                                to the river.
               Policy CO 10.1.3: Through dedications and acquisitions, obtain open space
               needed to preserve and protect wildlife corridors and habitat, which may include
               land within SEA’s, wetlands, woodlands, water bodies, and areas with threatened
               or endangered flora and fauna.
               Policy CO 10.1.4: Maintain and acquire, where appropriate, open space to
               preserve cultural and historical resources.
               Policy CO 10.1.5: Maintain open space corridors along canyons and ridgelines
               as a way of delineating and defining communities and neighborhoods, providing
               residents with access to natural areas, and preserving scenic beauty.
               Policy CO 10.1.6: Delineate open space uses within hazardous areas to protect
               public health and safety, which may include areas subject to seismic rupture,
               flooding, wildfires, or unsafe levels of noise or air pollution.
               Policy CO 10.1.7: Acquire adequate open space for recreational uses,
               coordinating location and type of open space with master plans for trails and
               parks.
               Policy CO 10.1.8: Encourage the use of vacant lots as community gardens,
               where appropriate.
               Policy CO 10.1.9: Preserve forested areas, agricultural lands, wildlife habitat
               and corridors, wetlands, watersheds, groundwater recharge areas, and other
               open space that provides natural carbon sequestration benefits.
                                                 CO-101                                June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                    City of Santa Clarita General Plan
              Policy CO 10.1.10: Ensure that the open space acquisition plan developed
              pursuant to the 2007 Open Space District formation conforms to General Plan
              goals and objectives.
              Policy CO 10.1.11: Partner with conservation agencies and other entities to
              acquire and maintain open space, combining funding and other resources for
              joint-use projects, where appropriate.
              Policy CO 10.1.12: Identify, pursue, and ensure adequate funding sources to
              maintain open space areas.
              Policy CO 10.1.13: Provide reasonable accommodation to ensure that residents
              throughout the Santa Clarita Valley have equal access to open space areas, in
              consideration of the health benefits to residents from access to nature.
              Policy CO 10.1.14: Protect open space from human activity that may harm or
              degrade natural areas, including but not limited to off road motorized vehicles,
              vandalism, campfires, overuse, pets, noise, excessive lighting, dumping, or other
              similar activities.
              Policy CO 10.1.15: In conformance with State law, ensure that any action by
              which open space land is acquired or disposed of, restricted, or regulated, be
              consistent with the open space plan contained in this Element.
              Policy CO 10.1.16: In conformance with State law, ensure that all development
              is consistent with the open space plan contained in this Element.
              Policy CO 10.1.17: Allow alternative energy projects in areas designated for
              open space, where consistent with other uses and values.
      Objective CO 10.2: Ensure the inclusion of adequate open space within development
      projects.
              Policy CO 10.2.1: Encourage provision of vegetated open space on a
              development project’s site, which may include shallow wetlands and ponds,
              drought tolerant landscaping, and pedestrian hardscape that includes vegetated
              areas.
              Policy CO 10.2.2: Encourage that open space provided within development
              projects be usable and accessible, rather than configured in unusable strips and
              left-over remnants, and that open space areas are designed to connect to each
              other and to adjacent open spaces, to the extent reasonable and practical.
              Policy CO 10.2.3: Where feasible, integrate open space areas with neighboring
              uses and parcels, to create shared amenities and green spaces.
              Policy CO 10.2.4: Seek opportunities to incorporate site features into the open
              space of a project design, which may include significant trees, vegetation, terrain,
              or water features, to provide thermal, acoustic, and aesthetic benefits.
DRAFT May, 2011                              CO-102

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                 Conservation and Open Space
                Policy CO 10.2.5: Where appropriate, allow density transfers and clustering to
                encourage retention of open space provided all residential lots meet the
                applicable minimum lot size requirements of the Land Use Element and the
                Zoning Ordinance.
PART 3: IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
The City of Santa Clarita will implement the goals, objectives and policies of the Conservation
and Open Space Element of the City of Santa Clarita General Plan through the following
actions.
City Task 1: General Plan Monitoring and Coordination
1.1     Periodically review the General Plan to ensure consistency with changing conditions,
        needs and policies related to the resource conservation and open space and process
        amendments as deemed appropriate.
1.2     In considering any future proposals to amend the Land Use Map, consider open space
        needs as a major priority in the planning for the Santa Clarita Valley.
1.3     Coordinate with the County of Los Angeles on any pending General Plan Amendments
        the may affect the open space and conservation goals of this Element
1.4     In decisions regarding acquisition or disposal of real property, ensure consistency with
        the open space and conservation goals of this Element.
1.5     Require that master plans and improvements for streets and highways, drainage and
        flood control facilities, sewers and water systems and other infrastructure are consistent
        with the goals and policies of this Element.
City Task 2: Unified Development Code Updates
2.1     Revise the City’s Unified Development Code and adopt other development-related
        ordinances as needed to ensure consistency with the goals and policies of this element,
        including requirements for increased energy conservation, water conservation,
        stormwater management, protection of night skies from light pollution, and
        environmentally-responsible design and building construction.
2.2     Revise the Official Zoning Map to reflect open space for resource conservation and
        recreation, consistent with the Land Use Map.
2.3     Adopt a green building program based on Leadership in Energy and Environmental
        Design (LEED) standards, Green Build, or equivalent.
2.4     In cooperation with the County, adopt consistent guidelines for hillside development and
        ridgeline protection.
City Task 3: Measures to Address Climate Change
3.1     According to State law, complete a Climate Action Plan (CAP), including a baseline
        inventory of Greenhouse Gas Emissions (GHG) from all sources.
                                               CO-103                                  June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
3.2    In the CAP, adopt reduction targets and deadlines for GHG emissions, enforceable GHG
       emission reduction measures, consistent with the goals of AB 32.
3.3    Regularly review progress made toward adopted reduction targets for GHG emission.
3.4    Regularly report on reduction measures to the City Council, public, and other applicable
       agencies.
3.5    Allocate adequate funding and provide adequate staffing to oversee implementation of
       the Climate Action Plan.
3.6    Consider joining the U. S. Mayor’s Climate Protection Agreement.
3.7    Evaluate the feasibility of purchasing renewable energy as part of the City’s supply.
3.8    Evaluate City buildings and facilities and retrofit as needed to ensure energy and water
       efficiency.
3.9    Design all new City buildings and facilities based on LEED principles.
3.10   Replace traditional incandescent traffic signals, street lights, and public parking lot lights
       with light emitting diode (LED) or other low voltage fixtures, and coordinate signal timing
       to reduce vehicle idling.
3.11   Reduce lighting levels in City facilities after business hours to the level needed for
       security only.
3.12   Continue implementing trip reduction programs for City employees.
3.13.  Purchase zero emission vehicles, (ZEV), clean fuel and/or low emissions vehicles for
       City fleets and equipment.
3.14   Update and implement the Environmentally Preferable Purchasing Policy, giving
       precedence to environmentally responsible vendors, contractors, and products.
3.15   Maintain or enhance, as needed, shade trees in public parking lots to mitigate the heat
       island effect.
3.16   Provide staff training on environmentally responsible building requirements and design
       procedures.
City Task 4: Development Review Process
4.1    Through the development and environmental review process, ensure that proposed
       development projects and subdivisions are consistent with the maps, goals, and policies
       of this element, including but not limited to energy and water conservation, low impact
       development techniques for handling stormwater, protection of night skies, trees and
       habitat, clustering development to protect open space, and preservation of resources.
4.2    In cooperation with the County, coordinate review of major development projects, such
       as specific plans, that may have regional impacts, in order to ensure consistency of such
       projects with the maps, goals, and policies of this element.
DRAFT May, 2011                               CO-104

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                Conservation and Open Space
City Task 5: Water Conservation
5.1     Evaluate City-owned facilities for water use and conservation opportunities, and program
        funding for improvements annually in the Capital Improvement Program to retrofit
        landscaping and fixtures as needed to reduce consumption.
5.2     For all new landscaping within the public right-of-way, encourage the use of drought
        tolerant landscape techniques, including hardscape, plant material, evapotranspiration
        controllers, and smart irrigation systems.
5.3     Establish a program to convert existing turf within the public right of way to drought
        resistant landscaping within a specified time period, and allocate funds annually to
        implement the program.
5.4     For all existing and new City-owned buildings, grounds, and facilities that are not used
        for recreational purposes, limit the amount of site area planted with turf, and landscape
        these open areas using water conservation techniques.
5.5     For City-owned parks, sports fields, and recreational facilities, evaluate the feasibility of
        converting turf grass to artificial turf.
5.6     In City-owned buildings and facilities, evaluate the feasibility of installing automatic
        faucets and waterless urinals.
5.7     Create opportunities to use harvested reclaimed water for landscaping on City-owned
        facilities.
5.8     Provide information to the public on suitable plants and landscape techniques for water
        conservation, through making such information available to homeowners and
        development applicants.
5.9     Promote the use of drought resistant landscaping on new development, through adoption
        of an ordinance and the design review process.
5.10     Through the Sanitation Districts expand the amount of recycled water available to
         various users.
City Task 6: Biological Resource Conservation
6.1     Continue implementing the City’s Urban Forestry Program, including maintenance of
        existing trees on public lands and rights-of-way, and planting of new trees. Provide
        adequate space for mature tree roots, or pave with porous concrete to ensure a healthy
        mature urban forest.
6.2     Recognize the Significant Ecological Area designations of Los Angeles County, and
        ensure adherence to SEA standards as a minimum condition of development approval in
        these areas.
6.3     Encourage and facilitate mitigation land banking in Significant Ecological Areas for
        resource protection.
                                                  CO-105                                June, 2011

Conservation and Open Space                                   City of Santa Clarita General Plan
6.4    Continue to protect riparian habitats along the Santa Clara River, oak woodlands, wildlife
       corridors, and other biological resources through property acquisition for open space and
       conservation purposes.
6.5    Protect existing trees on development sites through a tree preservation ordinance and
       the development review process, and ensure new tree planting as a condition of
       development approval, where appropriate.
City Task 7: Waste Reduction
7.1    Encourage recycling of construction and demolition debris.
7.2    Encourage recycling receptacles in all multi-family and non-residential development,
       through the design review process and code requirements.
7.3    Implement recycling programs in all City facilities.
7.4    Promote recycling at special events with 2,000 or more attendees per day of the event.
7.5    Encourage and promote waste reduction by businesses within the City.
City Task 8: Parks, Recreation, Trails, and Open Space
8.1    Complete and implement a revised Park and Recreation Master Plan for the City.
8.2    Continue implementing the Santa Clarita River Plan through acquisition and
       maintenance of open space along the river.
8.3    Implement the Non-Motorized Transportation Plan, including master plans for trails;
       expand and enhance the trail system pursuant to this plan.
8.4    Continue to implement the Open Space Acquisition program passed by the voters
       through a bond measure in 2007.
8.5    Seek opportunities to partner with other agencies on open space acquisition and
       maintenance.
8.6    Require open space dedication from developers as a condition of project approval,
       where appropriate.
8.7    Continue to maintain City-owned park and open space lands.
8.8    In cooperation with Los Angeles County, continue to maintain and expand the
       recreational trail system in the Santa Clarita Valley.
8.9    In cooperation with Los Angeles County, work towards establishing a common standard
       for open space throughout the Santa Clarita Valley.
8.10   Continue providing recreational programs that meet the needs of all economic and
       demographic segments of the population, and expand these programs as needed to
       serve additional residents.
DRAFT May, 2011                               CO-106
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                  Conservation and Open Space
8.11    In an effort to continue the joint planning efforts, Los Angeles County and the City of
        Santa Clarita will explore the feasibility of a Transfer of Development Rights (TDR)
        Program in order to direct growth and development away from valuable open space
        areas to identified infill areas within the OVOV Plan Area.
City Task 9: Historic Preservation
9.1     Adopt a Historic Preservation Ordinance for the City. As an interim measure, follow
        guidelines to protect historic structures and sites from unauthorized grading, demolition,
        modification, or new construction, except as permitted through review based upon
        adopted historic preservation guidelines.
9.2     Coordinate with the Native American Heritage Commission on any land use or planning
        decisions that may affect Native American cultural resources.
9.3     Coordinate with the Santa Clarita Historical Society on any land use or planning
        decisions that may affect historical sites.
9.4     Prepare a plan for an appropriate historical exhibit at the Pioneer Oil Refinery site.
9.5     Evaluate additional sites with potential for significance as historic or cultural resources,
        which may include undertaking a comprehensive historic resources survey, and add
        significant sites to the Inventory of Historical Resources as deemed appropriate.
City Task 10: Regulatory Compliance
10.1    For all new development projects, implement the procedures and requirements of the
        California Environmental Quality Act.
10.2    Implement the procedures and requirements of the State Mining and Reclamation Act for
        any active or proposed aggregate mining operations in the City.
10.3    Implement procedures and requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
        System (NPDES) on City projects, and through enforcement of compliance on private
        construction projects.
10.4    Require compliance with the requirements of the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the
        California Department of Fish and Game regarding protection of biological species and
        habitats.
10.5    Ensure compliance with State waste diversion mandates.
                                                 CO-107                                  June, 2011
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                          Safety
                                        SAFETY ELEMENT
                                             JUNE, 2011
PART 1: BACKGROUND AND SAFETY ISSUES
A.       Purpose and Intent of the Safety Element
Local governments are charged with the responsibility of protecting their citizens from unsafe
conditions in the planning area, including natural and man-made hazards that could affect life or
health, property values, economic or social welfare, and/or environmental quality. The Safety
Element describes natural and man-made hazards that may affect existing and future residents,
and provides guidelines for protecting public health and safety. It identifies present conditions
and public concerns, and establishes policies and standards designed to minimize risks from
hazards to acceptable levels. In addition, the Safety Element informs citizens about hazardous
conditions in specific areas, and assists policy makers in making land use and development
decisions.
Although some degree of risk is inevitable because disasters cannot be predicted with certainty,
unsafe conditions may be minimized through development of plans and policies to limit the
public’s exposure to hazards. For those cases in which disasters cannot be avoided, the Safety
Element addresses emergency response services, and includes policies intended to minimize
disruption and expedite recovery following disasters.
B.       Background
Section 65302 of the California Government Code requires that the Safety Element address
risks associated with ground rupture and shaking, seiche and dam failure, slope and soil
instability, flooding, urban and wildland fires, evacuation routes, and any locally-identified
issues, such as crime reduction, emergency preparedness, and hazardous materials incidents.
The aim of the Safety Element is to reduce the potential risk of death, injuries, property damage,
and economic and social dislocation resulting from these hazards, by providing a framework to
guide local land use decisions related to zoning, subdivisions, and entitlement permits.
Many of the issues covered in the Safety Element are also addressed in other General Plan
elements. The Safety Element is consistent with the Land Use Element and Economic
Development Element because hazards were identified and considered when establishing
appropriate land use patterns on the Land Use Map, in order to limit public exposure to risk.
The Element is consistent with the Circulation Element, because circulation policies require
adequate evacuation routes and emergency access throughout the community. The Element is
consistent with the Housing Element, because residential areas have been designated and are
required to be designed to protect neighborhoods from hazardous conditions. The Element is
consistent with the Conservation and Open Space Element, because areas identified as
potentially subject to flooding, slope failure, seiche, or other hazard, have been designated as
Open Space. In addition, conservation policies to protect watersheds and hillsides are also
intended to limit risk from flooding and slope failures. The Safety Element is consistent with the
Noise Element, because policies in both elements are intended to protect the public from
unhealthful conditions.
                                                S-1                                     June, 2011

Safety                                                           City of Santa Clarita General Plan
C.       Seismic and Geological Hazards
Earthquakes and Fault Zones Affecting the Planning Area
The planning area contains, and is in the vicinity of several known active and potentially active
earthquake faults and fault zones. The term fault describes a fracture or zone of closely
associated fractures where rocks on one side have been displaced with respect to those on the
other side. A fault zone consists of a zone of related faults which may be braided or branching.
New faults within the region continue to be discovered. Scientists have identified almost 100
faults in the Los Angeles area known to be capable of a magnitude 6.0 or greater earthquake.
The January 17, 1994, magnitude 6.7 Northridge Earthquake, which produced severe ground
motions causing 57 deaths and 9,253 injuries, left over 20,000 displaced from their homes.
Scientists have indicated that such devastating shaking should be considered the norm near
any large thrust fault earthquake in the region. Recent reports from the U.S. Geological Survey
and the Southern California Earthquake Center conclude that the Los Angeles area could
expect one earthquake every year of magnitude 5.0 or more, for the foreseeable future.
A major earthquake in or near the Santa Clarita Valley may cause deaths and casualties,
property damage, fires, hazardous materials spills, and other hazards. The effects could be
aggravated by aftershocks and the secondary effects of fire, chemical accidents, water
contamination, and possible dam failures. The time of day and season of the year could affect
the number of casualties and property damage sustained from a major seismic event. In
addition to impacts on human safety and property damage, a major earthquake could cause
socio-economic impacts on Valley residents and businesses through loss of employment,
interruption of the distribution of goods and services, and reductions in the local tax base.
Disruption of transportation, telecommunications, and computer systems could further impact
financial services and local government. A catastrophic earthquake could exceed the response
capability of the City and County, requiring disaster relief support from other local governmental
and private organizations, and from the State and federal governments.
Earthquakes are classified by their magnitude and by their intensity. The intensity of seismic
ground shaking is a function of several factors, including the magnitude of the quake, distance
from the epicenter, and local geologic conditions. The largest or maximum credible earthquake
a fault is capable of generating is used for community planning purposes. Earthquakes are
typically defined by their magnitude as measured on the Richter Scale. Each whole number
step in magnitude on the scale represents a tenfold increase in the amplitude of the waves on a
seismogram, and about a 31-fold increase in energy released. For example, a 7.5-magnitude
earthquake is 31 times more powerful than a 6.5-magnitude quake. The Modified Mercalli
Intensity Scale is a measure of the damage potential of earthquakes, and contains 12 levels of
intensity from I (tremor not felt) to XII (damage nearly total). For purposes of the discussion in
this section, intensity is given using the Richter Scale, which is generally described in Table S-1.
June, 2011                          S-2
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                            Safety
                    Table S-1: Richter Scale of Magnitude for Earthquakes
        Richter Magnitude                                 Earthquake Effects
                                    Generally not felt, but recorded
  Less than 3.5
                                    Often felt, but rarely causes damage
  3.5-5.4
                                    Slight damage to well-designed buildings, can cause major
  5.5-6.0                           damage to poorly constructed buildings over small regions
                                    Can be destructive in areas up to about 100 kilometers
  6.1-6.9                           across, in areas where people live
                                    Major earthquake; can cause serious damage over large
  7.0-7.9                           areas
                                    Great earthquake; can cause serious damage in areas
  8 or greater                      several hundred kilometers across
Active faults are those that have caused soil and strata displacement within the last 11,000
years (the Holocene epoch). Potentially active faults show evidence of surface displacement
during the last two million years (the Quaternary period). Exhibit S-1 shows the general location
of faults which have experienced seismic activity within the last two million years and are
considered to be active or potentially active, and which are located within or in the vicinity of the
planning area. Faults capable of causing major damage within the planning area are listed
below, with estimated potential magnitude indicated on the Richter scale.
    •   The San Andreas Fault Zone extends approximately 1,200 kilometers from the Gulf of
        California north to the Cape of Mendocino, where it continues northward along the ocean
        floor. The San Andreas Fault Zone marks the boundary between the Pacific and North
        American geotechnical plates; it is a right-lateral strike-slip fault that occurs along the
        line of contact between the two plates. The Fault Zone is located north of the City of
        Santa Clarita and extends through the communities of Frazier Park, Palmdale,
        Wrightwood, and San Bernardino. In 1857, a magnitude 8.0 earthquake occurred along
        a 255-mile long segment of this Fault, between Cholame and San Bernardino. This
        seismic event is the most significant historic earthquake in Southern California history.
        The length of the San Andreas Fault Zone and its active seismic history indicate that it
        has a high potential for large-scale movement in the near future, with an estimated
        Richter magnitude of 6.8 - 8.0. Along the Mojave segment, closest to the Santa Clarita
        Valley, the interval period between major ruptures is estimated to be 140 years.
                                                 S-3                                    June, 2011

Safety         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
June, 2011 S-4
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                            Safety
    •   The San Fernando Fault Zone is a thrust fault, 17 kilometers long, generally located
        approximately 20 miles southeast of Santa Clarita near the communities of San
        Fernando and Sunland. The Fault Zone’s last major movement occurred on February 9,
        1971, producing a quake with a Richter magnitude of 6.6 known as the San Fernando
        earthquake. The ground surface ruptures during this earthquake occurred on a little-
        known pre-existing fault in an area of low seismicity and previously unknown historic
        ground placement. The zone of displacement was approximately 12 miles long and had
        a maximum of three feet of vertical movement. The estimated interval between major
        ruptures along the San Fernando fault zone is estimated between 100 and 300 years,
        with a probable earthquake magnitude of 6.0 – 6.8.
    •   The San Gabriel Fault Zone traverses the planning area from northwest to southeast,
        extending 140 kilometers from the community of Frazier Park (west of Gorman) to Mount
        Baldy in San Bernardino County. Within the Santa Clarita Valley, the San Gabriel Fault
        Zone underlies the northerly portion of the community from Castaic and Saugus,
        extending east through Canyon Country to Sunland. Holocene activity along the Fault
        Zone has occurred in the segment between Saugus and Castaic. The length of this
        Fault, and its relationship with the San Andreas Fault system, contribute to its potential
        for future activity. The interval between major ruptures is unknown, although the
        western half is thought to be more active than the eastern portion. The Fault is a right-
        lateral strike-slip fault with an estimated earthquake magnitude of 7.2.
    •   The Holser Fault is approximately 20 kilometers in length extending from east of former
        Highway 99, westward to the vicinity of Piru Creek. Nearby communities include
        Castaic, Val Verde, and Piru. The surface trace of the Fault intersects the San Gabriel
        Fault east of Saugus. The most recent surface rupture has been identified as
        Quaternary period. Subsurface data in nearby oil fields demonstrate that the Holser
        Fault is a southward dipping, sharply-folded reverse fault. Subsurface exposures of this
        Fault in the Metropolitan Water District’s Saugus Tunnel show at least 14 feet of terrace
        deposits offset by this Fault, which suggest that the Fault is potentially active. This Fault
        could generate a maximum estimated earthquake magnitude of 6.5.
    •   The Sierra Madre Fault is a 55-kilometer long fault zone generally located southeast of
        the planning area along the north side of the San Gabriel Mountains, extending from
        Sunland to Glendora. The Sierra Madre Fault is a reverse fault that dips to the north.
        The zone of faulting is similar to, and may lie within, the same fault system as the San
        Fernando Fault Zone, which moved in 1971. Movement along faults in this zone has
        resulted in the uplift of the San Gabriel Mountains. Geologic evidence indicates that the
        Sierra Madre Fault Zone has been active in the Holocene epoch. The interval between
        major ruptures is estimated at several thousand years, and the Fault Zone has an
        estimated earthquake magnitude of 6.0 – 7.0.
    •   The Santa Susana Fault is a thrust fault, dipping to the north. The Fault is located south
        of the intersection of Interstate 5 and State Route 14, and extends 38 kilometers from
        Simi Valley to the San Fernando Valley. Nearby communities include Sylmar and San
        Fernando. This Fault has been classified as potentially active by geologists based on
        evidence suggesting that movement has occurred within the past two million years
        (Quaternary period). In its western portions, there is evidence that the fault plane has
        been folded and would, therefore, probably not have renewed movement. The interval
        between major ruptures is unknown. Portions of the Fault Zone have an estimated
        earthquake magnitude of 6.5 – 7.3.
                                                  S-5                                     June, 2011

Safety                                                           City of Santa Clarita General Plan
    •   The Oak Ridge Fault is a thrust fault extending 90 kilometers. The Fault is located west
        of the City and parallels the Santa Clara River and State Route 126 from Piru to the
        coast. Movement along the portion of the fault between Santa Paula and Ventura has
        been identified in the Holocene period. At its eastern end, the Oak Ridge thrust
        becomes more difficult to trace and appears to be overthrust by the Santa Susana Fault.
        The magnitude 6.7 Northridge earthquake in 1994 is thought to have occurred along the
        eastern edge of the Oak Ridge Fault. The interval between major ruptures is unknown,
        and the maximum earthquake magnitude is estimated to be 6.5 – 7.5.
    •   The Clearwater Fault is an east/west trending reverse fault, approximately 32 kilometers
        in length. The Fault is located approximately 10 miles northeast of the Castaic
        community and runs through Lake Hughes and Leona Valley, where it merges with the
        San Andreas Fault Zone. Evidence of movement along this Fault has been identified in
        the Late Quaternary period. Although an estimate of the amount and type of
        displacement on the Clearwater Fault is difficult to determine, the Fault is considered to
        be potentially active.
    •   The Soledad Fault is a left-lateral normal fault 20 kilometers in length, located near the
        communities of Acton and Soledad Canyon. The Fault is considered to be active, with
        surface rupture during the Quaternary period.
    •   The Northridge Hills Fault crosses the San Fernando Valley through Northridge and
        Chatsworth, disappearing under thick alluvium in the east central valley. This Fault is
        believed either to be more than one fault plane or a splinter of faults that align and
        possibly blend with the fault complex in the Santa Susanna Pass, which extends west
        into Simi Valley. Near Northridge in the San Fernando Valley, the Northridge Hills Fault
        is buried beneath the alluvium, and the Fault’s location is interpreted from oil industry
        data and from topographic patterns. The Fault is a reverse fault, 25 kilometers in length.
        This portion of the Fault has had movement during the late Quaternary period. Despite
        its name, it is not the fault responsible for the Northridge Earthquake (which occurred
        along the Oak Ridge Fault).
    •   The San Francisquito Fault is a subsidiary fault of the San Andreas Fault Zone.
        Although there is no evidence of recent activity, it has experienced up to seven meters of
        vertical displacement in the past. Originating just north of the Bouquet Reservoir, it
        extends under the dam and travels southwest to San Francisquito Canyon.
    •   The Pelona Fault, seven kilometers in length, is located near the community of Sleepy
        Valley and has ruptured in the Late Quaternary period.
In addition to seismic impacts from these faults, there is a potential for ground shaking from
blind thrust faults, which are low angle detachment faults that do not reach the ground surface.
Recent examples of blind thrust fault earthquakes include the 1994 Northridge (magnitude 6.7),
1983 Coalinga (magnitude 6.5), and 1987 Whittier Narrows (magnitude 5.9) events. Much of
the Los Angeles area is underlain by blind thrust faults, typically at a depth of six to 10 miles
below ground surface. These faults have the capacity to produce earthquakes of a magnitude
up to 7.5.
June, 2011                         S-6

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                          Safety
The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act, adopted by the State of California in 1972,
requires identification of known fault hazard areas on a map and prohibits construction of
specified building types within these fault hazard areas. The primary purpose of the Act is to
prevent the construction of buildings used for human occupancy on the surface trace of active
faults. Pursuant to this law, the State Geologist has established Special Studies Zones around
active faults, as depicted on maps distributed to all cities and counties. Local agencies are
required to regulate development within these Special Studies Zones, and may be more
restrictive than the State law based upon local conditions. Generally, the Act requires that
structures for human occupancy must be set back 50 feet from the fault trace. Areas within the
Santa Clarita Valley that are designated as Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zones are shown on
Exhibit S-1.
The planning area has experienced shaking from several earthquakes recorded back to 1855,
as listed on Table S-2. Prior to that date the historic record is incomplete. Epicenters of historic
earthquakes affecting the planning area are shown on Exhibit S-2. One of the largest occurred
in 1857 in the area of Fort Tejon. Estimated at a magnitude of 8.0, this earthquake resulted in a
surface rupture scar of about 220 miles in length along the San Andreas Fault, and shaking was
reported from Los Angeles to San Francisco. The strongest recent seismic event was the
January 1994 Northridge earthquake. The earthquake epicenter was located approximately 13
miles southwest of the Santa Clarita Valley in the Northridge community of Los Angeles County.
Estimated damages from the quake included $650 million to residential structures, $41 million to
businesses, and over $20 million to public infrastructure. Although no deaths were recorded in
the Santa Clarita Valley from the earthquake, the event resulted in damage to water distribution
and filtration systems, natural gas service, electrical service, and roads throughout the planning
area. Damage included the collapse of a freeway bridge at the Interstate 5/State Route 14
interchange, resulting in traffic and circulation impacts to the planning area for an extended
period of time. Other damage included a crude oil release from a pipeline rupture and the
dislocation of many mobile homes from their foundations. The City, County, and many other
agencies cooperated in disaster recovery efforts, quickly re-establishing essential services and
rebuilding critical facilities.
                                               S-7                                     June, 2011
Safety         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
June, 2011 S-8
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                          Safety
                                              Table S-2
                Historic Earthquakes Affecting the Santa Clarita Valley Planning Area
                                             1855-1999
      Year                          Location                           Richter Magnitude
      1855      Los Angeles, Los Angeles County                              Est. 6.0
      1857      Fort Tejon, Kern County                                      Est. 8.0
      1883      Ventura-Kern County border                                   Est. 6.0
      1893      San Fernando Valley, Los Angeles County                    Est. 5.5 - 5.9
      1916      Near Lebec, Kern County                                         5.2
      1925      Santa Barbara Channel, Santa Barbara County                     6.3
      1933      Huntington Beach, Orange County                                 6.3
      1941      Santa Barbara Channel, Santa Barbara County                     5.9
      1946      Northeastern Kern County                                        6.3
      1947      Central San Bernardino County                                   6.2
      1948      Near Desert Hot Springs, Riverside County                       6.5
      1952      White Wolf Fault, Kern County                                   7.5
      1971      San Fernando (Sylmar), Los Angeles County                       6.7
      1987      Whittier Narrows, Los Angeles County                            5.9
      1988      Pasadena, Los Angeles County                                    5.0
      1991      Sierra Madre, Los Angeles County                                5.8
      1994      Northridge, Los Angeles County                                  6.7
      1999      Hector Mine, San Bernardino County                              7.1
Impacts of Earthquakes
Ground shaking is the most significant earthquake action in terms of potential structural damage
and loss of life. Ground shaking is the movement of the earth’s surface in response to a seismic
event. The intensity of the ground shaking and the resultant damages are determined by the
magnitude of the earthquake, distance from the epicenter, and characteristics of surface
geology. This hazard is the primary cause of collapsed buildings and other structures. The
significance of an earthquake’s ground shaking action is directly related to the density and type
of buildings and the number of people exposed to its effect.
Surface rupture or displacement is the break in the ground’s surface and associated
deformation resulting from the movement of a fault. Surface rupture occurs along the fault
trace, where the fault breaks the ground surface during a seismic event. Buildings constructed
on or adjacent to a fault trace are typically severely damaged from fault rupture in the event of a
major fault displacement during an earthquake. As this hazard cannot be prevented, known
faults are identified and mapped so as to prevent or restrict new construction of structures within
fault hazard areas.
Liquefaction refers to a process by which water-saturated granular soils transform from a solid
to a liquid state during strong ground shaking. Liquefaction usually occurs during or shortly after
a large earthquake. The movement of saturated soils during seismic events from ground
shaking can result in soil instability and possible structural damage. In effect, the liquefaction
soil strata behave as a heavy fluid. Buried tanks may float to the surface, and structures above
the liquefaction strata may sink. Pipelines passing through liquefaction materials typically
sustain a relatively large number of breaks in an earthquake.
                                                S-9                                     June, 2011

Safety                                                            City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Liquefaction has been observed to occur in soft, poorly graded granular materials (such as
loose sands) where the water table is high. Areas in the Santa Clarita Valley underlain by
unconsolidated alluvium, such as along the Santa Clara River and tributary washes, may be
prone to liquefaction.
Dam inundation is another potential hazard from seismic shaking. Within the Santa Clarita
Valley, dams are located at the Castaic Reservoir and the Bouquet Reservoir. If the Castaic
Reservoir Dam were to rupture from a seismic event, potential flooding could occur in Castaic,
Val Verde, and Valencia. Failure of the two dams at the Bouquet Reservoir could result in
flooding downstream in Saugus and Valencia. These potential flood hazards are further
discussed in Section D (Flood Hazards).
A seiche is an earthquake-produced wave in a lake or reservoir. Seiches can be triggered by
ground motion from distant earthquakes or from ground displacement beneath the water body.
In reservoirs, seiches can generate short-term flooding of downstream areas. Within the
planning area, the Bouquet and Castaic Reservoirs may be subject to seiches due to
earthquake activity.
In addition to these impacts, a City emergency plan has identified the following potential
damage to vital public services, systems, and facilities which may result from a catastrophic
earthquake:
    •   Bed loss in hospitals
    •   Disruption or interruption of communications systems
    •   Damage to flood control channels and pumping stations
    •   Damage to power plants and interruption of the power grid
    •   Fires due to downed power lines and broken gas lines, exacerbated by loss of water
        pressure and potential damage to fire stations and equipment
    •   Damage to freeway systems and bridges, and blocking of surface streets
    •   Damage to natural gas facilities, including major transmission lines and individual
        service connections
    •   Petroleum pipeline breakage and fuel spills
    •   Interruption of rail service due to possible bridge and track damage
    •   Interruption of sanitary sewage treatment
    •   Interruption of water import through the State Water Project system
Seismic Design Requirements
In order to limit structural damage from earthquakes, seismic design codes have undergone
substantial revision in recent years. Earthquake safety standards for new construction became
widely adopted in local building codes in Southern California following the 1933 Long Beach
Earthquake, and have been updated in various versions of the California Building Code since
that date. The 1994 Northridge Earthquake resulted in significant changes to building codes to
ensure that buildings are designed and constructed to resist the lateral force of an earthquake
and repeated aftershocks. Required construction techniques to ensure building stability include
adequate nailing, anchorage, foundation, shear walls, and welds for steel-frame buildings.
June, 2011                           S-10

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                         Safety
Both the City and County enforce structural requirements of the Building Code. The Alquist-
Priolo Special Studies Zones and sound engineering and geotechnical practices are
instrumental in evaluating the structural stability of proposed new development. Policies in the
Safety Element are included to ensure that proposals for new development in the planning area
are reviewed to ensure protection of lives and property from seismic hazards, through analysis
of existing conditions and requirements for safe building practices.
Landslides
Landslides occur when the underlying geological support on a hillside can no longer maintain
the load of material above it, causing a slope failure. The term landslide also commonly refers
to a falling, sliding, or flowing mass of soil, rocks, water, and debris which may include
mudslides and debris flows. Landslides generated by the El Nino storms of 1998 and 1992
illustrate the hazards to life and property posed by debris flows and landslides. The size of a
landslide can vary from minor rock falls to large hillside slumps. Deep-seated landslides are
caused by the infiltration of water from rain or other origin into unstable material. Fast-moving
debris flows are triggered by intense rains that over - saturate pockets of soil on hillsides.
Landslides may result from either natural conditions or human activity. They are often
associated with earthquakes although there are other factors that may influence their
occurrence, including improper grading, soil moisture and composition, and subsurface geology.
Soils with high clay content or located on shale are susceptible to landslides, especially when
saturated from heavy rains or excessive landscape irrigation. Much of the planning area
consists of mountainous or hilly terrain, in which conditions for unstable soils and landslides
may be present.
The California Division of Mines and Geology has prepared Seismic Hazard Zone Maps of the
Newhall, Mint Canyon, Oat Mountain, and San Fernando 7.5-minute quadrangles. These four
quadrangles include land within the City limits. The maps identify areas of liquefaction hazard
and earthquake-induced landslide hazard. Exhibit S-3 shows areas prone to earthquake-
induced landslides and liquefaction, based on these maps.
Subsidence
Subsidence is the gradual, local settling or sinking of the earth’s surface with little or no
horizontal motion. Subsidence usually occurs as a result of the extraction of subsurface gas,
oil, or water, or from hydro-compaction. It is not the result of a landslide or slope failure.
Subsidence typically occurs over a long period of time and can result in structural impacts in
developed areas, such as cracked pavement and building foundations, and dislocated wells,
pipelines, and water drains. No large-scale problems with ground subsidence have been
reported in the planning area.
Both the City and the County have adopted ordinances requiring soil and geotechnical
investigations for grading or new construction in areas with a potential for landslide or
subsidence activity, in order to mitigate potential hazards from soil instability.
                                              S-11                                     June, 2011

Safety          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
June, 2011 S-12
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                          Safety
D.       Flood Hazards
Surface Water Drainage Patterns
The term flooding refers to a rise in the level of a body of water or the rapid accumulation of
runoff resulting in the temporary inundation of land that is usually dry. Flooding can be caused
by rivers and streams overflowing their banks due to heavy rains. Flood hazards in the planning
area are related to rainfall intensity and duration, regional topography, type and extent of
vegetation cover, amount of impermeable surface, and available drainage facilities.
The size, or magnitude, of a flood is described by a term called a “recurrence interval.” By
studying a long period of flow records for a stream, hydrologists estimate the size of a flood that
would have a likelihood of occurring during various intervals. For example, a five-year flood
event would occur, on the average, once every five years (and would have a 20 percent chance
of occurring in any one year). Although a 100-year flood event is expected to happen only once
in a century, there is a one percent chance that a flood of that size could happen during any
year. The magnitude of flood events could be altered if changes are made to a drainage basin,
such as by diversion of flow or increased flows generated by additional impervious surface area.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has mapped most of the flood risk areas
within the United States as part of the National Flood Insurance Program. Most communities
with a one percent chance of a flood occurring in any given year have the floodplains depicted
on a Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). Exhibit S-4 depicts the 100-year flood event
boundaries for the major watercourses in the planning area, which are generally located within
and directly adjacent to the Santa Clara River and its tributaries.
The Santa Clarita Valley contains many natural streams and creeks that function as storm drain
channels, conveying surface water runoff into the Santa Clara River. From its headwaters in the
San Gabriel Mountains to its mouth at the Pacific Ocean, the Santa Clara River drains a
watershed of 1,643 square miles, approximately 80 miles in length and about 25 miles in width.
Ninety percent of the watershed consists of mountainous terrain; the remaining portion is a mix
of valley floor, floodplain, and coastal plain. Within the headwater areas of the Santa Clarita
Valley, discharge during rainfall events tends to be rapid due to the steep terrain. High intensity
rainfalls, in combination with alluvial soils, sparse vegetation, erosion, and steep gradients, can
result in significant debris-laden flash floods.
The Santa Clara River and its tributary streams play a major part in moving the large volume of
runoff that is generated from the valley and surrounding foothills and mountains. The drainage
system, including natural streams as well as constructed storm drain infrastructure within City
and County areas, is adequate to handle normal precipitation in the region (15-19 inches per
year). With the rapid urbanization of the Valley since 1960, stormwater volumes have increased
due to increased impervious surface area from parking lots, rooftops, and streets. Flood control
facilities have been constructed to mitigate the impacts of development on drainage patterns,
including flood control channels, debris basins, and runoff control systems. Throughout the
central portion of the planning area, streams have been channelized into soft bottom channels
with concrete sides to allow for development in the floodplain of the Santa Clara River.
                                                S-13                                    June, 2011

Safety          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
June, 2011 S-14
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                           Safety
Because the channelization of stormwater can increase velocity and flows, much of the Santa
Clara River has remained unchannelized and in a natural condition. Where flood control
improvements have been required, the City has used buried bank stabilization as the preferred
method of protecting adjacent development from flood hazards. Buried bank stabilization has
been used along various reaches of the Santa Clara River, the South Fork of the Santa Clara
River, and San Francisquito Creek. Stabilizing banks from erosion by use of buried
reinforcement structures provides opportunities to maintain stormwater flows while protecting
habitat along the river banks, providing aesthetic views of the watercourse, and creating
opportunities to integrate channel improvements with trail systems.
The Los Angeles County Flood Control District (LAFCD) has constructed major flood control
facilities in the planning area, including the concrete-lined portions of the Santa Clara River and
its tributaries. The Los Angeles County Department of Public Works operates and maintains
major drainage channels, storm drains, sediment basins, and streambed stabilization structures.
Both the City and County are responsible for maintaining surface water quality through street
sweeping, catch basin clearing, public education, and other measures required by the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits issued by the Regional Water Quality
Control Board.
As described in the Conservation and Open Space Element, both the City and County have
acted to protect the Santa Clara River floodplain from development in order to maintain the
river’s natural character and to protect future development from flood hazards. The City’s 1996
Santa Clara River Enhancement and Management Plan recommended an acquisition program
for land adjacent to the river for open space, recreational, and flood protection uses, and the
City has since acquired hundreds of acres of land along the river for these purposes. Within the
County’s adopted Newhall Ranch Specific Plan, land adjacent to the River was set aside for
open space, floodplain and habitat protection; flood protection in this area will be achieved
through bank stabilization, detention basins combined with habitat areas, rip rap, and soft-
bottom channels designed to appear natural.
Localized flooding has been experienced intermittently in some areas of the Valley due to local
drainage conditions. During heavy rains over the last few years some areas of Castaic,
Newhall, Friendly Valley, and Bouquet Canyon have experienced mudflows or flooding. Local
flooding can be exacerbated by erosion and mudslides when heavy rains occur after wildfires.
Two areas of the City known to experience intermittent flooding are portions of Placerita
Canyon, Sand Canyon, and Newhall Creek. During storm events, transmission of storm flows
within the street right-of-way may cause localized flooding in these areas, rendering some roads
impassable. Throughout most areas of the City, curbs and gutters have been designed to
contain and carry storm flows into drainage structures; in these areas, stormwater water within
the street that is contained by the curbs is an indication that the combined roadway-drainage
system is functioning correctly.
                                               S-15                                     June, 2011

Safety                                                           City of Santa Clarita General Plan
The City has no plans to construct any new major drainage facility improvements. Engineering
studies show that the current City system has adequate capacity to handle projected storm
flows, provided it is properly maintained. In County areas, major drainage improvements will be
constructed by developers as part of the infrastructure requirements for new master-planned
communities. Portions of Sierra Highway north of the Santa Clara River are subject to flooding
from Mint Canyon, and the lack of adequate flood control facilities in this area represents the
last major constraint to development along this arterial corridor in Canyon Country. It is
expected that new development along Sierra Highway will generate requirements for flood
control improvements in this area. Within both jurisdictions, localized, short-term flooding
resulting from excessive rainfall, soil erosion resulting from wildland fires, or inadequate local
drainage infrastructure will be addressed by providing or requiring local improvements as
needed.
As discussed in the Conservation and Open Space Element, one way to maximize use of
existing flood control and drainage facilities is to limit the use of impermeable surface area on
development sites. Design techniques available to increase infiltration and decrease runoff on
development sites include use of permeable paving materials, eliminating curbs that channel
stormwater away from natural or landscaped areas, use of green roofs, and allowing greater
building height to limit building footprints and maximize pervious site area. These and other
similar techniques, collectively known as Low Impact Development (LID), were designed to
enhance water quality by limiting soil erosion, sedimentation, and pollution from pavement into
streams and rivers. LID principles also reduce impacts to drainage and flood control systems
from increased flows generated by new development, and provide for recharge of local
groundwater aquifers. Although flood protection devices and structures are necessary in some
areas to preserve public safety, they will be combined with other available methods of reducing
flooding by promoting infiltration of stormwater at the source through LID design principles.
Flood Control Regulations
Both the City and the County have adopted floodplain management ordinances to implement
the National Flood Insurance Program and other federal requirements established by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency. In August 2008, the City adopted the Floodplain
Management Ordinance (Chapter 10.06 of the Municipal Code). The Floodplain Management
Ordinance is based on the California Model Floodplain Management Ordinance issued by the
California Department of Water Resources who administers the National Floodplain Insurance
Program (NFIP) for FEMA. The City’s Floodplain Management Ordinance establishes floodway
maps, governs land uses and construction of structures within floodplains, and establishes
water surface elevations. Floodplains are divided into two types of hazard areas: 1) the
“floodway” which is the portion of the stream channel that carries deep, fast-moving water
(usually defined as the area needed to contain a 100-year storm flow); and 2) the “flood fringe”
area, the remainder of the floodplain outside of the floodway, which is subject to inundation from
shallow, slow-moving water. Drainage requirements are also addressed in other portions of the
Unified Development Code (UDC) and in the building code, in order to ensure that stormwater
flows are directed away from buildings into drainage devices to prevent flooding.
June, 2011                          S-16

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                          Safety
Dam Failure
Dam failure can result from natural or man-made causes, including earthquakes, erosion,
improper siting or design, rapidly-rising flood waters, or structural flaws. Dam failure may cause
loss of life, damage to property, and displacement of persons residing in the inundation path.
Damage to electric generating facilities and transmission lines could also impact life support
systems in communities outside of the immediate inundation area. Within the Santa Clarita
Valley, the two major reservoirs which could have a significant impact on the Santa Clarita
Valley in the event of a dam failure are located in Bouquet Canyon and Castaic. These
facilities, along with potential inundation areas, are shown on Exhibit S-3.
The Bouquet Canyon Reservoir is located in the central portion of the planning area. The
reservoir has two earth-filled dams, one on the west side overlooking Cherry Canyon, and one
on the south side above Bouquet Canyon. Both these reservoirs are owned and operated by
the City of Los Angeles. The Bouquet Reservoir has a maximum capacity of 36,505 acre feet of
water and 7.6 miles of shoreline. Because of its two dams, two potential inundation areas have
been identified in the event of a dam failure. On the Cherry Canyon side, the water would flow
west for approximately two miles through the Canyon into San Francisquito Canyon, and then
south for approximately 11 miles into the Santa Clara River. The Bouquet Creek dam would
drain south through Bouquet Canyon for 17 miles, into the Santa Clara River.
The Castaic Dam is located on Lake Hughes Road, one mile northeast of Interstate 5, just north
of the community of Castaic. This dam is operated by the State of California Resources
Agency, Department of Water Resources. Castaic Dam is an earth-filled dam located at the
confluence of Castaic and Elizabeth Lake Creeks. The dam facing is approximately one mile
across with a maximum capacity of 350,000 acre-feet of water, covering a surface area of 2,600
acres with 34 miles of shoreline. Should a breach in the dam occur, the water will flow south in
Castaic Creek for approximately five miles to the Santa Clara River.
Failure of these dams during a catastrophic event, such as a severe earthquake, is considered
unlikely, due to their type of construction. However, local safety plans have considered the
possibility of dam failure and have outlined a procedure for response and recovery from this
type of hazard, including identification of inundation areas and evacuation routes.
E.       Fire Hazard
Fire Protection Services
As part of the Consolidated Fire Protection District, the entire planning area receives urban and
wildland fire protection services from the Los Angeles County Fire Department. Mutual aid
agreements are maintained with several local, State, and federal agencies. The Fire
Department also provides fire prevention services, emergency medical services, hazardous
materials services, and urban search and rescue services.
                                               S-17                                      June, 2011
Safety                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
In 2007, the Fire Department stations in the Santa Clarita Valley responded to 15,432 calls
within the planning area, of which 594 were fire related and 10,093 were emergency medical
services. The Fire Department also responded to 10 hazardous materials calls, including
reports of hazardous conditions. The Fire Department has adopted a goal of responding to calls
in urban areas within five minutes, in suburban areas within eight minutes, and in rural areas
within 12 minutes. However, actual response times vary due to distances and road conditions.
The 2007 median response times throughout the planning area were five minutes within the City
limits, and less than eight minutes within unincorporated County areas.
As of December, 2006 there were 10 fire stations in the planning area. Two additional stations,
#75 in Chatsworth and #77 in Gorman, although outside the planning area, were able to provide
support as needed and will continue to do so. In 2006, the Fire Department retained a
consulting firm to analyze service levels and needs within its service area. The study concluded
that there were insufficient fire stations in the Santa Clarita Valley to maintain desired service
levels, and that the coverage areas were too large for the existing stations to meet target
response times. Based on projected needs, the Fire Department planned construction of
approximately 15 new stations in the Santa Clarita Valley by 2016. Since that time, the Fire
Department has undertaken construction of Station #108 on Rock Canyon Drive, and has
established temporary Stations #156 on Copperhill Drive, #132 on Sand Canyon Road, and
#104 on Golden Valley Road. As of the adoption date of this plan there were 13 stations in the
planning area. Two additional stations serve portions of the planning area, although they are
outside the boundaries; these are Station #77 in Gorman and Station #75 in Chatsworth.
Existing and planned fire stations are shown on Exhibit S-5.
Some fire stations in the Valley are geared toward providing urban fire protection services, while
others in outlying areas respond to brush fires along the urban-wildland interface. According to
Los Angeles County Fire Chief P. Michael Freeman, “The whole objective of firefighting is to try
to catch the fire when it’s small. The closer the station is to the location of the fire, the quicker
we can get there and the better chance we’ll have to keep it small.” In 2007, the Fire
Department opened two temporary fire stations (No. 132 on Sand Canyon Road in Stetson
Ranch, and No. 156 on Copper Hill Drive in Saugus) to provide service until permanent stations
are completed. The County also moved forward with plans and environmental documents to
build two additional stations+.
The County has adopted fire impact fees within the planning area to fund new construction of
fire stations and purchase of capital fire equipment. These fees are collected from developers
who are required to mitigate potential health and safety impacts from fire danger by funding
construction of a new fire station or purchase of equipment. Funding is also provided by the
County and the City through property tax revenue. Additionally, voters approved a special tax in
1997 to pay for essential fire suppression and emergency medical services.
In 2007, the Fire Department received funding from Los Angeles County to purchase new fire
engines as part of the County’s plan to phase out older fire equipment. Fire engines typically
last about 15 years before they need to be replaced. Normally one or two engines are
maintained within each fire station in the County. Other equipment is also planned for
replacement to maintain effective operational capacity.
June, 2011                         S-18

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                          Safety
Fire prevention activities are headed by the County Fire Marshall, and include preparation of
codes, ordinances and standards; plan checking for fire safety, sprinkler systems and fire
alarms; fire inspections of structures; brush clearance compliance programs; fuel modification;
education; fire investigation; establishing standards for access and fire flow in new subdivisions;
and environmental review, among other activities. The Fire Department’s Emergency Medical
Services unit was established in 1969 to provide paramedics to respond to medical calls and
implement advance life support. The Urban Search and Rescue service provides trained
responders to rescue in confined spaces, by helicopter, by diving, and in other special
circumstances. Hazardous material programs provided by the Fire Department are discussed in
Section G of this element.
The Peak Load Water Supply is the supply of water available to meet both domestic water and
fire fighting needs during the particular season and time of day when domestic water demand
on a water system is at its peak. Both the City and the County review new development plans
to ensure that adequate water supply is available to provide fire flow as well as daily water
supply, prior to issuance of building permits.
The City, Fire Department and various other County agencies are collaborating on a Joint Task
Force to examine the ongoing needs of the Santa Clarita Valley for fire station development.
This examination includes funding for construction and personnel, and ways to assure
appropriate fire staffing to meet anticipated growth, with the goal of continuing to provide the
highest level of public safety services to the Santa Clarita Valley residents.
                                               S-19                                     June, 2011

Safety          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
June, 2011 S-20
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                           Safety
Wildland Fire Protection
Wildland fire refers to a fire that occurs in a suburban or rural area that contains uncultivated
lands, timber, range, watershed, brush, or grasslands, including areas in which there is a
mingling of developed and undeveloped lands. For thousands of years, fires have been a
natural part of the Southern California ecosystem. However, as urban development has spread
throughout hillside areas of the region, wildland fires have come to represent a significant
hazard to life and property.
The classic “wildland/urban interface” exists where well-defined urban and suburban
development presses up against open expanses of wildland areas. Certain conditions must be
present for significant interface fires to occur, including hot, dry, windy weather; the inability of
fire protection forces to contain or suppress the fire; the occurrence of multiple fires that
overwhelm committed resources; and a large fuel load (dense vegetation). Once such a fire
has started, several conditions influence its behavior, including fuel load, topography, weather,
drought, and development patterns. Southern California has two distinct areas of risk for
wildland fires: 1) the foothills and lower mountain areas, typically covered with scrub brush or
chaparral; and 2) the higher elevations of mountains, covered with heavily forested terrain.
Historical records kept by the U.S. Department of Forestry indicate that wildland fires occur
regularly within the planning area, with large fires occurring approximately every 10 years. Fire
danger rises based on the age and amount of vegetation; therefore, fire incidents tend to be
cyclical in an area as vegetation intensity increases with age, and dead vegetation accumulates.
The fall of 2003 was the most destructive wildfire season in California history. In a 10-day
period, 12 separate fires raged across Los Angeles, Riverside, San Bernardino, San Diego, and
Ventura Counties, burning almost 750,000 acres and resulting in the loss of 22 lives and 4,812
homes. The magnitude of the 2003 fires resulted from a combination of factors, including
extended drought followed by thunderstorms, lightning strikes and windy conditions; an
infestation of bark beetles that killed thousands of mature trees; and the practice of suppressing
wildfires over the last century that has led to buildup of brush and highly flammable fuel loads.
Wildland fires can require evacuation of portions of the population, revised traffic patterns to
accommodate emergency response vehicle operations, and restrictions on water usage during
the emergency. Health hazards may exist for elderly or disabled persons who cannot evacuate
or succumb to smoke and heat. The loss of utilities, and increased demand on medical
services, can also be anticipated.
The Santa Clarita Valley planning area is susceptible to wildland fires because of its hilly terrain,
dry weather conditions, and native vegetation. Steep slopes allow for the quick spread of
flames during fires, and pose difficulty for fire suppression due to access problems for
firefighting equipment. Late summer and fall months are critical times of the year when wildland
fires typically occur, when the Santa Ana winds deliver hot, dry desert air into the region. Highly
flammable plant communities consisting of variable mixtures of woody shrubs and herbaceous
species, such as chaparral and sage vegetation, allow fires to spread easily on hillsides and in
canyons. According to the Fire Department, 80 to 90 percent of the planning area is located in
a Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zone, which is the highest classification for areas subject to
wildfires. The potential wildland fire hazard areas within the planning area are shown on Exhibit
S-6.
                                               S-21                                     June, 2011

Safety          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
June, 2011 S-22
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                          Safety
Areas subject to wildland fire danger include portions of Newhall and Canyon Country, Sand
Canyon, Pico Canyon, Placerita Canyon, Hasley Canyon, White’s Canyon, Bouquet Canyon,
and all areas along the interface between urban development and natural vegetation in hillside
areas. Fire hazards increase with any drought periods, and are highest for structures at the
fringe of forested or wildland areas. In addition to the damage caused directly by a foothill fire,
further damage may be caused by resulting mudslides during subsequent rains.
In October, 2007, wildfires again swept through Southern California, including the Santa Clarita
Valley. Emergency response procedures put into place after the 2003 fires reduced losses
through better notification and evacuation procedures, and through quick action by the State
and Federal governments to declare an emergency and provide suppression support. Within
the Santa Clarita Valley the 2007 fires included the Buckweed Fire, which burned 38,356 acres;
the Magic Fire, which burned 1,750 acres; and the Newhall Fire, which burned 40 acres. The
Ranch Fire, which burned 55,756 acres, started near Castaic and burned primarily wildland
areas. To respond to these fires, the City set up a telephone bank that handled thousands of
phone calls, and transformed Central Park into a Fire Department base camp for firefighters.
Local Assistance Centers were set up to help residents file FEMA claims, and the nonprofit
Santa Clarita Valley Disaster Coalition solicited and disbursed funds for fire victim relief.
Twenty-one homes were destroyed and 15 homes damaged by the Buckweed Fire, but no lives
were lost.
Local fire response resources include those of the Los Angeles County Fire Department, the
Fire Services mutual aid system, the California Division of Forestry, and the United States
Forest Service. The combination of forces applied will depend upon the severity of the fire,
other fires in progress, and the availability of resources. Suppression efforts can involve fire
equipment, heavy construction equipment, and air fire bombardment aircraft, in addition to hand
crews.
The Fire Department operates 10 fire suppression camps assigned to the Air and Wildland
Division, of which four camps employ paid personnel and six camps are staffed with inmate
crews from detention facilities. Wildland fire crews are used for fire protection, prevention, and
suppression activities. They control wildland fires by cutting a control line around the perimeter
of a fire, coordinating activities of bulldozers, and use of water-dropping helicopters and fixed
wing aircraft, as deemed appropriate. The Fire Department also oversees vegetation
management for fuel reduction, and provides response to other emergency incidents as
required.
Under a mutual aid agreement covering federal forest lands, responsibility for non-structure fires
within the National Forest belongs to the United States Forest Service (USFS), while the Fire
Department has the responsibility for suppressing structure fires. In practice, each agency
cooperates in fighting both wildland and structural fires during actual fire emergencies. There
are USFS fire stations and facilities located within the planning area.
                                               S-23                                    June, 2011

Safety                                                              City of Santa Clarita General Plan
In addition to suppression activities, the Fire Department has adopted programs directed at
wildland fire prevention, including adoption of the State Fire Code standards for new
development in hazardous fire areas. Fire prevention requirements include provision of access
roads, adequate road width, and clearance of brush around structures located in hillside areas.
In addition, proof of adequate water supply for fire flow is required within a designated distance
for new construction in fire hazard areas. The Fire Department also provides fire safety training
to County residents and youth education programs on fire safety and prevention. The City
teams with the County to provide training to residents on fire prevention and response, through
the Community Emergency Response Training (CERT) program, and other educational
programs described in Section H of this element (Emergency Preparedness and Response).
Residents with homes located in urban/wildland interface areas must bear some of the
responsibility for preventing the spread of wildland fires. Houses surrounded by brushy growth
rather than cleared space allow for greater continuity of fuel and increase the fire’s ability to
spread. Homeowners should also consider whether their home is located near a fire station,
has adequate access for fire suppression vehicles, has adequate water supply for fire flow, is
located away from slopes or canyons which act to draw fires upward, and is constructed with
fire-resistant materials and design features, such as non-combustible roofing and boxed eaves.
The California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection has issued guidelines for fuel
reduction and other fire safety measures in urban/wildland interface areas.1 These guidelines
were issued in response to recent changes to Public Resources Code Section 4291 that
increased the defensible space clearance requirement from 30 feet to 100 feet around
structures. For fire protection purposes, “defensible space” means the area within the perimeter
of a parcel where basic wildfire protection practices are implemented. This area is
characterized by adequate emergency vehicle access, emergency water reserves, street names
and building identification, and fuel modification measures. Fuel reduction through vegetation
management around homes is the key to saving homes in hillside areas. The City, County and
Fire Department will continue to provide public education programs about fire prevention
strategies for residents in interface areas.
After a fire has been suppressed in a wildland area, the work of restoration begins. The Burned
Area Emergency Response (BAER) Team is a group of specialists in fields such as hydrology,
soil sciences and wildlife management who evaluate damage to habitat areas from fires, and
from firebreaks which may have been constructed to contain fires by cutting and clearing
vegetation with earthmovers. In order to prevent erosion and re-establish vegetation consistent
with native plant communities, appropriate planting and other management techniques must
occur as soon as possible after a fire is extinguished.
1
  California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection, General Guidelines to Implement Performance
Based Defensible Space Regulations under PRC 4291, 2005.
June, 2011                           S-24

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                            Safety
F.       Severe Weather Conditions
Severe weather threats for Santa Clarita Valley residents were identified in the City’s Natural
Hazard Mitigation Plan as including extreme heat and high-velocity winds. Extreme heat results
in excessive demands on the regional power grid to supply electricity for air conditioners. Long
periods of extreme summer heat can affect the local water table levels and soil quality,
increasing the risk of flash floods if rain occurs. In addition, extreme heat for extended periods
increases the risk of wildland fires and exacerbates formation of ozone, resulting in impaired air
quality. Exposure by humans to excessive heat can result in heat exhaustion or heatstroke;
each year, about 175 Americans die as a result of summer heat waves.
The planning area is also subject to strong winds, with hot dry Santa Ana winds often reaching a
velocity of 60 miles per hour between the months of October and March. These winds may
overturn trees, create unsafe driving conditions for motorists, and damage utility lines. They
also create ideal conditions for the origin and spread of wildfires, by drying out vegetation and
spreading sparks. On average, high wind events occur from 5 to 10 times per year in the
planning area.
The Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan addressed these potential safety hazards with goals
focused on public education regarding precautions against exposure to high heat and poor air
quality; tree trimming programs to address falling limbs and trunks during high winds;
participation in regional notification programs regarding power black-outs; debris management
after windstorms; and undergrounding of utility lines.
G.       Hazardous Materials
Hazardous materials include any substance or combination of substances which, because of
quantity, concentration, or characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to an increase in
death or serious injury, or pose substantial hazards to humans and/or the environment. These
materials may include pesticides, herbicides, toxic metals and chemicals, liquefied natural gas,
explosives, volatile chemicals, and nuclear fuels.
Within the planning area, a hazardous materials release or spill would most likely involve either
transportation of materials by railroad or truck, use of hazardous materials at a business, or
illegal dumping of hazardous wastes. Hazardous materials are transported to and through the
planning area by vehicles using Interstate 5, State Routes 14 and 126, and the Union Pacific
Railroad.
California law provides a general framework for regulation of hazardous wastes by the
Hazardous Waste Control Law (HWCL), passed in 1972. The Department of Toxic Substances
Control (DTSC) is the State’s lead agency for implementing the HWCL, which regulates
hazardous waste facilities and requires permits for facilities involved in the generation,
treatment, storage, and disposal of hazardous wastes. In 1986 the State passed the Tanner Act
(AB 2948) which governs the preparation of hazardous waste management plans and siting of
hazardous waste facilities. Under this Act each County must adopt a Hazardous Waste
Management Plan. The Los Angeles County Hazardous Waste Management Plan provides
direction for the proper management of all hazardous waste in the County and 38 contract
cities, including data on hazardous waste generation, existing treatment facilities, household
and other small generator waste, and siting criteria for hazardous waste management facilities.
Any such facility is required to consider protection of residents, surface and groundwater quality,
air quality, environmentally sensitive areas, structural stability, safe transportation routes, social
and economic goals.
                                               S-25                                       June, 2011

Safety                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Within Los Angeles County, the Fire Department has the responsibility of regulating hazardous
waste management through its Health Hazardous Materials Division (HHMD). The County’s
Public Works Department assists through implementation of the underground storage tank
program. There are three County fire stations that handle hazardous materials incidents (known
as Haz Mat Stations); Station 76 is located in Valencia and serves the Santa Clarita Valley.
Emergency response to accidents associated with hazardous material is generally undertaken
by the Fire Department and its HHMD Division, pursuant to the Los Angeles County Fire/Health
Haz Mat Administering Agency Plan. The transport of hazardous materials and explosives
through the planning area on State highways and freeways is regulated by the State
Department of Transportation (Caltrans).
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency maintains a list of all sites in the nation that are
contaminated with hazardous substances. This list is known as the CERCLIS Database. The
Department of Toxic Substances Control (DTSC) also maintains a list of contaminated sites in
the State for which it is providing oversight and enforcement of clean-up activities, known as the
Cal-Sites Database. As of 2003, there were nine sites in the planning area on which clean-up
was either on-going or completed. Of these, the most significant in terms of area and potential
for redevelopment is the Whittaker-Bermite property, a 988-acre site previously used for
explosive and flare manufacture. Today the site is largely vacant and is undergoing clean-up of
perchlorate and other chemicals released by previous industrial users. The (DTSC) is
responsible for overseeing the soil and groundwater remediation activities at the site.
A number of options are provided to help residents and businesses safely dispose of hazardous
waste. The City’s residential waste hauler (Waste Management) provides bulky item pickup
service, which includes electronic waste (e-waste) such as old computers and televisions.
Residents may also drop off e-waste items at the waste hauler’s yard. The City also has a door-
to-door Household Hazardous Waste pick-up program run through Curbside, Inc., under which
limited amounts of antifreeze, automobile batteries, motor oil and filters, house paint, and e-
waste will be picked up upon receiving telephone notification. Programs for disposal of e-waste
and small amounts of hazardous waste generated from businesses in the City are also available
through Curbside, Inc., while larger quantities generated from businesses must be disposed of
through a qualified hauler.
The County offers weekly household hazardous waste collection events at various locations
throughout the county, including the Santa Clarita Valley, at which residents can drop off their
hazardous waste for disposal. The County also maintains several permanent collection facilities;
for Santa Clarita Valley residents, the closest permanent hazardous waste collection facility is
located in Palmdale (1200 W. City Ranch Road). County residents may also use City of Los
Angeles hazardous waste collection centers; the closest of these facilities is in Sun Valley
(11025 Randall Street). Hazardous waste collection for businesses located in County areas
must be arranged with private waste haulers. All hazardous waste collected is disposed of in a
hazardous waste landfill.
Information on City and County programs for disposal of hazardous waste is available on the
websites of each agency.
June, 2011                          S-26

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                              Safety
H.       Emergency Preparedness and Response
Emergency Preparedness Plans
In an emergency, local governments must provide emergency response services in addition to
maintaining normal day-to-day duties, to the extent possible. The California Code of
Regulations establishes the standard response structure and basic procedures to be used by
local governments for emergency response and recovery. As required by State law, both the
County and City have adopted the Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS) for
managing response to multi-agency and multi-jurisdictional emergencies, and to facilitate
communications and coordination among all levels of government and affected agencies. SEMS
establishes organizational levels for managing emergencies, standardized emergency
management methods, and standardized training for responders and managers. When fully
activated, SEMS activities occur at five levels: field response, local government, operational
areas (county-wide), Mutual Aid Regions, and at the State level.
Both City and County emergency plans provide operational concepts, describe responsibilities,
and outline procedures for emergency response. The County has adopted an Operational Area
Emergency Response Plan, which describes the planned responses to emergencies associated
with natural and man-made disasters and technological incidents. The City’s 2003 SEMS
Multihazard Functional Plan addresses planned response to emergencies associated with
natural disasters and technological incidents, including both peacetime and wartime nuclear
defense operations. Along with all the hazards discussed above, the plan addresses response
procedures for a major airplane crash, train derailment, truck incident, Metrolink incident or
collision, civil unrest, terrorism, and nuclear attack. Emphasis is given to emergency planning;
training of full-time, auxiliary and reserve personnel; public awareness and education; and
assuring the adequacy and availability of sufficient resources to cope with emergencies. The
plan also identifies appropriate land use, design, and construction regulations to reduce losses
from disasters. The City’s SEMS plan addresses the following four phases of emergency
response:
     1. Preparedness phase, requiring increased readiness for emergency through preparation
         of emergency plans and procedures, providing information and training, inspection of
         critical facilities, recruitment of disaster personnel, mobilization of resources, and testing
         of systems.
     2. Response phase, which may require evacuation of threatened populations,
         dissemination of public information about the disaster, coordination with other agencies,
         obtaining mutual aid, declaration of a Local Emergency, evaluation of damage,
         establishment of care and shelter operations, and restoration of vital services and
         utilities.
     3. Recovery phase, which may include coordinating assistance programs and support
         priorities, rejoining affected families, providing essential services, restoring property,
         identifying residual hazards, mitigating future hazards, and recovering costs.
     4. Mitigation phase, designed to mitigate impacts after the disaster through updating local
         ordinances and codes, upgrading structures, recovering costs, providing information and
         training, and revising land use plans as needed.
                                                  S-27                                      June, 2011

Safety                                                            City of Santa Clarita General Plan
In addition to the SEMS plan, in 2004 the City adopted a five-year Natural Hazard Mitigation
Action Plan as a collaborative effort between City staff and citizens, public agencies, non-profit
organizations, the private sector, and regional and State agencies. The plan provides a list of
activities that may assist the City in reducing risk and preventing loss from natural hazard
events, including earthquakes, floods, hazardous material spills, landslides and earth
movement, severe weather, and wildland fires. The plan contains a five-year action matrix
based on the following mission statement: “To promote sound public policy designed to protect
citizens, critical facilities, infrastructure, private property, and the environment from natural
hazards. This can be achieved by increasing public awareness, documenting the resources for
risk reduction and loss-prevention, and identifying activities to guide the City toward building a
safer, more sustainable community.” The Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan also identifies all
critical facilities and infrastructure and establishes goals to increase emergency response and
enhance recovery.
In 2006, the City of Santa Clarita adopted and implemented the National Incident Management
System (NIMS) to comply with Federal Department of Homeland Security requirements, based
on Homeland Security Presidential Directive 5 (HSPD-5), Management of Domestic Incidents.
This directive required a phased-in adoption and implementation of NIMS by State and local
governments as a condition of receipt of federal preparedness funding, including Homeland
Security grants. HSPD-5 requires all federal, State, local and tribal jurisdictions to adopt NIMS
and use it in their individual domestic incident management, emergency prevention,
preparedness, response, recovery, and mitigation activities. NIMS does not replace SEMS but
will rather be integrated into SEMS by emergency personnel. Because the federal government
modeled NIMS after SEMS, the two systems use similar terminology and procedures, although
NIMS also includes new requirements for reporting and qualifications.
The City has implemented a regional telephone notification system that will be able to send
information to residents and businesses within the Santa Clarita Valley affected by, or in danger
of, the impacts of an emergency or disaster. Emergency response personnel can use the
system to notify those homes and businesses that are at potential risk with information on the
events and/or actions (such as evacuation) that the City and local public safety Officials are
asking them to take. The City’s notification system includes the incorporated City limits as well
as areas outside the City. The school districts have separate notification systems, and the
County is preparing to implement a Countywide call system. In the event of evacuations, the
Fire Department directs the Sheriff’s Department regarding areas that need to be evacuated.
That information is then shared with the City’s Emergency Operations Center, and emergency
notification is then conveyed to residents.
Another method of relaying emergency-related information is through the City’s e-alert. This
phone-based tool allows residents to receive mobile phone text alerts concerning emergencies
affecting the community. Residents can subscribe and automatically receive emergency-related
text alerts (eAlerts) from the City by texting the term “SCEMERGENCY” to 41411 from any
mobile phone device and mobile service provider.
Community Preparedness and Training
The County and City both implement comprehensive programs for emergency preparedness,
including community involvement and training. To educate the public about emergency
response, the City and County cooperate to offer residents training through the Community
Emergency Response Training (CERT) program, which focuses on effective
disaster/emergency response techniques. The CERT program is designed to help families,
June, 2011                            S-28

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                        Safety
neighborhoods, schools and businesses prepare for effective disaster and emergency response
through training and pre-planning. Program material covers earthquakes, fires, floods,
hazardous materials incidents, and other life-threatening situations. Participants attend seven
weekly classes designed to help them recognize potential hazards and take appropriate actions;
identify, organize, and utilize available resources and people; and treat victims of life-
threatening conditions through Simple Triage and Rapid Treatment (START). A second class is
also offered to graduates of the basic CERT course, which provides more in-depth training on
critical incident stress management, handling animals during disasters, community traffic safety,
and the Incident Command System. From 1997 through 2007, more than 1,100 Santa Clarita
Valley residents were trained in the CERT program.
In 2001, the CERT program was expanded with another level of training, CERT II. The training
provided in this second CERT program was developed and implemented based on the
emergency response issues of the Santa Clarita Valley, and includes modules on Community
Traffic Safety; Psychological First Aid (Critical Incident Stress Management); SEMS, NIMS, and
Incident Command; and Animal Preparedness.
Once a year the City also presents an Emergency Expo, attended by several thousand
residents, at which residents are provided with information materials on emergency
preparedness. Over 60 agencies and vendors participate in this event, in an effort to provide
relevant information with an interactive approach. The City promotes the CERT program at the
Emergency Expo by using CERT-trained volunteers to provide information at various booths
and activities.
Through its emergency management program, the City also provides ongoing training and
outreach to schools, businesses, faith-based institutions, seniors, and the special needs
community. The City uses its website, City Hall, and local libraries as locations to distribute
information on disaster preparedness and response to residents.
Since 2006, the City has collaborated with the College of the Canyons, the Los Angeles County
Department of Public Health, the Sheriff’s Department, and CERT volunteers to develop and
adopt a Point of Dispensing (POD) plan to respond to bioterrorism, pandemic flu epidemics, or
similar public health threats. The plan is based on a multi-agency approach using the NIMS
model, and included conducting a drive-through medication dispensing exercise to be used in
the event a mass quantity of medications needs to be distributed to the public within a short
period of time. In 2006 and 2007, trained student nurses from College of the Canyons worked
side by side with Public Health personnel administering flu shots, in order to test the drive-
through model.
The Santa Clarita Emergency Communications Team is a local chapter of the County Disaster
Communication Service and is registered as a civil defense organization under the Radio
Amateur Civil Emergency Service (RACES). The team’s primary purpose is to supply
emergency communications for the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department and the City of
Santa Clarita. Members are volunteer amateur radio operators who assist other emergency
responders by enhancing communications services. Members also assist with the Santa Clarita
Fire Watch program and the School Emergency Communication Plan. In addition to emergency
response, the group assists with community events such as the Santa Clarita Marathon,
Cowboy Poetry Festival, and Fourth of July Parade.
                                               S-29                                  June, 2011

Safety                                                             City of Santa Clarita General Plan
In spite of these programs and the outreach efforts by the City and County, many residents are
not adequately prepared for emergencies. A 2007 County Department of Public Health Report
found that more than 20 percent of households in the County did not have emergency supplies
on hand, and only 41 percent of the respondents said they had an emergency plan for their
family. In a major disaster each household may need to survive on its own resources for
several days before help arrives. It is necessary for each family and head of household to
proactively prepare for emergencies by developing a plan and stockpiling adequate supplies.
Information on how to prepare for disasters is available on the City’s website and through the
training programs described in this section.
Emergency Access
The Santa Clarita Valley has freeway access along only three routes – Interstate 5 and State
Route 14 going north and south, and State Route 126 going west – to use for evacuation
purposes in the event of an emergency such as fire or earthquake. Residents in some areas,
such as Stevenson Ranch and Castaic, will need alternate evacuation routes in case Interstate
5 is closed during an emergency incident. City and County staff have developed alternate
evacuation routes along surface streets to provide alternate travel routes through and out of the
Santa Clarita Valley. Opening of the new Cross Valley Connector will also provide an effective
east-west route for use in the event of an emergency.
In addition to addressing evacuation routes, detour routes have been implemented through the
Santa Clarita Valley in the event that the local freeways are closed. The Santa Clarita Valley
has been affected by major highway closures that, like the 1994 Northridge Earthquake, cut off
the Santa Clarita Valley from the San Fernando Valley and beyond.
One of the most recent incidents occurred when a big rig crashed inside a truck route tunnel
under the Interstate 5. The result was a 30-plus big rig and car pile up that cost three lives and
caused the two-day closure of the north and southbound lanes of Interstate 5. Interstate 5 is
California’s main north/south highway, and locally, handles in upwards of 250,000 cars per day.
The resulting impacts to local streets put the City of Santa Clarita’s Emergency Operations
Center into action, along with its state-of-the-art traffic monitoring and control technology.
The City, along with Los Angeles County Sheriffs Traffic Division, California Highway Patrol and
Caltrans developed a traffic plan that included three alternate routes (A, B, and C as noted in
Exhibit S-7) through the City of Santa Clarita from Interstate 5 to State Route 14. In addition, the
City of Santa Clarita worked with Metrolink to add additional commuter trains and parking at the
City’s three Metrolink stations. City staff also personally directed commuters to the newly
expanded parking lots for the Monday morning commute and provided shuttle service for quick
access to the stations.
Residents were also able to stay informed of unforeseen changes to their specific route through
U-Text, a text messaging service that allows commuters to subscribe and receive mobile phone
text alerts when there are urgent changes to a commuter route.
The 1994 Northridge Earthquake toppled the Interstate 5/State Route 14 interchange and the
same interchange also collapsed during the 1971 Sylmar earthquake. Since that time, the
interchange has been rebuilt to enhanced seismic standards. Caltrans has also tested all
freeway bridges and interchanges in Los Angeles and Ventura Counties to ensure they meet
current seismic standards for structural safety.
June, 2011                         S-30

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Safety
During the development review process, emergency access is evaluated for all pending
development projects. Two means of ingress and egress are required for all major development
projects, including subdivisions and commercial/industrial sites. Adequate road and driveway
widths are required to provide access to fire trucks, along with turnouts and turnaround areas
where deemed necessary. Traffic control during evacuation procedures will be based upon the
nature of the emergency and the condition of the roads. Temporary signage will be placed by
the City and County Public Works Departments to ensure that evacuation routes are clearly
marked for motorists.
I.       Law Enforcement and Crime Prevention
Police Protection
Communities within the planning area are served by the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s
Department, which is housed within the Department’s Santa Clarita Valley Station located in
Valencia. The Station’s service area covers 656 square miles, including both City and County
areas and portions of the Angeles National Forest. The Sheriff’s Department oversees general
law and traffic enforcement within the City, while the California Highway Patrol (CHP) has
jurisdiction over traffic on State highways and in unincorporated County areas. The location of
law enforcement facilities is shown on Exhibit S-5.
The Santa Clarita Sheriff’s Station was designed to house a staff of about 90 personnel, and
space is insufficient to meet current staffing and future needs. In the year 2008, there were a
total of 242 budgeted personnel housed at the station, including deputies, sergeants, and
support staff. The Sheriff’s Department also operates one storefront substation in Newhall.
Storefront stations are staffed 8 to 12 hours per day, sometimes with civilian personnel. The
Department provides helicopter air support, search and rescue coordination, and the Career
Offenders Burglary Robbery (COBRA) unit, which handles juvenile and gang-related crimes.
Special programs offered in conjunction with community members and other organizations
include the Anti-Gang Task Force, Citizens’ Option for Public Safety (COPS) grants, drug
education, the Family Violence Task Force, gang education, graffiti abatement, local law
enforcement block grants, and emergency response programs. The station also has an
extensive off-road enforcement team that spends considerable time working complaint areas in
the rural portions of both City and County jurisdictions.
The Sheriff’s Department is planning for expansion of the main station, and is also planning to
expand staffing levels to meet the needs of the Santa Clarita Valley’s growing population.
Although there is no adopted law enforcement staffing level standard, the Sheriff’s Department
strives to maintain one officer per 1,000 people, and this service level is being met within the
Santa Clarita Valley.
Response times for law enforcement calls vary by time of day, number of officers on duty, traffic
conditions, and call volume. Calls for service are classified as Routine, Priority, or Emergent.
Routine calls, such as vandalism reports, do not require a priority response from field units.
Priority incidents, such as domestic disturbances, require an immediate response but not a
“code three” response. Emergent incidents, such as a traffic accident or shooting, require an
automatic code three response. From 1990 to 1999, the total volume of calls for service
increased by about 35 percent (from 35,031 to 47,470); however, response times for priority and
emergent incident calls remained approximately the same.
                                              S-31                                    June, 2011

Safety                                                           City of Santa Clarita General Plan
For the purpose of compiling crime statistics, the term Part I Crimes is used to describe the
most serious offenses, including homicide, rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, larceny,
theft, grand theft auto, and arson. According to annual reports compiled by the Sheriff’s
Department, the rate of Part 1 Crimes in the Santa Clarita Valley has remained fairly constant
since year 2000. In 2006, the California Department of Justice ranked the City of Santa Clarita
as the third safest city in California for cities with a population of 150,000 or more (following
Irvine and Glendale). The Sheriff’s Department and City credit proactive law enforcement and
crime prevention programs with achieving this ranking.
In addition to providing law enforcement and response services, the Sheriff’s Department uses
community-oriented policing strategies to prevent crime, and engages citizens in crime
prevention efforts through a number of programs. The Community Relations Unit at the
Sheriff’s Station oversees community-oriented policing programs, including Neighborhood
Watch, Business Watch, vacation security, and other crime prevention programs. Sheriff’s
deputies hold regular meetings throughout the Santa Clarita Valley to educate the public on
crime prevention and provide information about gangs, personal safety, vehicle security, and
teen and parent survival. The Sheriff’s Department also includes a Teen Resource page on its
website listing information about substance abuse, suicide prevention, gang membership,
sexual assault, pregnancy and birth control, and AIDS.
According to the Sheriff’s Department, “the Neighborhood Watch Program is a working network
of concerned and proactive citizens throughout the Valley. Meetings are conducted in
neighborhoods to establish an effective crime prevention plan. Each neighborhood in the
program has developed relationships with each other and with Law Enforcement to protect them
against crime.” Through the Neighborhood Watch Training Program, the Sheriff’s Department
trains citizens on techniques to protect themselves and their properties from auto theft, identity
theft, burglary, graffiti, and “senior scam protection.”
In 2007, the Santa Clarita Valley Sheriff’s Station and the City, in conjunction with the Santa
Clarita Valley Chamber of Commerce, launched the first Business Watch program in the Santa
Clarita Valley. This program provides information to business owners about strategies to
enhance building security, ensure security for employees, prevent loss from theft and forgery,
minimize the risk of identity theft, and other crime prevention techniques. The program provides
training for both employers and employees on how to develop emergency procedures and
prevent loss from crime.
The primary planning issue for the Sheriff’s Department at this time is expansion of space, both
at the main station and at additional substations, in order to meet existing and projected needs
for law enforcement programs and services in the Santa Clarita Valley. In 2008, the Sheriff’s
Department adopted a funding program for capital facilities needed to meet the law enforcement
needs of expected growth in the Santa Clarita Valley, through collection of a law enforcement
impact fee. Both the City and the County collect the law enforcement fee on new development
permits, to fund future facilities.
Detention Facilities
The Peter J. Pitchess Detention Center (Pitchess) in Castaic is the largest jail complex in the
County, and serves the entire planning area, as well as other County areas. The jail consists of
four facilities, but only three are currently operated. The North Facility is a maximum-security
facility with a housing capacity of 1,556. The East Facility, the oldest operational jail in the
County, has been renovated and houses a maximum capacity of 1,974 inmates. The North
June, 2011                           S-32

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                           Safety
County Correctional Facility is a maximum security complex housing a maximum capacity of
3,928 inmates. This facility also includes vocational training programs in the areas of computer
sign production, clothing manufacturing, and printing. As of 2007, Pitchess had a housing
capacity of 7,500 inmates. The location of this facility is shown on Exhibit S-5.
In 2007, plans were developed to expand the barracks at Pitchess to house more than 1,000
female inmates. The County Board of Supervisors approved the $136.6 million expansion
project to serve female inmates from throughout the County, in order to relieve overcrowding
and improve safety and security.
The Los Angeles County Probation Department provides secure detention for delinquent minors
in juvenile halls, and control and rehabilitations programs in Camp Scott and Camp Scudder.
Juvenile halls provide confinement to minors ranging in age from 8 to 18 who await adjudication
and disposition of legal matters. Camps provide treatment, care, custody, and training for the
rehabilitation of delinquent minors as wards of the juvenile court.
Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design
One of the ways in which land use planning can assist law enforcement and promote public
safety is through incorporating crime prevention techniques into development site designs. This
concept was promoted by the U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development in its 1996
publication Creating Defensible Space by Oscar Newman. 2 Newman first published his theories
about defensible space in 1972 and they were successfully adopted in many communities. The
use of environmental design features to prevent crime has been called CPTED (Crime
Prevention Through Environmental Design). In 1995 the City of Los Angeles issued CPTED
Design Guidelines based on the premise that “proper design and effective use of the built
environment can lead to a reduction in the incidents and fear of crime, reduction in calls for
police services, and to an increase in the quality of life.”3 The County uses similar guidelines for
public housing facilities administered by the Community Development Commission.
According to Newman, “Defensible space operates by subdividing large portions of public
spaces and assigning them to individuals and small groups to use and control as their own
private areas…All defensible space programs have a common purpose: they restructure the
physical layout of communities to allow residents to control the areas around their homes. This
includes the streets and grounds outside their buildings and the lobbies and corridors within
them.”4 In his studies of St. Louis and other cities, Newman found that when residents had
some control over public space around their homes they maintained these areas in a clean, safe
condition. However, when common areas were open to many dwelling units and to the public,
with no oversight or supervision by residents, these areas were subject to vandalism, dumping,
and crime. Newman found that crime was also influenced by building height and design. High-
rise residential buildings (over four stories) were found to be unsuitable for families with
children, although they could be effective for senior communities if properly designed. Within
public housing for families, he found that project size and the number of dwelling units sharing
common entries correlated to crime rates. Large building size also affected residents’ fear of
crime, and resulted in high rates of residential turnover and vacancy.
2
  Newman, Oscar. Creating Defensible Space. U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development,
Office of Policy Development and Research. April, 1996.
3
  Design Out Crime: Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design Guidelines, City of Los Angeles,
1995.
4
  Newman, page 2.
                                              S-33                                       June, 2011

Safety                                                             City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Defensible space is an important consideration in residential development, particularly in high-
density, multiple family residential areas. Other CPTED principles include the following:
     •   Surveillance. Areas that are accessible to the public but are not readily visible, such as
         dead-end alleys and drive aisles, often attract crime. Surveillance is a design concept
         directed at keeping intruders under observation by locating windows overlooking
         common areas.
     •   Access control. Controlling access to a site protects users from crime by creating a
         perception of risk for potential offenders.
     •   Territorial reinforcement. The physical design of a site can contribute to a sense of
         territorial “ownership” by site users. Areas that are not clearly under the supervision of
         adjacent buildings are subject to trespass and illicit activities.
CPTED design strategies include provision of adequate lighting; grouping common activity
areas together to promote surveillance; providing clear travel paths with avoidance of dead-end
pathways or drive aisles; provision of security devices such as fencing and cameras; clearly
delineating public and private spaces; avoidance of “no man’s land” areas on the site; providing
secure, lighted storage areas; avoidance of long corridors shared by all and owned by none;
encouraging neighborhood watch programs; use of landscaping to avoid graffiti; and elimination
of hiding places within landscaped areas.
Although neither the City nor County have formally adopted CPTED guidelines, safety issues
are addressed through the development review process in both agencies. Policies have been
added to the Safety Element to promote crime prevention through site design in future
development decisions.
J. Terrorism
Terrorism is defined as the use of fear for intimidation. Terrorism is a crime where the threat of
violence is often as effective as the commission of the violent act itself. Terrorism affects us
through fear, physical injuries, economic losses, psychological trauma, and erosion of faith in
government. Terrorism is a strategy used by individuals or groups to achieve their political
goals.
Terrorists espouse a wide range of causes. They can be for or against almost any issue,
religious belief, political position, or group of people of one national origin or another. Because
of the tremendous variety of causes supported by terrorists and the wide variety of potential
targets, there is no place that is truly safe from terrorism. Throughout California there is a nearly
limitless number of potential targets, depending on the perspective of the terrorist. Some of
these targets include: abortion clinics, religious facilities, government offices, public places
(such as shopping centers), schools, power plants, refineries, utility infrastructure, water storage
facilities, dams, private homes, prominent individuals, financial institutions and other
businesses.
In March 2002, Presidential Directive 3 established a Homeland Security Advisory System to
provide a comprehensive and effective means to disseminate information regarding the risk of
terrorist acts to Federal, State, and local authorities and citizens. The system provides warnings
in the form of a set of graduated “Threat Conditions” that would increase as the risk of the threat
increases.
June, 2011                            S-34

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                              Safety
This system creates a common vocabulary, context, and structure for an ongoing discussion
about the nature of the threats that confront the homeland and the appropriate measures that
should be taken in response. It seeks to inform and facilitate decisions appropriate to different
levels of government and to private citizens at home and at work.
The Homeland Security Advisory System (HSAS) is binding at the Executive Branch level and is
suggested, although voluntary at other levels of government and within the private sector.
There are five Threat Conditions, each identified by a description and corresponding color:
Higher threat conditions indicate a greater the risk of a terrorist attack. Risk includes both the
probability of an attack occurring and the potential gravity. Threat conditions are assigned by
the Attorney General in consultation with the Secretary of Homeland Security. Threat conditions
may be assigned for the entire nation, or they may be set for a particular geographic area or
industrial sector. Assigned threat conditions are reviewed at regular intervals to determine
whether adjustments are warranted. The assignment of a threat condition will prompt the
implementation of an appropriate set of Protective Measures. Protective Measures are the
specific steps an organization will take to reduce its vulnerability or increase its ability to
respond during a heightened alert.
Santa Clarita Protective Measures
Threat Condition levels and corresponding protective measures are listed below:
Low Condition (Green)
This condition is declared when there is a low risk of terrorist attack. Emergency Operations
Center activation level is inactive.
    •   Ensure staff receives proper training on Homeland Security Advisory System, and
        protective measures
    •   Regularly assess facilities for vulnerabilities and take measures to reduce them
    •   Refine and exercise as appropriate preplanned protective measures
Guarded Condition (Blue)
This condition is declared when there is a general risk of terrorist attacks.               Emergency
Operations Center activation level is inactive.
    •   Review and update emergency response procedures
    •   Provide the public with any information that would strengthen its ability to act
        appropriately
    •   Check communications with designated emergency response or command locations
Elevated Condition (Yellow)
An elevated condition is declared when there is a significant risk or terrorist attacks. This
condition may or may not activate the Emergency Operations Center depending on a
regional/local assessment.
                                               S-35                                         June, 2011

Safety                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
    •   Increase surveillance of critical locations whose loss will have an adverse effect on the
        City’s and County’s ability to provide service to the public and/or accomplish its primary
        mission
    •   Coordinate emergency plans as appropriate with nearby jurisdictions
    •   Assess preplanned protective measures within the context of the current threat
    •   Keep staff aware of what procedures are taking place
High Condition (Orange)
A high condition is declared when there is a high risk of terrorist attacks. This condition may or
may not activate the Emergency Operations Center depending on local/regional assessment.
    •   Take additional precautions at public events
    •   Review building evacuation plans
    •   Review mail handling/package delivery procedures
    •   Review information technology system security issues including remote capabilities
    •   Review emergency reporting procedures
    •   Be prepared to have someone monitor the Emergency Management Information System
        (EMIS) if directed
    •   Restrict public access to buildings if threat assessment is credible regionally/locally
    •   Coordinate necessary security effort with law enforcements agencies including the Los
        Angeles County Sheriff and California Highway Patrol
    •   Prepared to execute contingency procedures
    •   Test staff notification procedures/systems
Severe Condition (Red)
A severe condition reflects a severe risk of terrorist attacks. Emergency Operations Center
activation may activate from monitoring to full activation; this will depend on the local/regional
assessment.
    •   Stand ready to increase or redirect personnel to address critical emergency needs
    •   Monitor, redirect, or constrain transportation systems
    •   Consider closing public facilities based on Terrorism Early Warning Group threat
        guidance
    •   Consider canceling large scale public events if their security cannot be enhanced, based
        on Terrorism Early Warning Group threat guidance
    •   Activate Emergency Operations Center, level of activation determined by threat
        assessment from Terrorism Early Warning Group threat guidance
    •   Direct staff to monitor EMIS
    •   Ensure all staff are kept informed
June, 2011                          S-36

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                         Safety
Bioterrorism Planning
Bioterrorism is the threatened or intentional release of biological agents (virus, bacteria, or air
toxins) for the purpose of influencing the conduct of government or intimidating or coercing a
civilian population. These agents can be released by way of air (as aerosols), food, water, or
insects. Since the terrorist attacks of September 1, 2001, and the subsequent anthrax
incidents, there has been a great concern about bioterrorism in the United States. With this
concern, there is growing recognition that the unique characteristics of a bioterrorist attack, in
contrast to a conventional attack, would require additional response preparation and
coordination.
An integral part of bioterrorism response is mass prophylaxis. Mass prophylaxis is the capability
to protect the health of the population through administration of critical intervention (e.g.,
antibiotics, vaccinations, antivirals) to mitigate the development of disease among those who
are exposed or potentially exposed to public health threats.
Every public health jurisdiction in the country is charged with the responsibility to develop and
maintain the capability to carry out first response and ongoing mass antibiotic dispensing and
vaccination campaigns tailored to its local population.
There are two conceptual approaches to mass prophylaxis: “push” and “pull” approach; one is
utilizing the U.S. Postal Service to bring medications directly to individuals or homes in an
affected community. The “pull” approach requires that individuals travel to centers where they
can receive medications or vaccinations. Points of Dispensing (POD) are an example of the
“pull” approach.
In preparation for a unique response to a bioterrorism attack, the City of Santa Clarita, the Los
Angeles County Department of Health, and the College of the Canyons (COC) have
collaborated to coordinate and respond with a drive-thru POD models to assist those potentially
exposed to a biological agent.
Utilizing the drive thru POD, the City, COC and Department of Health Services have tested the
model by operating an influenza vaccination clinic. Since 2006, this yearly exercise serves as
an opportunity to test the POD model while providing a vital real-world service to the general
population.
COC is a designated POD site, because it has a school of nursing and an Emergency Medical
Technician (EMT) program that support the medical operations component of the POD. In
addition, COC’s site has the capacity to handle the vehicle traffic flow. The Community
Emergency Response Training (CERT) team, volunteers, and City staff from emergency
management, recreation and community services, traffic engineering, and public works also
support the POD operations.
Emergency Medical Services
Los Angeles County Department of Health Emergency Services Agency developed a Disaster
Resource Center (DRC) program to address issues related to healthcare surge capacity. There
are 13 DRCs geographically located in Los Angeles County. In the Santa Clarita Valley, Henry
Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital (HMNMH) is one of the designated DRCs. As the designated
DRC site, HMNMH is the lead for 11 other hospitals.
                                               S-37                                    June, 2011

Safety                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
DRCs are hospitals that address surge capacity in a disaster through procurement, storage,
maintenance and security of extra medical equipment, supplies and pharmaceuticals. Each
DRC works with hospitals, clinics and other healthcare providers in their geographic location to
plan, train, exercise and facilitate regional disaster preparedness. Each DRC also has capability
to mobilize storage trailers outfitted with equipment and supplies to set up a mobile triage area
with inflatable surge tents.
HMNMH has a medical cache and a pharmaceutical cache, ventilators, patient monitors,
communication equipment, security equipment for crowd control, evacuation equipment and
staff to manage the program. HMNMH also has the capability to expand and provide care with
surgery beds, isolation areas, pharmaceuticals, personal protective equipment for chemical,
biological, radiological, nuclear and explosive events (CBRNE), and decontamination facilities.
In addition, HMNMH has a certified trained decontamination team, and staff trained in
psychological first aid, and trauma burn care.
When a disaster strikes and it is beyond the capability of the local jurisdictions, the affected area
would contact Los Angeles County Medical Alert Center (MAC). MAC then would survey other
DRC’s for items requested.
K. Accident Prevention
Safety issues related to accident prevention overlap some of the other areas addressed in the
General Plan. As with crime prevention, design features can be used to forestall accidents from
trip-and-fall hazards on development sites through provision of adequate lighting, clearly
delineated pathways, well-marked building entrances, and appropriate selection and
maintenance of landscape material. Accidental injuries on trails and bikeways can be prevented
through planning and design as well, including illumination, signage, traffic markings, adequate
trail width and surface material, removal of hazardous landscaping and other obstructions, and
safe crossings at intersections. Accidents involving vehicles, pedestrians and bicyclists within
the public right-of-way can be minimized through installation of traffic control devices and
implementation of other policies contained in the Circulation Element. Through the design
review process, the layout of parking lots and driveways on new development projects is
evaluated for potential conflicts between vehicles, delivery trucks, and pedestrians, in order to
avoid potentially hazardous areas on the site. Both the City and County continually monitor
traffic accident data in order to determine if additional traffic control devices are needed to
maintain public safety, and traffic improvements are installed where warranted.
L. Summary of Safety Planning Needs in the Santa Clarita Valley
Based on the existing conditions and issues outlined in the background sections of the Safety
Element, safety planning needs for the Santa Clarita Valley are summarized below. Policies
and objectives in the following section have been developed to address these needs.
     1. Reduce risks to public safety and property from seismic activity and related hazards,
         through identification of seismic hazard zones and requirements for seismic design.
     2. Identify and mitigate hazards from soil instability, including landslides and subsidence,
         through identification of hazard areas and requirements for design mitigations to address
         unstable soils.
June, 2011                           S-38

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                        Safety
    3. Plan for and ensure construction and maintenance of adequate flood control facilities to
        protect existing and future residents from flood hazards.
    4. Identify risks from, and plan for emergency response, in the event of dam failure from
        the Castaic or Bouquet Canyon Reservoirs.
    5. Address drainage improvement needs to mitigate localized flooding problems.
    6. Require Low Impact Development techniques in planning and construction, to reduce
        stormwater runoff, promote infiltration, and reduce the need for costly flood control
        infrastructure.
    7. Control and regulate new development and construction in identified floodplains by
        applying appropriate development standards, and implement federal floodplain
        management policies to protect public safety and property.
    8. Promote planning for and coordination with the Los Angeles County Fire Department to
        construct new fire stations as needed throughout the Santa Clarita Valley.
    9. Adopt and implement policies for fire-safe development in urban/wildland interface
        areas.
    10. Require adequate emergency access, street identification, and address numbers in all
        development, to ensure timely response to emergencies.
    11. Identify, sign, maintain, and provide public information regarding evacuation routes
        through and out of the Santa Clarita Valley, in the event of a major disaster.
    12. Continue coordinating with other agencies to provide information and training to
        residents about maintaining adequate firebreaks in wildland interface areas.
    13. Ensure provision of adequate fire flow for new development.
    14. Continue providing tree maintenance services for trees on public property as part of the
        urban forestry management program, to limit damage during windstorms from falling
        limbs.
    15. Protect residents from the harmful effects of hazardous materials through appropriate
        zoning and development standards, and coordinate with other agencies as needed on
        clean-up efforts for contaminated areas.
    16. Continue to prepare, update and implement emergency preparedness procedures and
        response plans.
    17. Continue to provide training to public officials and residents on emergency preparedness
        and response.
    18. Cooperate with the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department to expand facility space in
        the Santa Clarita Valley to meet current and projected law enforcement needs.
                                              S-39                                     June, 2011

Safety                                                            City of Santa Clarita General Plan
    19. Promote crime prevention through public education and support of Neighborhood Watch,
        Business Watch, and CPTED (Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design)
        programs.
    20. Promote measures to prevent accidental injury by ensuring adequate lighting,
        addressing trip and fall hazards, analyzing traffic accident data and providing traffic
        safety improvements where needed, promoting walkable neighborhoods, ensuring safe
        trails, and other similar programs.
    21. Cooperate with appropriate agencies and the public to create a plan to prepare for and
        respond to potential terrorist activities.
PART 2:          SAFETY GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
Geological Hazards
Goal S 1: Protection of public safety and property from hazardous geological conditions,
including seismic rupture and ground shaking, soil instability, and related hazards.
        Objective S 1.1: Identify and map areas in the Santa Clarita Valley that are susceptible
        to geological hazards, for use by the public and decision makers in considering
        development plans.
                 Policy S 1.1.1: Maintain maps of potentially active faults and fault zones, based
                 on information available from the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Zone maps,
                 United States Geological Survey, State Board of Geologists, State Mining and
                 Geology Board, and other appropriate sources.
                 Policy S 1.1.2: Maintain maps of areas subject to liquefaction and landslides,
                 based on data provided by the State and other appropriate sources.
                 Policy S 1.1.3: In the event of significant incidents of soil subsidence, compile
                 data and prepare maps showing areas with potential for this hazard.
                 Policy S 1.1.4: Maintain maps showing potential inundation areas from dam
                 failure.
        Objective S 1.2: Regulate new development in areas subject to geological hazards to
        reduce risks to the public from seismic events or geological instability.
                 Policy S 1.2.1: Implement requirements of the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault
                 Zoning Act.
                 Policy S 1.2.2: Restrict the land use type and intensity of development in areas
                 subject to fault rupture, landslides, or liquefaction, in order to limit exposure of
                 people to seismic hazards.
                 Policy S 1.2.3: Require soils and geotechnical reports for new construction in
                 areas with potential hazards from faulting, landslides, liquefaction, or subsidence,
                 and incorporate recommendations from these studies into the site design as
                 appropriate.
June, 2011                          S-40
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                          Safety
               Policy S 1.2.4: Enforce seismic design and building techniques in local building
               codes.
               Policy S 1.2.5: Consider the potential for inundation from failure of the Castaic
               or Bouquet Canyon Reservoir dams when reviewing development proposals
               within potential inundation areas.
        Objective S 1.3: Reduce risk of damage in developed areas from seismic activity.
               Policy S 1.3.1: Identify any remaining unreinforced masonry buildings or other
               unstable structures, and require remediation or seismic retrofitting as needed to
               meet seismic safety requirements.
               Policy S 1.3.2: Increase earthquake safety in all public facilities through bracing
               of shelves, cabinets, equipment and other measures as deemed appropriate.
               Policy S 1.3.3: Provide informational materials to the public on how to make
               their homes and businesses earthquake safe.
               Policy S 1.3.4: Cooperate with other agencies as needed to ensure regular
               inspections of public infrastructure such as bridges, dams, and other critical
               facilities, and require repairs to these structures as needed to prevent failure in
               the event of seismic activity.
Flood Hazards
Goal S 2: Protection of public safety and property from unreasonable risks due to flooding.
        Objective S 2.1: Plan for flood protection as part of a multi-objective watershed
        management approach for the Santa Clara River and its tributaries.
               Policy S 2.1.1: On the Land Use Map, designate appropriate areas within the
               floodplain as open space for multi-use purposes, including flood control, habitat
               preservation, and recreational open space. Development in the floodplain will
               require mitigation as deemed necessary by the reviewing authority.
               Policy S 2.1.2: Promote Low Impact Development standards on development
               sites, including but not limited to minimizing impervious surface area and
               promoting infiltration, in order to reduce the flow and velocity of stormwater runoff
               throughout the watershed.
               Policy S 2.1.3: Promote the use of vegetated drainage courses and soft-bottom
               channels for flood control facilities to the extent feasible, in order to achieve
               water quality and habitat objectives in addition to flood control.
               Policy S 2.1.4: Cooperate with other agencies as appropriate regarding the
               related issues of flood control, watershed management, water quality, and habitat
               protection.
                                               S-41                                     June, 2011
Safety                                                          City of Santa Clarita General Plan
               Policy S 2.1.5: Promote the joint use of flood control facilities with other
               beneficial uses where feasible, such as by incorporating detention basins into
               parks and extending trails through floodplains.
       Objective S 2.2: Identify areas in the Santa Clarita Valley that are subject to inundation
       from flooding.
               Policy S 2.2.1: Prepare and maintain maps of floodways and floodplains based
               on information from the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and
               other appropriate sources, in order to qualify for FEMA’s National Flood
               Insurance Program.
               Policy S 2.2.2: Identify areas subject to localized short-term flooding due to
               drainage deficiencies.
       Objective S 2.3: Plan for and construct adequate drainage and flood control
       infrastructure to ensure flood protection.
               Policy S 2.3.1: Implement drainage master plans designed to handle storm
               flows from the 100-year storm.
               Policy S 2.3.2: Include funding for drainage and flood control improvements in
               the annual City budget.
       Objective S 2.4: Implement flood safety measures in new development
               Policy S 2.4.1: Require that new development comply with FEMA floodplain
               management requirements.
               Policy S 2.4.2: On the Land Use Map, restrict the type and intensity of land use
               in flood-prone areas, or require flood-proof construction, as deemed appropriate.
       Objective S 2.5: Limit risks to existing developed areas from flooding.
               Policy S 2.5.1: Address drainage problems that cause flooding on prominent
               transportation corridors by working with multi-jurisdictional agencies and
               stakeholders to construct needed drainage improvements.
               Policy S 2.5.2: Provide for the maintenance of drainage structures and flood
               control facilities to avoid system malfunctions and overflows.
Fire Hazards
Goal S 3: Protection of public safety and property from fires.
       Objective S 3.1: Provide adequate fire protection infrastructure to maintain acceptable
       service levels as established by the Los Angeles County Fire Department.
               Policy S 3.1.1: Coordinate on planning for new fire stations to meet current and
               projected needs.
June, 2011                           S-42

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                       Safety
               Policy S 3.1.2: Program adequate funding for capital fire protection costs, and
               explore all feasible funding options to meet facility needs.
               Policy S 3.1.3: Require adequate fire flow as a condition of approval for all new
               development, which may include installation of additional reservoir capacity
               and/or distribution facilities.
        Objective S 3.2: Provide for the specialized needs of fire protection services in both
        urban and wildland interface areas.
               Policy S 3.2.1: Identify areas of the Santa Clarita Valley that are prone to
               wildland fire hazards, and address these areas in fire safety plans.
               Policy S 3.2.2: Enforce standards for maintaining defensible space around
               structures through clearing of dry brush and vegetation.
               Policy S 3.2.3: Establish landscape guidelines for fire-prone areas with
               recommended plant materials, and provide this information to builders and
               members of the public.
               Policy S 3.2.4: Require sprinkler systems, fire resistant building materials, and
               other construction measures deemed necessary to prevent loss of life and
               property from wildland fires.
               Policy S 3.2.5: Ensure adequate secondary and emergency access for fire
               apparatus, which includes minimum requirements for road width, surface
               material, grade, and staging areas.
               Policy S 3.2.6: For areas adjacent to the National Forest, cooperate with the
               United States Forest Service regarding land use and development issues.
               Policy S 3.2.7: Continue to provide information and training to the public on fire
               safety in wildland interface areas.
        Objective S 3.3:      Maintain acceptable emergency response times throughout the
        planning area.
               Policy S 3.3.1: Plan for fire response times of five minutes in urban areas,
               eight minutes in suburban areas, and 12 minutes in rural areas.
               Policy S 3.3.2: Require the installation and maintenance of street name signs
               on all new development.
               Policy S 3.3.3: Require the posting of address numbers on all homes and
               businesses that are clearly visible from adjacent streets.
                                               S-43                                 June, 2011
Safety                                                        City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Hazardous Materials
Goal S 4: Protection of public safety and property from hazardous materials.
       Objective S 4.1: Identify sites that are contaminated with chemicals and other
       hazardous materials, and promote clean-up efforts.
              Policy S 4.1.1: Continue to support clean-up efforts and re-use plans for the
              Whittaker-Bermite property.
              Policy S 4.1.2: Coordinate with other agencies to address contamination of soil
              and groundwater from hazardous materials on various sites, and require that
              contamination be cleaned up to the satisfaction of the City and other responsible
              agencies prior to issuance of any permits for new development.
       Objective S 4.2: Cooperate with other agencies to ensure proper handling, storage,
       and disposal of hazardous materials.
              Policy S 4.2.1: On the Land Use Map, restrict the areas in which activities that
              use or generate large amounts of hazardous materials may locate, to minimize
              impacts to residents and other sensitive receptors in the event of a hazardous
              materials incident.
              Policy S 4.2.2: Through the development review process, ensure that any new
              development proposed in the vicinity of a use that stores or generates large
              amounts of hazardous materials provides adequate design features, setbacks,
              and buffers to mitigate impacts to sensitive receptors in the event of a hazardous
              materials incident.
              Policy S 4.2.3: Require businesses to verify procedures for storage, use, and
              disposal of hazardous materials.
              Policy S 4.2.4: Cooperate with other agencies to hold regular events to promote
              safe disposal of small amounts of household hazardous waste, including e-
              waste, by Santa Clarita Valley residents.
Law Enforcement
Goal S 5: Protection of public safety through the provision of law enforcement services and
crime prevention strategies.
       Objective S 5.1: Cooperate with the Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department’s plans
       for expansion of facility space to meet current and future law enforcement needs in the
       Santa Clarita Valley.
              Policy S 5.1.1: Participate in a multi-jurisdictional task force to evaluate
              alternatives for combining public safety services with administrative services
              within a centralized government complex serving the entire Santa Clarita Valley.
June, 2011                        S-44

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                          Safety
               Policy S 5.1.2: Provide staff assistance to assess future law enforcement
               needs, and work together with the County, Sheriff’s Department, and other
               partners to develop and implement plans for meeting these needs.
               Policy S 5.1.3: Cooperate on implementation of funding mechanisms for law
               enforcement services.
        Objective S 5.2: Cooperate with the Sheriff’s Department on crime prevention
        programs to serve residents and businesses.
               Policy S 5.2.1: Promote and participate in the Business Watch program to
               assist business owners in developing and implementing crime prevention
               strategies.
               Policy S 5.2.2: Promote and support Neighborhood Watch programs to assist
               residents in establishing neighborhood crime prevention techniques.
               Policy S 5.2.3: Provide code enforcement services to maintain minimum health
               and safety standards and as a deterrent to crime.
Accidents
Goal S 6: Reduced risk to public safety and property damage from accidental occurrences.
        Objective S 6.1:      Reduce damage from high winds through effective urban forest
        management.
               Policy S 6.1.1: Continue tree trimming and maintenance programs for trees in
               the right-of-way and on public property, to limit damage from falling limbs.
               Policy S 6.1.2: Promote the planting of tree types appropriate to the local
               climate, to avoid breakage by brittle, non-native trees.
        Objective S 6.2: Increase public safety through the design of public facilities and urban
        spaces.
               Policy S 6.2.1: In designing or reviewing development plans, ensure that
               lighting levels are adequate to provide safe and secure nighttime use of each
               site, while limiting excessive or unnecessary light and glare.
               Policy S 6.2.2: In reviewing development plans, consider Crime Prevention
               Through Environmental Design (CPTED) principles to increase public safety
               through establishing defensible space, clearly delineated public and private
               areas, and effective surveillance of common areas.
               Policy S 6.2.3: In designing or reviewing development plans, ensure that
               pedestrian pathways, stairs, steps and ramps are designed to provide clear and
               unimpeded passage in order to avoid trip hazards and conflicts with vehicles.
               Policy S 6.2.4: Continue to monitor traffic accident data in order to evaluate and
               address any traffic control needs to enhance public safety.
                                              S-45                                      June, 2011

Safety                                                         City of Santa Clarita General Plan
              Policy S 6.2.5: Use traffic calming devices and reduced street widths to slow
              traffic speeds and reduce accidents, where deemed appropriate.
       Objective S 6.3: Provide for the safety of disadvantaged persons.
              Policy S 6.3.1: In cooperation with other agencies, ensure adequate shelter for
              homeless persons to limit their exposure to accidental injury and illness.
              Policy S 6.3.2: Implement the provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act
              to ensure safe travel paths and accommodations for persons with disabilities.
       Objective S 6.4: Minimize damage resulting from aircraft accidents near Agua Dulce
       Airpark.
              Policy S 6.4.1: Support efforts by Los Angeles County to require all new
              development in the vicinity of the Agua Dulce Airpark to comply with the County’s
              Airport Land Use Plan and applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
              regulations.
Emergency Planning
Goal S 7: Protection of the public through planning for disaster response and recovery, in order
to minimize damage from emergency incidents or terrorist activities.
       Objective S 7.1: Maintain and implement plans and procedures to prepare for disaster
       response and terrorist activities.
              Policy S 7.1.1: Regularly update emergency preparedness and response plans
              that are consistent with State plans.
              Policy S 7.1.2: Continue to provide regular training to public officials and the
              public on emergency procedures.
              Policy S 7.1.3: Ensure that evacuation routes are clearly posted throughout the
              Santa Clarita Valley.
              Policy S 7.1.4: Strengthen communication and cooperation between agencies,
              citizens and non-profit groups to plan for disaster response.
       Objective S 7.2: Plan for ways to minimize economic and social disruption, and
       expedite recovery from emergency incidents.
              Policy S 7.2.1: In cooperation with other agencies, plan for temporary shelters
              for residents displaced by disasters and emergency incidents.
              Policy S 7.2.2: Plan for expedited plan check, permitting, and inspection
              programs to aid recovery efforts involving the rebuilding of damaged structures.
              Policy S 7.2.3: Ensure that proper record-keeping procedures are in place for
              purposes of obtaining reimbursement from State and federal agencies.
June, 2011                        S-46

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                          Safety
                Policy S 7.2.4: Purchase disaster and recovery supplies locally to assist local
                businesses in their recovery efforts.
PART 3:         IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SAFETY ELEMENT
The City of Santa Clarita will implement the goals, objectives and policies of the Safety Element
of the City of Santa Clarita Valley General Plan through the following actions:
    1. On the Land Use Map, designate areas that are subject to potential damage from natural
        or man-made hazards for appropriate land uses, such as open space or low-density
        residential, in order to reduce exposure of persons and property to hazardous
        conditions.
    2. Revise the City’s Unified Development Code and other development-related ordinances
        as needed to ensure consistency with the goals and policies of the Safety Element.
    3. Through the review process for new discretionary development applications, require
        consistency with the goals and policies of the Safety Element, including requirements to
        mitigate hazards from seismic, geotechnical, soils, flooding, fire, crime, or other unsafe
        conditions as appropriate.
    4. Update master plans for drainage, streets, emergency services, and other City
        infrastructure and facilities as needed to conform with the goals and policies of the
        Safety Element.
    5. Update the City’s Capital Improvement Program as appropriate to incorporate capital
        projects needed to implement goals and policies of the Safety Element, such as
        drainage and street improvements.
    6. As part of the annual General Plan review process, conduct an annual review of the
        Safety Element, along with other General Plan elements, to determine compliance, and
        file a report with the California Office of Planning and Research and Department of
        Community Development pursuant to Government Code Section 65400(a) (2).
    7. Ensure that any acquisition of real property for public use is consistent with the Safety
        Element and other General Plan elements, pursuant to Government Code Section
        65402.
    8. In cooperation with the County, implement compatible policies and guidelines for hillside
        development within the Santa Clarita Valley, to protect the public from landslides and
        other geotechnical hazards.
    9. In cooperation with the County, implement compatible policies and guidelines for flood
        control and drainage improvements, to protect the public from regional and local flooding
        (including dam inundation).
    10. In cooperation with the County, implement compatible policies for wildland fire safety,
        including but not limited to fuel reduction and defensible space, building materials and
        design, emergency access and evacuation routes, and fire flow requirements, to protect
        the public from wildfires.
    11. Ensure compliance with seismic safety standards through plan review and inspection
        procedures on all new construction, pursuant to adopted codes and ordinances.
                                              S-47                                      June, 2011

Safety                                                           City of Santa Clarita General Plan
   12. Review any proposed General Plan Amendments to ensure compliance with applicable
       goals and policies of the Safety Element; coordinate this review with the County as
       appropriate.
   13. Monitor effectiveness of the Safety Element in achieving the goals of protecting property,
       public health, and safety; initiate amendments thereto as needed to meet changing
       conditions, needs, and policies, coordinating such amendments with the County as
       appropriate.
   14. Continue implementing emergency preparedness plans and procedures, updating them
       as needed and providing training to staff and the general public on emergency
       preparedness, response, and recovery.
   15. Continue to cooperate with the County and other agencies as needed to respond to
       emergencies throughout the Santa Clarita Valley.
   16. Cooperate with the County Fire Department in its efforts to plan for and construct new
       fire station facilities within the Santa Clarita Valley, which may include coordination on
       determining appropriate locations and evaluating various funding mechanisms for new
       facilities and services.
   17. Cooperate with the County Sheriff’s Department in its efforts to plan for expansion of law
       enforcement services to serve the Santa Clarita Valley, which may include coordination
       on determining appropriate station locations and evaluating various funding mechanisms
       for new facilities and services.
   18. Continue cooperating with the County and other appropriate entities on control of
       hazardous substances, addressing the safe use, storage, and disposal of hazardous
       substances as appropriate.
   19. Continue implementing the City’s urban forestry maintenance program, to reduce
       potential hazards from falling tree limbs.
   20. Continue maintenance programs for street pavement, traffic control, and directional
       signage, in order to ensure maximum safety for motorists, cyclists, and pedestrians on
       City roadways.
June, 2011                           S-48

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                             Housing Element
                                      HOUSING ELEMENT
                                        OCTOBER, 2013
I.       INTRODUCTION
A.       Background and Purpose of the Housing Element
Incorporated in 1987, the City of Santa Clarita contains a population of approximately 205,000,
encompassing the communities of Canyon Country, Newhall, Saugus, and Valencia. Since its
formation, Santa Clarita has positioned itself as a family-friendly diverse community with top-
ranked schools, safe neighborhoods, and an economically stable development environment.
For the last two decades, the City of Santa Clarita has seen significant trends in its housing
market, population demands and the continued need for expansion.
As a required element of the General Plan, the Housing Element is part of the comprehensive
planning document that provides a framework to guide new development in the City. The
Housing Element contains information about the number and type of homes that must be built in
order to ensure that all residents in the City will have a safe and healthy home in the future.
This element was prepared to help Santa Clarita meet local and regional housing goals, and to
comply with State General Plan requirements.
Although the City has experienced rapid residential growth since its incorporation, and growth
pressures continue to be felt throughout the Santa Clarita Valley, the issue of housing must be
carefully evaluated in order to address the specific needs of community residents. Adequate
housing for the elderly, disabled, lower-income households, large families, residents of
overcrowded or substandard dwellings, and other special needs groups are addressed in the
Housing Element. In addition, the element addresses future housing needs based on existing
housing stock, housing costs, demographic characteristics, income levels, and regional
population projections. As required by State law, the Housing Element also includes an
inventory of land that is adequately designated for various types of housing to meet projected
needs; an evaluation of constraints to production of needed housing, along with
recommendations for mitigating such constraints; and policies and programs indicating the
City’s commitment to assist in housing development through regulatory concessions and
incentives.
The City’s first Housing Element following its 1987 incorporation was included in the first
General Plan, adopted in June, 1991. The Housing Element was amended in 1992, 1993, and
1995, at which time the element was certified as adequate by the California Department of
Housing and Community Development (HCD). The City adopted a comprehensive update of
the Housing Element in 2001, after which HCD requested modifications regarding provision of
adequate sites for affordable housing. The City’s 2004 revision to the document was adopted to
address HCD’s comments and to reflect housing activity within the City at that time. In 2011, as
part of a comprehensive General Plan update, the Housing Element update was completed and
certified by HCD. The element update reflected land use and circulation map changes,
addressed development activity and demographic changes and incorporated recent state laws
regarding housing element contents.
This document is an update to the Housing Element that was adopted in 2011 and subsequently
certified by the State in 2011.
                                              H-1                                  October 2013

Housing Element                                                   City of Santa Clarita General Plan
B.      Legal Requirements
Housing elements have been mandatory components of the General Plan since 1969.
California Government Code Article 10.6, Sections 65580 through 65589.9, establish the legal
requirements for preparation of housing elements by cities and counties throughout the state. In
creating the housing element law, the Legislature’s aim was to ensure that local governments
would cooperate with one another in order to address regional housing needs, and that counties
and cities would marshal available resources and develop appropriate local programs to meet
the State’s housing goals. Section 65580 states that “the availability of housing is of vital
statewide importance, and the early attainment of decent housing and a suitable living
environment for every Californian, including farm workers, is a priority of the highest order.” The
State’s interest in housing production also recognizes the critical role of housing as an engine
for economic stability and growth.
In general, the Housing Element must include the following components:
       A housing needs assessment for existing households, including those overpaying for
        housing, living in overcrowded conditions, or with special needs; housing units needing
        rehabilitation; and assisted affordable units at risk of converting to market-rate units.
       A projection of future housing needs, in conformance with the Regional Housing Needs
        Allocation prepared by the Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) for
        the Los Angeles metropolitan area.
       An inventory and analysis of sites suitable for housing development based on zoning
        and land use designation, size, existing uses, environmental constraints, availability of
        infrastructure, and realistic development capacity, by income level.
       An analysis of constraints to new housing development, including both governmental
        and non-governmental factors that may limit housing construction and affordability.
       Housing programs to ensure that adequate sites are provided to meet the City’s share of
        the regional housing need; assist in the development of housing for low- and moderate-
        income households; remove or mitigate governmental constraints; conserve and
        improve the existing affordable housing stock; promote equal housing opportunity; and
        preserve at-risk subsidized housing units.
       Quantified objectives for housing, including estimates of the number of units, by income
        level, to be constructed, rehabilitated, and conserved over the planning period of the
        element.
       An evaluation of the policies, programs, and quantified objectives of the prior Housing
        Element.
Government Code Section 65585 requires cities to submit copies of their draft and adopted
housing elements to the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD)
for review. HCD will review the draft element and report its findings to the city after a 60-day
review period. After adoption, HCD has 90 days to review the Housing Element and provide
comments to the City. The housing element is the only General Plan element that must be
reviewed by the State as part of the adoption process.
October 2013                              H-2

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                Housing Element
In general, housing elements are required at the time of General Plan adoption. Unlike the
other General Plan elements, the housing element must be revised at regular intervals as
established by State law – typically, every five years. The City’s last Housing Element revision
was adopted in 2011, and the next update for cities within the SCAG region is scheduled for
2013. The planning period for this revision of the Housing Element extends from October 15,
2013 to October 15, 2021. With the adoption of Senate Bill 375, there has been a recent
change to require jurisdictions to update housing elements in an interval of a period not to
exceed eight years.
The City’s planning area boundary is shown on Exhibit H-1, and includes the incorporated City
boundaries along with the adopted sphere of influence. The area of the incorporated City is
about 62.8 square miles, and the sphere of influence includes an additional 21.2 square miles.
The City is required to plan for its sphere of influence, which includes land contiguous to existing
City boundaries that may be annexed into the City at some future date. However, in preparing
this Housing Element, potential residential development outside the City limits has not been
considered in the suitable sites analysis for purposes of meeting the City’s Regional Housing
Needs Allocation. If, in the future, land within the sphere of influence is annexed to the City and
developed with residential uses, this housing will be in addition to that planned for in this
Housing Element.
C.      Public Participation
State law requires that local governments make a diligent effort to involve all economic
segments of the community in the preparation of a housing element update, and this
participation process must be described in the element.
In compliance with State requirements, the City and its housing consultant made a concerted
outreach effort to invite public input during preparation of this Housing Element. Between
October 2007 and August 2008, City staff and the City’s housing consultant held four meetings
with community groups, a meeting with the Newhall Redevelopment Committee, and a public
workshop at the Newhall Community Center to receive input on the Housing Element. In
addition, the housing consultant interviewed a number of Santa Clarita social service providers
by telephone and by email to gather information on the housing needs of special needs
populations within the City. More information on these efforts is provided below.
City staff and the housing element consultant met with the Healthcare Roundtable on October
19, 2007, and again on January 18, 2008. This Roundtable, which holds monthly meetings,
includes representation from most of the social service providers in the Santa Clarita Valley.
The housing element consultant attended a meeting of the Santa Clarita organization Save Our
Seniors on August 1, 2008. This meeting was attended by a number of seniors and advocates
and addressed problems that some seniors are experiencing in “affordable” senior housing
developments.
A public workshop on the housing element was held at the City’s Activities Center on April 8,
2013, which was widely advertised throughout the community in both English and in Spanish.
This meeting was attended by 5 people and a Spanish translator was available at the meeting.
Oral comments were received from all of the attendees, and no written comments were
submitted at the meeting.
                                                 H-3                                  October 2013

Housing Element     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
October 2013    H-4
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                 Housing Element
The prior housing element consultant also conducted telephone interviews with staff of the
following agencies: Santa Clarita Valley Senior Center; Santa Clarita Community Development
Corporation (Cold Weather Shelter); Single Mother’s Outreach; and Los Angeles County
Community Services Department. The following agencies were contacted by phone and
provided information on clients and services by email: North Los Angeles County Regional
Center; and Los Angeles County Department of Mental Health.
A study session by the City’s Planning Commission was held on April 16, 2013 and was
attended by approximately 15 people. After review of the draft element by HCD and circulation
of a draft Negative Declaration for the Housing Element update, a public hearing on the draft
element was held on September 17, 2013 by the Planning Commission.                        A formal
recommendation of approval of the Housing Element to the City Council was adopted on the
same date. The City Council reviewed the draft Housing Element and related environmental
document at a public hearing on October 22, 2013, and the element was adopted on October
22, 2013. During all public hearings, both Planning Commission and City Council, the public
was encouraged to participate in the process through both written and oral testimony. The
revised Housing Element and environmental documentation was available both online at the
City’s website and in written form at various locations throughout the City.
Public input received through all the meetings and correspondence described in this section has
been considered in preparation of this Housing Element. Any written comments received have
been compiled in the Appendix for review and reference.
D.      Consistency with Other General Plan Elements
 The Housing Element is consistent with all the other General Plan elements as required by
state law. Specifically, the Housing Element is consistent with other General Plan elements as
follows:
Land Use Element
The Land Use Element establishes the type and density of development that will be allowed in
the planning area. The Housing Element is consistent with the Land Use Element because the
location and density ranges shown for residential land use districts on the land use map have
been designated in consideration of the housing needs projected for all economic and
demographic segments of the Valley’s residents, including households with special needs and
those with incomes of less than the County median. Adequate sites for attached and multi-
family housing have been identified to ensure that the need for affordable housing has been met
in the City. The number of dwelling units that can be built in the planning area based on the land
use plan will ensure that the regional housing needs allocated to the City can be met. In
addition, the Land Use Element allows mixed uses in various locations proximate to residential
areas, in order to provide services such as food and drug stores and medical offices within
walking distance of residents.
Circulation Element
The Circulation Element contains a plan for major transportation facilities within the Santa
Clarita Valley, including streets and highways, rail and bus transit routes, stations and terminals,
and airport facilities. The Housing Element is consistent with the Circulation Element because
streets and highways have been planned to convey vehicles through the planning area at
                                               H-5                                    October 2013

Housing Element                                                    City of Santa Clarita General Plan
acceptable service levels when the new housing provided for by the land use plan and housing
objectives are developed. In addition, policies have been included in both elements to ensure
that residents have adequate access to streets and highways, public buses and commuter rail,
bicycle trails, and walkways.
Conservation and Open Space Element
The Conservation and Open Space Element contains maps and policies to ensure preservation
of an open space greenbelt around large portions of the Santa Clarita Valley, in addition to
preserving water quality, historic and cultural resources, scenic views, and providing
recreational facilities to enhance the quality of life for Valley residents. The Housing Element is
consistent with the Conservation and Open Space Element because adequate sites for housing
to meet the regional housing needs allocation are available throughout the City without
impacting open space or resource conservation areas. In addition, adequate parkland and
recreational facilities have been planned to meet the needs of existing and future residents.
The Housing Element also addresses the need for resource conservation in new housing
construction, including conservation of energy and water resources.
Noise Element
The Noise Element contains maps and policies to ensure that residents will not be exposed to
health risks or nuisances due to noise generated from freeways and high-volume roadways,
airports, industrial and recreational uses, special events, and other uses emitting loud sounds.
Policies in the Noise Element address sound attenuation measures to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare, such as setbacks, noise barriers, and buffering. The Housing Element is
consistent with the Noise Element because “sensitive receptors” such as residential
neighborhoods, group housing, and support services including medical, child care, and
educational facilities, will be protected from harmful effects of noise.
Safety Element
The Safety Element contains maps and policies to ensure that residents are not exposed to
health risks due to air pollution, earthquakes, wildland fires, or other environmental hazards, and
that adequate provisions are made for crime prevention, law enforcement, and fire protection
services. The Housing Element is consistent with the Safety Element because residential land
uses were designated in consideration of the locations of hazard areas, including known
earthquake fault zones, areas subject to flooding or wildfires, unstable soils, and other
environmental hazards. In addition, the Safety Element includes policies to ensure that new
residential development plans in the City are evaluated for conformance with accepted crime
prevention measures, and that adequate law enforcement and fire protection services are
provided to ensure the safety of City residents.
Economic Development Element
The Housing Element supports the Economic Development Element because it provides for a
range of housing programs to meet the needs of a variety of employment levels throughout the
Santa Clarita Valley.
October 2013                               H-6

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                               Housing Element
E.      Consistency with Related City Planning Efforts
Redevelopment Five-Year Plan
On June 29, 2011, Assembly Bill 1X26 (AB1X26) was signed into law which dissolved
Redevelopment Agencies throughout the state of California, including the Redevelopment
Agency of the City of Santa Clarita and outlined a complex process to unwind the activities of
redevelopment agencies and dispose of assets. AB1X26 also allowed cities to elect to become
the “Housing Successor Agency,” which means the former housing functions, duties and
obligations of the Redevelopment Agency would rest with the local jurisdiction that formed the
Redevelopment Agency. The City of Santa Clarita elected to become the Housing Successor
Agency.
As a result of the dissolution of redevelopment agencies, the Five-Year Implementation Plan,
which expired in June 2012, has not been updated. In the past, this document would address
specific requirements in State law with respect to prior affordable housing activities and the
anticipated housing programs in the future. This would include ten year objectives to achieve
compliance with State law in its affordable housing programs in the following three categories:
housing production, replacement housing, and expenditures by household type. Currently, there
is no legislative requirement to provide a plan for implementing affordable housing activities,
including the creation of new affordable housing.
However, the Downtown Newhall Specific Plan does continue to remain in effect and does
include a total of over 700 additional housing units in the plan area, of which 75 potential units
are identified as potentially affordable housing to low and moderate income households,
including 40 units affordable to very low income households.
Consolidated Plan
The City of Santa Clarita is an entitlement city for Community Development Block Grant (CDBG)
funds. Use of CDBG funds requires the City to follow a five-year strategic planning process
called the Consolidated Plan. The process begins with a document called the Consolidated
Plan (Con Plan), in which the needs of the low- and moderate-income community are identified
and prioritized. Each year an Annual Action Plan is developed which identifies how the annual
entitlement funds will be allocated and how those allocations address the needs identified in the
Con Plan. Finally, the City submits an annual Consolidated Annual Performance Evaluation
Review (CAPER) reporting on the effect the various CDBG-funded activities have had on the
community. The current Consolidated Plan five-year cycle will end in June 2014. A new five-
year Con Plan is in development.
The current Con Plan identifies affordable housing as a high priority. This is consistent with the
policies and programs identified in the Housing Element, specifically those identified to assist
low- and moderate-income households. Many of the programs identified in the Housing
Element may be funded through the use of CDBG funds.
F.      Explanation of Housing Terms
Some terms used in the discussion of affordable housing have specific legal meanings. As a
reference tool for readers, this section defines terms that are used throughout the text.
                                               H-7                                   October 2013

Housing Element                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Affordable Housing
Because the term “affordable” is used generically to describe a wide variety of housing prices, it
is important to provide a definition consistent with state and federal law. The State defines
housing as “affordable” when housing costs do not exceed 30% of household income. The
federal government allows renters to pay up to 40% of their income for rent, but limits owner
affordability to 30% of household income. Current mortgage lending standards require that
monthly payments, including insurance and taxes, should not exceed 29% of gross income.
At one time, many new housing units were “affordable” to working families buying their first
home. Now, the term “workforce” housing is used for subsidy programs for middle or median
income workers who can no longer afford to buy homes. Even subsidized housing targeted to
households earning 50% or less of median income sometimes is not affordable to seniors on
Social Security, disabled people, and mothers in the CalWorks program; these households may
need programs that charge 30% of income for rent or are targeted to households earning 30%
or less of median income (extremely low income). Rents in buildings financed by the low
income housing tax credit program often are set for households earning 60% or less of median
income. These rents, set at nearly $1,000 per month for a one bedroom unit, are often too high
for seniors on fixed incomes and low wage working families. From this discussion, it can be
seen that the term “affordable” has many meanings and connotations for various income levels.
What is considered affordable for working class families is often not affordable to very-low
income households.
Income Definitions
State and federal agencies use different definitions to describe income levels of households for
purposes of administering housing programs, as described below. Throughout the text, both the
percent of median income and the income category will be provided to avoid confusion from the
various definitions used by different agencies.
      1. Federal Income Level Definitions
      The federal government (Department of Housing and Community Development, or HUD)
      defines households that qualify for affordable housing based on three different income
      levels: extremely low income, very low income, and low income. The Los Angeles County
      median income, updated in December of 2012, was $61,900. HUD uses this number as a
      base for calculations of income maximums in each category below, taking into account the
      higher cost of living in Los Angeles County. For this reason, the allowable household
      incomes in each area will not match straight mathematical calculations. The qualified
      income levels in Santa Clarita based on federal guidelines are described below and in
      Table H-1.1.
         Extremely Low Income: An extremely low income household is one earning 30% or
          less of area median income. A family of four in Santa Clarita earning $24,850 or less
          was considered extremely low income.
         Very Low Income: A low-income household earns between 31% and 50% of area
          median income. The very-low income limit for a family of four in 2012 was $41,400.
October 2013                            H-8

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                         Housing Element
          Low Income: A low income household is one earning between 51% and 80% of area
           median income. The income limit for a low income four-person family in 2012 was
           $66,250.
                                                 Table H-1.1:
                                     Federal Income Levels Defined
                                                                              Approximate Income
       Income Levels                     Percentage of Median Income          Maximum (Family of
                                                                              four in dollars)
       Extremely Low                     Less than 30%                                           24,850
       Very Low                          31%-50%                                                 41,400
       Low                               51%-80%                                                66,250*
       * Low Income limits exceeding median income is an anomaly due to HUD historical high cost
       adjustments to median. Household lower income figures are derived based on very-low income figures
       not adjusted by HUD to account for any exceptions.
      The federal low-income housing tax credit program administered by the state’s Tax Credit
      Allocation Committee sets affordable rents at 60% of median but gives additional
      application points to projects that target rents to households of even lower income.
      2. State Income Level Definitions
      The State of California uses several sets of definitions for income-qualified households.
      For the Housing Element, the regional councils of government (including the Southern
      California Association of Governments, or SCAG), calculate future housing needs at the
      four income levels listed below and in Table H-1.2, but use the three above-listed federal
      categories in their calculations of existing need.
          Extremely Low Income: Household income is less than 30 percent of Area Median
           Income (AMI). For a four-person household in Santa Clarita, a low income household
           would earn no more than $24,850.
          Very Low Income: Household income is 50 percent or less than the AMI, or $41,400
           for a four-person household.
          Low Income: Household income is 51 to 80 percent of the AMI, or no more than
           $66,250 for a four-person household.
                                                      H-9                                      October 2013

Housing Element                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                                           Table H-1.2:
                                  State Income Levels Defined
                                                                      Approximate Income
       Income Levels               Percentage of Median Income        Maximum (Family of
                                                                      four in dollars)
       Extreme Very Low            Less than 30%                                       24,850
       Very Low                    31%-50%                                             41,400
       Low                         51%-80%                                             66,250
      The State density bonus law (Gov. Code 65915) makes provisions for housing affordable
      to households earning either 50% or 80% of median income. The housing programs
      administered by the California Department of Housing and Community Development use
      the categories created by the federal government with some additional adjustments.
Area Median Income (AMI)
AMI is the amount of annual family income at which half of all families in the area earn less and
half earn more. AMI is a measure used by HUD and by the California Department of Housing
and Community Development (HCD). According to a memo issued by HCD on February 25,
2013 entitled “State Income Limits for 2013 Reflecting New State Hold Harmless Policy”, “HCD
updates its income limits based on income limit revisions the Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) makes to its Section 8 Housing choice Voucher Program that HUD
released on December 11, 2012.” This memo sets the area median income for Los Angeles
County at $64,800.”
Median Family Income (MFI)
MFI is a measure calculated and used by the Census at every level of Census geography. It is
the midpoint of family income, the amount at which half of all families earn less and half earn
more. This measure is used by the California Department of Finance. According to the
American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates, median family income for Santa Clarita in 2011
was $85,045.
Cost-Burdened Households
These are households in which more than the recommended amount of household income is
spent on housing. The federal government sets standards for the amount a household should
pay for housing at no more than 30% of their gross income for rent or mortgage, including utility
costs. Households paying more than 30% of income for housing are considered cost-burdened,
and households paying 50% or more for housing are considered extremely cost-burdened.
G.       Who Qualifies for Affordable Housing?
The income definitions contained in subsection F, above, meet State and federal guidelines.
However, they do little to describe the residents of the Santa Clarita community that may qualify
for affordable housing. Table H-1.3 has been included below to illustrate various income levels
October 2013                            H-10

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                          Housing Element
within Los Angeles County with respect to various types of employment. As this table shows,
many people with full-time jobs might be classified as heading very-low, low-, or moderate-
income households, and might be in need of affordable housing assistance.
               Table H-1.3: Household Income Levels and Sample Occupations
                                   Los Angeles County, 2013
                                                                      Annual Income for 4-
           Income Category                Sample Occupations
                                                                       Person Household
                                     Food service workers
                                     Laundry/dry cleaning                Up to $25,300
             Extremely Low
                                     Hair shampooers
         (30% or less of AMI*)
                                     Clerical                              $12.16/hr
                                     Cooks
                                     Nursing aides
                                     Medical assistants
                                     Janitors                         $25,300 to $41,141
                Very low
                                     Child care workers
           (31 - 50% of AMI)
                                     Retail sales clerks            $12.16/hr. to $20.26/hr
                                     Bakers
                                     Security guards
                                     Carpenters
                                     Plumbers
                                     Computer operators               $41,141 to $67,434
                  Low
                                     Teachers
          (51 to 80% of AMI)
                                     Social service staff            $20.26/hr to $32.42/hr
                                     Laboratory technicians
  *Area Median Income for the Los Angeles-Long Beach Area in 2013 as established by HUD
  was $61,900.
  Source: Karin Pally Associates, HUD User and Federal Employment Data
                                            H-11                                 October 2013
Housing Element                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan
II.     REVIEW OF PRIOR HOUSING ELEMENT OBJECTIVES
A.      Success with Quantified Objectives
The City’s prior Housing Element revision was adopted in June 2011. This section includes an
evaluation of the objectives contained within the 2011 element to determine the City’s level of
success in achieving the prior goals and objectives.
Between July 1, 2005 and January 1, 2013, an additional 828housing units were constructed in
the City of Santa Clarita, as summarized in Table H-2.1 below. Included in this number were
793 single-family units and 35multi-family units (includes both rental and ownership units, such
as condominiums, townhomes and duplexes). This number represented 9% of the City’s RHNA
allocation of 9,598 new units for the planning period of the element. Table H-3.11 in Section
3.D, Existing Housing Characteristics, shows the City’s permit data by year for newly
constructed housing units.
The City also funded rehabilitation of 652 units during this period through its residential
rehabilitation and Handyworker grant programs. Although these units were not made affordable
and, therefore, do not meet the objectives for preservation/conservation, maintenance of its
existing housing stock is an important objective for the City and ensures that individuals and
families whose resources are not adequate to maintain their homes can continue to live in safe
and decent conditions.
                                          Table H-2.1
      2006-2014 RHNA Objectives from 2011 Element and Accomplishments 2006-2012
                        RHNA Objectives 2006-2014
                                                           Accomplishments 2006-2012
                        (from 2011 Element)
                        New             Rehabilitation     New
     Income Groups                                                           Rehabilitation
                        Construction    (City Objective)   Construction
                                   N/A                120              N/A               219
     Extremely Low
                                 2,492                480                0               246
     Very Low
                                 1,560                427                5               187
     Low
                                 1,657                  0               30                  0
     Moderate
                                 3,888                  0              793                  0
     Above Moderate
                                 9,598              1,027              828               652
     Total
    Source: City of Santa Clarita 2011 Housing Element, and City records, and U.S. Department
of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) - Integrated Disbursement and Information System
(IDIS) Reports
B.      Success in Meeting 2011 Goals, Policies, and Programs
The City of Santa Clarita was successful in accomplishing many of the goals adopted in the
2005-2013 Housing Element (last revised in 2011). The following points summarize the City’s
major housing accomplishments during the last planning period.
October 2013                           H-12

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                 Housing Element
    1. The City constructed 851new dwelling units, 9% of its RHNA allocation of 9,598units.
    2. The City expanded a program of proactive Community Preservation to monitor and
        improved housing conditions in targeted neighborhoods.
    3. The City provided residential rehabilitation and Handyworker grants to 652 income-
        eligible households to make repairs related to safety, accessibility, and habitability,
        ensuring that residents could continue to live in housing that is healthy and safe.
    4. In the land use plan and zoning map, the City ensured that adequate sites were zoned
        for residential uses of varying densities, sufficient for its entire RHNA allocation of 9,598
        units.
    5. Through its planning and permitting services, the City processed entitlements for
        construction of 1,502 new houses, condominiums and apartments in the City.
    6. Through allocation of HOME funds, the City provided silent second loans to assist seven
        eligible households to become first-time homebuyers.
    7. The City amended the Unified Development Code to include a mixed use ordinance,
        create an administrative process for reasonable accommodations, reduction in second
        unit minimum standards and implementation of a Homeless Shelter Overlay zone where
        homeless shelters are allowed by right among others.
    8. The City contracted with the San Fernando Valley Fair Housing Council to provide fair
        housing services, including outreach, education and investigation of discrimination
        complaints.
Table H-2.2 is a complete review of the housing programs included in the City’s 2011 Housing
Element, which includes programs and activities of the City between 2005 and 2013, the last
housing element period. The table has three columns. The first column (Programs) reproduces
the program adopted in the element and captures the objective. The second column (Result
Evaluation) describes the results, if any, of program activities. The third column states the
future status including the City’s intention to continue, revise or discontinue the program, and
provides a reference for that program in the programs section of the 2013 Housing Element.
                                              H-13                                     October 2013

        Housing Element                                                 City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                           Table H-2.2: Review of Housing Programs, 2005-2013
                                                   Result
        Program/Goal                                                                        Future Status
                                                 Evaluation
Goal H 1: Provide adequate sites to accommodate 9,598 new housing units between 2006 and 2014.
H 1.1                           The City amended the zoning map to                Program completed.
Adequate Sites for Housing      rezone a minimum of 320 acres of land
Affordable to Low and Very      from parcels within Suitable Sites 2,3,4,5
Low Income Households –         and 16 acres to the UR5 and SP zones to
Amend zoning map to             require minimum densities of 20 units per
provide adequate properties     acre, ensuring that at least 50% of the
with appropriate zoning.        capacity of these sites is zoned
                                exclusively for residential use.
H 1.2                           The City approved two projects for a total       Program to be modified to reflect
Affordable Housing Density      of 117 units of affordable units.                the City’s new RHNA
Bonus - Approve at least 121                                                     requirements and included in the
affordable units to meet the                                                     next cycle of the Housing
City’s Regional Housing                                                          Element.
Needs Allocation.
H 1.3                           The zoning map was amended to provide            Program Completed.
Adequate Sites for Market       sites for the development of at least 2,061
Rate Housing                    units but up to 9,792 market rate.
H 1.4                           The Unified Development Code was                 Program Completed.
Density Bonus Code              amended to allow granting of density
Amendment - The City will       bonuses provided that all units in the
consider amending the           project are affordable to very-low and low-
Unified Development Code to     income residents and that the project
allow granting of density       conforms with the City’s design
bonuses.                        guidelines.
H 1.5                           The City amended the zoning map to               Program Completed.
Mixed Use Ordinance -           rezone areas to include the Mixed Use
Implement the City’s Mixed      Overlay Zone (MU) to encourage a mix of
Use provisions as set forth in  residential, commercial, employment and
the General Plan Land Use       institutional opportunities within activity
Element.                        centers along identified corridors
                                throughout the City
H 1.6                           A study has yet to be conducted.                 Conduct study and make
Graduated Density Zoning—                                                        recommendations to be
Newhall        Redevelopment                                                     completed by 2015. To be
Area The City will evaluate                                                      included in next cycle Housing
the feasibility of adopting a                                                    Element.
program      for    “graduated
density zoning” in this target
area.
        October 2013                            H-14

         City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                           Housing Element
                                                      Result
         Program/Goal                                                                  Future Status
                                                   Evaluation
H 1.7                             The Program infeasible and not needed      Program review complete.
Small Lot Subdivisions – To       at this time.
make homeownership more
affordable by allowing the
creation of smaller, fee-
simple lots.
H 1.8                             An interdepartmental team has been         Continue tracking available land
Land Banking/Write-Downs –        created and began monitoring of available  quarterly This program will be
Establish a proactive land        land and potential funding sources. Tough  carried over to the next cycle of
banking strategy to facilitate    viable land was available, no funding was  the Housing Element.
the development of housing        available. Research into establishing a
affordable to low and very-       land bank conducted in 2012 with a
low income households.            conclusion that not enough
                                  blight/abandonment necessary to justify a
                                  land bank at this time. Additionally, no
                                  funds to are available to develop housing.
H 1.9                             Investigated the community land trust      Program Complete.
Community Land Trust -            requirements and found that it was not
Create a community land           feasible at this time.
trust to make housing
permanently affordable
H 1.10                            Began research into inclusionary housing   The feasibility study for this
Inclusionary Housing              programs in various jurisdictions.         program is not complete at this
Program (Mixed Income                                                        time. This program will be
Housing) – Evaluate the                                                      carried over to the next cycle of
feasibility of adopting an                                                   the Housing Element.
inclusionary housing program
H 1.11                            In 2011, the Vista Canyon Specific Plan    This program will be carried over
Large Sites Program - The         was approved by the City for an            to the next cycle of the Housing
City will encourage land          approximate 1,100 mixed-use                Elemen.t
divisions and specific plans      development with a transit station.
resulting in parcels sizes that
facilitate multifamily
developments affordable to
lower income households.
Goal H.2: Assist in the development of adequate housing to meet the needs of extremely low, very low, low
and moderate income households (Government Code Section 65583(c)(2).
                                                       H-15                                October 2013

        Housing Element                                              City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                                                  Result
         Program/Goal                                                                    Future Status
                                                Evaluation
H 2.1                           ABx1 26 and AB 1484 dictated terms of         Obtain Finding of Completion
Redevelopment Affordable        RDA dissolution and severely restricted       from DPF and determine amount
Housing Program - The           the use of RDA low/mod housing funds          of funds available for housing
Agency adopted a new 5-         (LMHF’s). Continued with dissolution          programs. This program will be
Year Implementation Plan        process – LMHF’s not available as of          carried over to the next cycle of
and a 10-Year Housing Plan      February 2013.                                the Housing Element.
in 2008. Housing
construction activities are
anticipated to take place in
the project area in the
Housing Element planning
period
H 2.2                           Submitted applications in 2008, 2011 and      Need to possibly adjust policies
Homebuyer Assistance –          2013.                                         on program to make it more
FirstHOME Program - The         2010-11 - Applied for HOME funds from         attractive to borrowers. This
primary funding source for      HCD (not awarded).                            program will be carried over to
this program is HOME funds      2011-12 - $700k in HOME funds awarded         the next cycle of the Housing
which are obtained through      by HCD to continue FirstHOME.                 Element.
competitive application to the  2012-13 - Re-launched FirstHOME
State. While the City intends   Program and completed initial eligibility
to apply for HOME funds as      on two borrowers.
often as they become
available, it cannot predict
the outcome of those
applications.
H 2.3                           Coordinated with CalHFA for FirstHOME         Invite CalHFA representatives to
Homebuyer Assistance –          Program. CalHFA staff presentation at         all FirstHOME borrower meetings
CalHFA - The City will          FirstHOME borrower meetings.                  and continue to promote CalHFA
continue to coordinate the                                                    on the City’s website and in the
FirstHOME Program with          Promote CalHFA on the City’s website          Affordable Housing and Services
CalHFA programs in order to     and in Affordable Housing and Services        Brochure. This program will be
increase the low- and           Brochure.                                     carried over to the next cycle of
moderate-income                                                               the Housing Element.
homebuyer’s opportunity for
homeownership
H 2.4                           City continued to be a participating          The City will continue to be a
Homebuyer Assistance –          jurisdiction.                                 participating jurisdiction. This
Mortgage Credit Certification                                                 program will be carried over to
Program - The City will                                                       the next cycle of the Housing
continue to be a participating                                                Element.
jurisdiction in this program so
that homebuyers in Santa
Clarita can benefit from the
federal Mortgage Credit
Certification Program (MCC
Program) operated by the
County of Los Angeles.
        October 2013                          H-16

        City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                            Housing Element
                                                    Result
        Program/Goal                                                                  Future Status
                                                  Evaluation
H 2.5                            Researched shared housing programs,        No demand for a program of this
Senior Shared Housing            which fall into two general categories:    type at the present time. This
Program - The City will          1. Matching programs for current           program is complete at this time.
explore and evaluate the best    homeowners to find borders
method of assisting seniors      2. Matching programs operated at senior
to share housing in order to     apartment buildings to match seniors as
make housing more                room-mates in a rental unit.
affordable. The result of this
evaluation will be either: 1)    Discussed the concept with Rachelle
Develop a new City program;      Dardeau, ED at the Senior Center, who
or 2) contract with an existing  has concerns about funding staff to do it,
shared housing provider          and the level of legal risk if things go
                                 wrong.
H 2.6                            City annually funds homeless case          Continue to fund homeless case
Homeless Case Management         management using general funds (one 6      management services. This
- In addition to shelter, those  month period) and CDBG funds.              program will be carried over to
experiencing homelessness        •       05-06: 85 served                   the next cycle of the Housing
need on-going case               •       06-07:100 served                   Elemen.t
management to address the        •       07-08: 100 served
issues leading to                •       08-09: 140 served
homelessness, and assist         •       10-11: 133 served
them with transition to stable   •       11-12: 135 served
permanent housing
                                                     H-17                                 October 2013

        Housing Element                                              City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                                                 Result
        Program/Goal                                                                    Future Status
                                               Evaluation
H 2.7                         2006-07 - Conducted an RFQ process to           Approve DDA for NAD when
Collaboration with Non-Profit find a non-profit affordable housing            LMHF’s become available. This
Affordable Housing            developer with which to work on a new           program will be carried over to
Developers - The City intends construction project. The Related               the next cycle of the Housing
to continue to be responsive  Companies and National Community                Element.
to the proposals of other     Renaissance (CORE) were chosen and
affordable housing            sites were explored.
developers, and will support
projects which show promise   2007-08 - Worked with Mercy Housing,
to provide affordable housing non-profit affordable housing developer,
for seniors and families,     to evaluate a plan for a 100% affordable,
especially those who are      67-unit acquisition and rehabilitation
extremely low-income.         project in Canyon Country. Project was
                              put on hold and ultimately cancelled due
                              to the crash of the bond market in Fall
                              2008.
                              2009-2010 - Collaborated with
                              Related/CORE to identify and acquire two
                              parcels for a future new construction
                              affordable housing development.
                              2010-11 - Entered into an Exclusive
                              Negotiation Agreement with The Related
                              Companies and National CORE to
                              negotiate DDA; acquired the Caltrans and
                              Jang parcels; and entitled a 30-unit,
                              100% affordable housing development
                              with an increased density (Newhall
                              Avenue Development – NAD)
                              2011-12 - Continue to extended the ENA
                              for the affordable housing development
                              (Newhall Avenue Development – NAD)
                              until such time as RDA LMHF’s become
                              available.
                              2012-13 - Continue to extended the ENA
                              for the affordable housing development
                              (Newhall Avenue Development – NAD)
                              until such time as RDA LMHF’s become
                              available.
        October 2013                         H-18

        City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                             Housing Element
                                                     Result
         Program/Goal                                                                   Future Status
                                                   Evaluation
H 2.8                            2009-10 to 2010-11 - Working closely
Extremely-Low Income             with CORE/Related, City staff identified    Continue to investigate funding
Affordable Housing Program       all sources of funding for a 30-unit 100%   sources for affordable housing
Encourage the development        affordable housing development at 50%       which are sufficient to allow for
of housing for extremely-low     and 60% AMI. With all other funds in        affordability at and below 30%
income households                place, the project still had a $6.3 million AMI. This program will be carried
(households earning at or        dollar funding gap. RDA funds were          over to the next cycle of the
below 30% of median, based       identified to fund that gap, but no         Housing Element.
on HUD calculations for the      additional funds were available to drive
Los Angeles County area).        down the affordability levels to 30% AMI
Within each program              or below. A No other projects with
described in the H 2.7 Goal,     affordability at or below 30% of AMI have
an emphasis will be placed       been proposed.
on serving the needs of
extremely-low income             2011-12 - ABx1 26 and AB 1484 dictated
households. Housing              terms of RDA dissolution and severely
developed through Program        restricted the use of RDA low/mod
2.1 - Redevelopment              housing funds (LMHF’s) for even
Affordable Housing Program, moderately affordable housing.
will be required to include
units for extremely-low          2012-13 - Continued with dissolution
income households. As part       process – LMHF’s not available as of
of the activities in Program H February 2013.
2.7 - Collaboration with Non-
Profit Affordable Housing
Developers, the City will give
preference to programs and
projects that have greater
numbers of housing for very-
low income households.
Goal H.3: Conserve and improve the existing housing stock through Community Preservation, rehabilitation
loans, and a handy worker program.
                                                      H-19                                  October 2013

        Housing Element                                              City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                                                   Result
         Program/Goal                                                                   Future Status
                                                 Evaluation
H 3.1                           2007 - Identified two areas for proactive     The City will continue these
Proactive, Community            code enforcement – CC and RDA project         programs. This program will be
Preservation - Conduct          area.                                         carried over to the next cycle of
proactive Community                                                           the Housing Element.
Preservation activities related 2008 – 2011 Began Extreme
to property maintenance and     Neighborhood Make-over Program (ENM)
public safety issues in         to bring resources to proactive areas and
selected neighborhoods of       other areas as well. ENM is a
Canyon Country and Newhall      collaboration among multiple City
to forestall decline of these   divisions : Code (violations), B&S
neighborhoods and help          (permits), ES (graffiti), RDA (rehab
maintain them in a clean,       programs), Planning (permits), and CS
safe, healthy, and secure       (volunteers), as well as Fire and Sherriff.
manner that contributes to
community vitality.             ENM’s held to date:
                                1. 2008 CC - North Oaks Area SE 2
                                2. 2008 Newhall - East Newhall Area
                                3. 2009 Saugus - Bonelli Tract
                                4. 2009 CC - North Oaks Area SW
                                5. 2011 CC - North Oaks Area SE
                                Assigned dedicated staff to proactive
                                code areas. CP officers refer to other
                                City divisions, and agencies to help
                                residents address issues.
H 3.2                           2008 - Began enforcement of State law         Program complete.
Foreclosed Property             regarding maintenance of foreclosed
Maintenance Program - The       properties. California Civil Code 2929.3.
City will adopt a program to    To date:
require banks and other         2010 Abandoned Properties: 32 cases
entities that own foreclosed    opened – 24 cases closed
properties in Santa Clarita, to 2011 Abandoned Properties: 30 cases
maintain those properties.      opened – 28 cases closed
                                2012 Abandoned Properties: 11 cases
                                opened – 8 cases closed
H 3.3                           City operates an annual Residential and        The City will continue this
Residential Rehabilitation      Property Rehabilitation Program that           program. This program will be
Program - The City will         provides grants to low/mod homeowners          carried over to the next cycle of
continue to administer a        to repair their owner-occupied residences.     the Housing Element.
program that provides grants    Actual units repaired are:
to low- and moderate-income     2005-06 – 35 units
homeowners to repair their      2006-07 – 34 units
primary residences.             2007-08 – 45 units
                                2008-09 – 24 units
                                2009-10 – 30 units
                                2010-11 – 25 units
                                2011-12 – 27 units
        October 2013                            H-20

        City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                           Housing Element
                                                    Result
         Program/Goal                                                                 Future Status
                                                  Evaluation
H 3.4                            The City funds a Handyworker Program       The City will continue this
Handyworker Program - The        operated by the local Senior Center. The   program. This program will be
City will continue to provide    Program that provides grants to low/mod    carried over to the next cycle of
financial support to the         homeowners to repair their owner-          the Housing Element.
Handyworker Program,             occupied residences. Actual units
operated by the Santa Clarita    repaired are:
Valley Committee on Aging –      2005-06 – 99 units
Senior Center through a          2006-07 – 75 units
grant from the City.             2007-08 – 86 units
                                 2008-09 – 94 units
                                 2009-10 – 86 units
                                 2010-11 – 66 units
                                 2011-12 – 72 units
H 3.5                            City operates an annual Residential and    The City will continue this
Property Rehabilitation          Property Rehabilitation Program that       program. This program will be
Program - The City will          provides grants to low/mod homeowners      carried over to the next cycle of
continue to administer the       to repair their owner-occupied residences. the Housing Element.
Property Rehabilitation          Actual units repaired are:
Program to provide grants to     2007-08 – 9 units
low- and moderate-income         2008-09 – 8 units
homeowners for repairs to        2009-10 – 1 units
the grounds surrounding their    2010-11 – 6 units
owner-occupied homes.            2011-12 – 2 units
Typical repairs include
driveway repair, tree-
trimming, fence, wall, and
gate repair, and brush
clearance Grants are for up
to $1,000 in repairs.
                                                     H-21                                 October 2013

         Housing Element                                             City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                                                  Result
         Program/Goal                                                                    Future Status
                                                Evaluation
H 3.6                           2009-10 Website went live in July 2009        The City will continue this
Provide Information for                                                       program. This program will be
Energy Conservation             2010-11 Adopted the standard CalGreen         carried over to the next cycle of
Programs - The City of Santa code on January 1, 2011. The City of             the Housing Element.
Clarita will create and         Santa Clarita is currently implementing
maintain a website that will    the base level standards of that code. In
be a “one-stop shop” that will addition, the City launched
provide residents, businesses GreenSantaClarita.com in 2011
and builders with programs
and products that assist with   2012 Climate Action Plan was approved
energy conservation on          by the City Council.
existing units. The website
will include any available
programs for lower income
residents. In addition, the
City will review the existing
building and development
codes with all relevant state
programs to implement many
as recommendations as
feasible.
GOAL H.4: Preserve affordability of existing homes that are at risk of converting to market-rate rents during
the planning period.
H 4.1                           2008-2009 - Proposed acquisition/rehab        Contact State and building
Preservation of At-Risk         project was made infeasible by the bond       owners as needed to begin
Housing - To the extent         market melt-down in September 2008.           conversation on preserving
feasible, the City will work to                                               affordability on the schedule
preserve affordable units at    2011-12 - Updated status of Diamond           below:
risk of losing their subsidies  Park – confirmed new bonds issued
and converting to market-rate   through LACDC extend the affordability to     2012-13 – check status of:
rents. City staff is currently  2036.                                         •       Meadowridge (2014)
working with affordable                                                       •       Park Sierra (2015)
housing developers on a         2012 - Updated status of the Village –
project which would preserve    confirmed new bonds issues through            2013-14 – check status of:
14 at-risk units and convert    LACDC extended affordability to 2032          •       Canterbury Village (senior
an additional 53 market-rate                                                  - 2016)
units in the same project to
affordable units.                                                             The City will continue this
                                                                              program. This program will be
                                                                              carried over to the next cycle of
                                                                              the Housing Element.
GOAL H.5: Address and, where appropriate and legally possible, remove government constraints to the
maintenance, improvement, and development of housing for all income levels.
         October 2013                         H-22

        City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                         Housing Element
                                                   Result
         Program/Goal                                                              Future Status
                                                 Evaluation
 H5.1                            The entire Unified Development Code has   Program complete.
Reasonable Accommodation-        been re-written to be consistent with the
The City will amend the          general plan. This program was part of
Unified Development Code to      that update, and was approved by the
create an administrative         City Council in 2013.
procedure whereby property
owners and residents can
apply for a reasonable
accommodation for changes
to make housing accessible
to persons with disabilities or
in need of any
accommodation as protected
by fair housing laws. The
ordinance will be based on
models provided by the
California Department of
Housing and Community
Development. Information on
the reasonable
accommodation procedure
will be made available on the
City’s website.
H 5.2                            This program was approved by the City     Program complete.
Emergency Shelter                Council in 2009.
Ordinance - Adopt an
ordinance which modified the
City’s Unified Development
Ordinance to create a
Homeless Shelter Overlay
Zone. Within this overlay
zone, a year round shelter is
permitted without any
approval of a discretionary
permit.
H 5.3                            This program was approved by the City     Program complete.
Transitional and Supportive      Council in 2009.
Housing - Adopt an
ordinance which modified the
City’s Unified Development
Ordinance to allow for
transitional and supportive
housing as a permitted use in
all residential zones in the
City limits.
                                                     H-23                             October 2013

         Housing Element                                             City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                                                  Result
         Program/Goal                                                                   Future Status
                                                Evaluation
H 5.4                           The entire Unified Development Code has       Program complete.
Flexible Development            been re-written to be consistent with the
Standards for Housing -         general plan. In addition, the Lyons
The City will amend the         Avenue Corridor Plan was adopted that
Unified Development Code to     encourages flexible development
provide a process which         standards. These programs was part of
affords flexibility for design  that update, and was approved by the
and development standards       City Council in 2013.
to promote affordable
housing, multi-family housing,
infill housing, mixed-use
housing, and transit-oriented
housing development, which
may include but is not limited
to shared parking, variable lot
sizes and dimensions,
building height, and/or
setbacks, subject to design
review and approval.
H 5.5                           The entire Unified Development Code has       Program complete.
Second Units - The City will    been re-written to be consistent with the
consider amending the           general plan. This program was part of
Unified Development Code to     that update, and was approved by the
allow second dwelling units     City Council in 2013.
on individual residential lots
with primary dwellings,
provided that said lots are
between 5,000 square feet
and 19,999 square feet in
area, subject to an
Administrative Permit. This
action is in addition to the
City’s existing allowance for
second dwelling units on lots
of 20,000 square feet or
larger, subject to an
Administrative Permit.
H 5.6                           Staff from Planning, Building and Safety,     The City will continue this
Monitoring of Codes and         and Housing regularly evaluate                program. This program will be
Ordinances - The City will      ordinances, codes, policies, and              carried over to the next cycle of
regularly monitor the           procedures to ensure they meet the            the Housing Element.
implementation of               compliance requirements for reasonable
ordinances, codes, policies,    accommodations.
and procedures to ensure
that they comply with
reasonable accommodation
for the disabled.
         October 2013                          H-24

        City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                             Housing Element
                                                    Result
        Program/Goal                                                                   Future Status
                                                 Evaluation
H 5.7                            Working closely with CORE/Related, City     Continue to investigate fee
Fee Reductions or Deferrals      staff negotiated a Disposition and          deferrals on all proposed
for Affordable Housing           Development Agreement for Newhall           affordable housing developments.
Projects - The City will review  Avenue Development. This project was        The City will continue this
affordable housing proposals     approved with a 50% reduction in Quimby     program. This program will be
on a case-by-case basis and      fees. No other projects with affordability  carried over to the next cycle of
authorize reduction or           at or below 30% of AMI have been            the Housing Element.
deferral of fee payments as      proposed. No other affordable housing
deemed appropriate.              developments proposed.
Projects with units for very-
low income households will
be given priority for any
available fee reductions or
deferrals. The City will
investigate implementing a
fee reduction or deferral
ordinance to encourage
developers to create
affordable units for very-low
income households.
H 5.8                            The entitlement process for Newhall         The City will continue this
Expedited Processing for         Avenue Development was expedited and        program. This program will be
Affordable Housing Projects–     the project received entitlements faster    carried over to the next cycle of
The City will continue an        than any other project of its kind in the   the Housing Element.
existing program to expedite     City’s history. A single point of contact
processing for affordable        from Housing and a single point of
housing projects, including      contact from Planning worked closely with
one-stop preliminary review,     staff from multiple departments met to
concurrent application           plan the most efficient approach, and
review, designation of a         worked closely with the developer on all
primary contact, construction    aspects of the entitlement process.
and grading plan review,         City staff expedited the negotiation of the
permitting, and inspection.      Newhall Avenue Disposition and
                                 Development Agreement by working
                                 closely with the developers and other City
                                 departments and divisions.
                                 A Habitat for Humanity project approved
                                 by Planning Commission and City Council
                                 through expedited process.
                                                     H-25                                  October 2013

        Housing Element                                                  City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                                                      Result
         Program/Goal                                                                      Future Status
                                                    Evaluation
H 5.9                              The entire Unified Development Code has        Program complete.
Elimination of Amenity-Based       been re-written to be consistent with the
Mid-Point Density Policy -         general plan. This program was part of
The City will amend the            that update, and was approved by the
General Plan to eliminate the      City Council in 2013.
amenity-based mid-point
density policy, and will adopt
density designations for
residential land uses that are
appropriate to the
topography, infrastructure,
environmental conditions,
development capacity, and
other site characteristics.
H 5.10                             This program was approved by the City          Program complete.
Modification to the UDC            Council in 2009.
Definition of Family - Amend
the Unified Development
Code to modify the definition
of family to exclude the
operator, operator’s family
and staff to comply with the
Health and Safety Code
H 5.11                             The entire Unified Development Code has Program Complete
Program: Residential Care          been re-written to be consistent with the
Facility Standards - The City      general plan. This program was part of
will consider amending the         that update, and was approved by the
Unified Development Code to City Council in 2013.
allow residential care facilities
to have the same
requirements as multi-family
development including the
removal of the conditional
use permit requirement.
Goal H.6: Promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, religion, sex, marital status,
ancestry, national origin, color, familial status or disability. (Government Code Section 65583(c)(5)
        October 2013                              H-26

         City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                             Housing Element
                                                      Result
         Program/Goal                                                                    Future Status
                                                    Evaluation
H 6.1                              City subcontracts with the Fair Housing     The City will continue this
Fair Housing Programs - The        Council of the San Fernando Valley to       program. This program will be
City contracts with a service      provide fair housing services, including    carried over to the next cycle of
provider to provide and            complaint investigation, outreach and       the Housing Element.
coordinate fair housing            education for landlords, tenants, buyers,
services for residents. The        and sellers, and litigation when required.
fair housing services provider
is required to conduct
outreach and education
activities, distribute literature,
provide housing vacancy
listings, and publicize the
availability of fair housing
services through various
media. The contractor also
records and investigates
inquiries and complaints from
residents.
H 6.2                              2009-2010 - 5 year AI completed as part     Release RFP for new AI to be
Analysis of Impediments to         of the 2009-2013 Con Plan process.          submitted to HUD by May 15,
Fair Housing Choice - As a                                                     2014. The City will continue this
Community Development                                                          program. This program will be
Block Grant entitlement                                                        carried over to the next cycle of
community, the City is                                                         the Housing Element.
required to develop an
Analysis of Impediments to
Fair Housing Choice (AI) in
conjunction of the submission
of the Consolidated Plan.
H 6.3                              Staff continuously monitors all issues      The City will continue this
Monitor Housing Issues - The       affecting the development and               program. This program will be
City will monitor legislation,     maintenance of affordable housing,          carried over to the next cycle of
trends, and policy issues          including legislation at the county, state, the Housing Element.
related to the development         and federal level, and availability of
and maintenance of                 entitlement and one-time funds.
affordable housing in the City
of Santa Clarita.
                                                        H-27                                 October 2013
        Housing Element                                             City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                                                  Result
        Program/Goal                                                                   Future Status
                                               Evaluation
H 6.4                          Annually staff sends out notices to Park      The City will conduct a new
Mobile Home Rent               owners regarding the CPI increase             election process in Summer
Adjustment Policies - The      allowed in the coming year, receive           2013. The City will continue this
City currently has a Mobile    appeals when they are filed, and conduct      program. This program will be
home park rental adjustment    hearings as required.                         carried over to the next cycle of
policy codified as Municipal                                                 the Housing Element.
Code Chapter 6.02. This        2006-07 - Caravilla rent increase appeal.
ordinance is designed to
protect park residents, the    2007-08 - Caravilla rent increase appeal.
majority of which are of lower
income, from unreasonable      2008-09 - Greenbrier rent increase
rent increases. The            appeal.
ordinance also provides for        -   Cordova rent increase appeal.
the election of a Mobile           -   Canyon Breeze closure hearing.
Home Rental Adjustment
Panel.                         2009-10 - Polynesian rent increase
                               appeal.
                               2010-11 Per SCMC 6.02, an election was
                               conducted to fill two owner-representative
                               positions, and two resident-representative
                               positions on the Manufactured Home
                               Park Rental Adjustment Panel. A search
                               was conducted for a fifth panel member
                               per SCMC 6.02. The elected officials
                               were sworn in for a three-year term, and
                               the proposed fifth member was approved
                               by the four elected members on 11/10/10.
                               2011-12 - No appeals.
                               2012-13 - Sand Canyon rent increase
                               appeal.
        October 2013                          H-28
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                Housing Element
III.    EXISTING
This section of the element summarizes demographic and housing conditions in the City to draw
conclusions about existing needs that should be addressed in the Housing Element. It provides
an overview of the City of Santa Clarita’s population, economic, housing, and other
characteristics which are the foundation for the various housing programs proposed in the
Housing Element.
The Land Use Element of the General Plan describes the City's development pattern as
encompassing older communities such as Newhall, Canyon Country and Saugus, and the
newer, master-planned community of Valencia. In addition, there are low-density, picturesque
areas such as Sand Canyon and Placerita Canyon within the City limits, where residents enjoy
a rural lifestyle. Because the City is comprised of various communities that each have a well-
defined identity, the City’s General Plan recognizes the distinctive value of each of its
communities and neighborhoods.
Santa Clarita, incorporated in 1987, is the one of the newest cities in Los Angeles County. It is
also the fourth largest city (62.8 square miles) and the third largest in population (approximately
205,000), exceeded only by the City of Los Angeles, and Long Beach. Although two of its
constituent communities, Newhall and Saugus, were founded in the 1880s, the majority of the
housing in Santa Clarita has been built since the mid-1960s.
Residents of Santa Clarita overall have a median income that exceeds the County median by
about 48.5%. In 2006, estimated median household income in Los Angeles County (according
to the 2006 American Community Survey of the U.S. Census) was $56,266, while in Santa
Clarita it was $83,759.
A.      Population Characteristics, Economic Characteristics, and Housing Trends
        Characteristics
Population
According to the California Department of Finance (DOF), the population of Santa Clarita in
January of 2011 was 176,971. SCAG Census 2010 amounts to almost the same number, while
the City of Santa Clarita’s website notes that, “Santa Clarita is the third largest city in Los
Angeles County with a population of 203,323 in December 2012.” This latter figure represents
an increase of 14.8% over the population in 2007. By contrast, the population of Los Angeles
County as a whole grew only 6.6% during this period. Although the population in most areas in
Los Angeles County increased mainly through natural growth (excess of births over deaths)
during this period, the population of Santa Clarita also grew through annexation. By April 2013,
the City of Santa Clarita recently completed the following newly-annexed areas: North
Copperhill in Saugus (the City's largest annexation to date) and 9,500 residents; Vista
Canyon/Fair Oaks/Jakes Way, which includes 14,900 residents; and South Sand Canyon in
Canyon Country, which includes 40 residents. Population in 2006, 2010 and 2012 is shown in
Table H-3.1.
                                              H-29                                    October 2013

Housing Element                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                       Table H-3.1: City Population, 2006, 2010 and 2012
                U. S. Census          American               Department          of
                2010                  Community Survey Finance (DOF) 12
                                      (ACS) 2006*
                      176,320               158,940                 176,971
              *
                Population estimate in 2006 by the American Community Survey
              (ACS) has an error of +/- 9,670. It is likely that the chart does not
              include the City's most recent annexations. Both ACS and DOF
              numbers are estimates, one based on sample survey data, the other
              based on local data such as building permits.
Age
The median age in Santa Clarita in 2010 was 35.9, an increase from 33.7 in 2006. The
proportion of persons aged 20-34 increased by 1.1% while the proportion of those aged 35-44
decreased by 2.4%. The other changes were in the 5 to 14 year old age range, which
decreased 3.9%, and those age 75 and older, which increased by 1.0%.
When contrasted with the County as a whole, the areas of largest difference were in three age
ranges. The group aged 20-34 was 3.7% larger Countywide than in Santa Clarita; this may
reflect the lack of four-year educational opportunities, higher housing prices, and a smaller
proportion of jobs in Santa Clarita relative to the County as a whole. In addition, a suburban
lifestyle tends to be more attractive to families than to young adults, as reflected in the
proportion of persons aged 45-54, which was 2.5% larger in Santa Clarita than in the County as
a whole. Santa Clarita’s single-family, suburban character appears to have attracted
households that are seeking homes in which to raise children. The proportion of persons age
75 and older is also 1% smaller in Santa Clarita than in the County as a whole, with 9.5% of the
City population age 65 and older in contrast to 10.9% Countywide. This trend may reflect the
relatively recent development trends in Santa Clarita, where most of the housing has been
constructed over the last twenty years and residents have not yet aged in place.
Age of the City’s population in 2006 and 2010 is shown in Table H-3.2.
October 2013                            H-30

      City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                            Housing Element
              Table H-3.2: Age Distribution for City and County Population, 2006 and 2010
                                           2010
              2010    Census                                     2006 ACS                2006 ACS
Age Range                       %          Census        %                      %                     %
              City                                               City                    County
                                           County
                                                                                             741,942
0-4                    11,152         6.3      645,793      6.6        12,607       7.9                 7.5
                                                                                           1,482,753
5-14                   26,029       14.8     1,312,535     13.4        27,218     17.1                14.9
                                                                                             755,741
15-19                  14,512         8.2      753,630      7.7        14,423       9.1                 7.6
                                                                                           2,149,581
20-34                  33,653       19.0     2,228,519     22.7        28,476     17.9                21.6
                                                                                           1,550,427
35-44                  26,187       14.8     1,430,326     14.6        27,284     17.2                15.6
                                                                                           1,350,427
45-54                  28,939       16.4     1,368,947     13.9        23,116     14.5                13.6
                                                                                             904,140
55-64                  18,997       10.8     1,013,156     10.3        13,185       8.3                 9.1
                                                                                             523,784
65-74                   9,598         5.4      568,470      5.8         7,755       4.9                 5.3
                                                                                             489,555
75 +                    7,253         4.1      497,229      5.1         4,876       3.1                 4.9
                                                                                           9,206,408
Total                176,320         100     9,818,605                158,940      100                 100
        Source: 2010 U. S. Census and 2006 American Community Survey
      Race/Ethnicity
      Between 2006 and 2010, there was a change in the distribution of race and ethnicity in Santa
      Clarita. Persons identifying themselves as White increased both in number and proportion of
      the population. The proportion and numbers of Asians, Latinos, and African Americans also
      increased. Persons identifying themselves as White still form the majority of Santa Clarita’s
      population. The number of Whites in Santa Clarita increased over this period from 91,002 in
      2006 to 124,379 in 2010. In 2006, Whites made up 57.3% of Santa Clarita’s population and by
      2010 they were 70.5% of the population.
      There were 15,025 persons identifying themselves as Asian in 2010, an increase of 0.2 from
      2006%. There was a substantial increase in the number of persons identifying themselves as
      “Some Other Race”, from 517 to 21,169 (an increase of 11.7%). In 2010, Latinos made up
      29.5% of Santa Clarita’s population, increasing from 28.0% in 2006. Nevertheless, the
      proportion of Latinos in Santa Clarita is still substantially lower than in the population
      Countywide, which was 47.7% in 2010.
      The proportion of African Americans also increased but only slightly, from 2.1% to 3.2% of the
      population, while proportions of American Indian/Alaska Natives, Native Hawaiian or Pacific
      Islander or Two or More Races, made up 5.5% of the population in 2010, an increase of 1.6%
      over its proportion of 3.9% in 2006.
      In terms of housing policy, there is a legitimate concern about whether households of different
      races and ethnic groups have equal access to rental and ownership housing including home
                                                   H-31                                 October 2013

Housing Element                                                 City of Santa Clarita General Plan
loans. It is often difficult for renters and borrowers to identify discrimination when they have
been turned down for a loan or an apartment rental, so it is recommended that the City continue
to periodically conduct the Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing to evaluate whether
homebuyers and renters in the City have equal access to housing. The City contracts with a fair
housing organization to provide outreach, education and discrimination complaint investigation,
and will conduct a new Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing in 2014 (Program H 6.2).
The City’s Fair Housing programs are found in the Programs section under H 6.1.1 and H 6.1.2.
Race and ethnicity for City residents in 2006 and 2010 are shown in Table H-3.3.
                  Table H-3.3: Santa Clarita Race and Ethnicity, 2006 and 2010
 2010 Census                  No.         %       2006 ACS                     No.         %
 Total                         176,320       100 Total                           158,940    100
 Not Hispanic or Latino        124,379      70.5 Not Hispanic or Latino          114,371   72.0
 White                         125,005      70.9 White                            91,002   57.3
 African American                 5,623       3.2 African American                  3,404    2.1
 American Indian          or                      American      Indian     or
 Alaska Native                    1,013       0.6 Alaska Native                       856    0.5
 Asian                           15,025      8.5 Asian                            13,174     8.3
 Native Hawaiian          or                      Native      Hawaiian     or
 Pacific Islander                   272       0.2 Pacific Islander                    636    0.4
 Some Other Race                 21,169     12.0 Some Other Race                      517    0.3
 2 Or More Races                  8,213       4.7 2 Or More Races                   4,782    3.0
 Latino or Hispanic              51,941     29.5 Latino or Hispanic               44,569 28.0
Source: 2006 American Community Survey and U.S. Census. Note that the possible error in
this particular table of the 2006 American Community Survey is quite large.
Income
According to the 2010 American Community Survey, the median income in Santa Clarita
(meaning the point at which half of all households earn less and half earn more), is $83,579,
which is 48.5% higher than the Countywide median income of $56,266.
Median income is used to gauge whether housing in a community is affordable to most
residents. Although median income in Santa Clarita is higher than the County as a whole, it
was not high enough to qualify households to purchase the single-family homes that were sold
in the City during June 2008, although it would have been sufficient to purchase several of the
condominiums sold in the City that month.
October 2013                             H-32

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                               Housing Element
               Table H-3.4: Santa Clarita Income Distribution, 2006 and 2010
 2010 Census                Number     %         2006 ACS                      Number     %
 Total Households             58,102       100 Total Households                  51,029     100
 Less than $10,000             1,706        2.9 Less than $10,000                   976      1.9
                               1,714
 $10,000 to $14,999                         2.9 $10,000 to $14,999                1,579      3.1
 $15,000 to $24,999            3,614       6.2 $15,000 to $24,999                 3,485      6.8
 $25,000 to $34,999            3,722       6.4 $25,000 to $34,999                 3,959      7.8
                               5,663
 $35,000 to $49,999                         9.7 $35,000 to $49,999                5,482    10.7
 $50,000 to $74,999            8,992      15.5 $50,000 to $74,999                 9,627    18.9
 $75,000 to $99,999            9,807      16.9 $75,000 to $99,999                 9,280    18.2
 $100,000 to $149,999         13,003      22.4 $100,000 to $149,999              10,255    20.1
 $150,000 to $199,999          5,603       9.6 $150,000 to $199,999               3,112      6.1
 $200,000 or more              1,915        3.8 $200,000 or more                  3,273      6.4
Source: U.S. Census and American Community Survey
Employment
The distribution of employment by industry remained relatively consistent over the period 2006
to 2010, with a small increase in the proportion of employment in educational occupations and a
small decrease in Transportation.
The single largest employer is William S. Hart Union School District, with 2,988. Six Flags
Magic Mountain and Saugus Union School District is next, together providing 4,130 jobs.
However, much of the employment in the City is generated from small businesses (60 percent).
Construction accounts for about six percent of employment.
According to the California’s Employment Development Department, unemployment in the City
of Santa Clarita for September 2012 fell to 6.2 percent, which is a full 1.5 percent lower than the
unemployment rate in September 2011. September 2012 marks the lowest unemployment rate
the City has seen since December 2008, and the City of Santa Clarita continues to maintain one
of the lowest unemployment rates in Los Angeles County. Job creation remains comparatively
strong, with unemployment at lower levels than similar cities in the Los Angeles area, the
County of Los Angeles, and the State. The City of Santa Clarita continues to work with the
Santa Clarita Valley Economic Development Corporation (SCVEDC), the Chamber of
Commerce, Valley Industry Association (VIA), College of the Canyons, and the Santa Clarita
WorkSource Center to attract and retain jobs, create hiring opportunities, and provide training
programs for residents in the area.
                                              H-33                                    October 2013

 Housing Element                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan
 Additional unemployment information is taken from this March 29, 2013 newspaper article on
 www.SignalSCV.com: “Santa Clarita’s unemployment rate dropped to 6.3 percent in February,
 according to data released Friday by the California Employment Development Division. The
 rates reverse revised January rates, released last week, that indicated an upswing in
 unemployment the first month of the year. Post-holiday jobless numbers for the city hit 6.7
 percent. Santa Clarita’s February unemployment rate was much lower than those of other
 nearby cities. Los Angeles’s rate stood at 11.4 percent in January; Glendale’s at 9 percent;
 Pasadena’s at 7.8 percent; Palmdale at 12.8 percent; and Lancaster at 14.5 percent, according
 to the Employment Development Department. The unadjusted numbers also reflected a drop in
 the jobless rate for Los Angeles County from 10.4 percent to 10.3 percent in February — the
 rate at which the unemployment numbers had rested in December 2012.”
 Table H-3.5 shows the industry sectors in which residents of the City are employed (note that
 this table does not show the location of these jobs, which may be within or outside of the City
 limits).
                     Table H-3.5: Employment by Industry, 2006 and 2010
 Census 2010               Number       %         ACS 2006                     Number      %
 Agriculture,    Forestry,                        Agriculture,      Forestry,
                                  454        0.5                                      313     0.4
 Other                                            Other
 Construction                   5,491        6.4 Construction                       4,556     5.9
 Manufacturing                  9,345       10.8 Manufacturing                      7,969    10.1
 Wholesale Trade                2,413        2.8 Wholesale Trade                    1.918     2.4
 Retail Trade                   8,687       10.0 Retail Trade                       8,373    10.6
 Transportation                 3,851        4.5 Transportation                     3,974     5.0
 Information                    5,010        5.8 Information                        4,912     6.2
 Finance                        6,114        7.1 Finance                            5,854     7.4
 Professional                 10,387        12.0 Professional                      10,343    13.1
 Educational                  17,383        20.1 Educational                       14,673    18.5
 Arts, Entertainment            8,619       10.0 Arts, Entertainment                7,851     9.9
 Other Services                 4,256        4.9 Other Services                     4,303     5.4
 Public Administration          4,452        5.1 Public Administration              3,965     5.0
 Total                        86,462              Total                            79,104
Source: U.S. Census and American Community Survey
 October 2013                          H-34

 City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                               Housing Element
 More than 40% of workers living in Santa Clarita in 2010 were employed in management and
 professional occupations, a slight increase from 2006. . There has been a slight increase in
 construction, maintenance jobs since 2006. Table H-3.6 shows the occupations in which
 residents of the City are employed (note that this table does not indicate the location of these
 jobs, which may be within or outside of the City limits).
                           Table H-3.6: Employment by Occupation
 2010 ACS Census                Number      %       2006 ACS                      Number     %
 Management, professional       34,662      40.1    Management, professional      29,579     37.4
 Service occupations            14,248      16.5    Service occupations           14,544     18.4
 Sales and office               23,133      26.8    Sales and office              22,202     28.1
 Construction, maintenance      7,142       8.3     Construction, maintenance     6,114      7.7
 Production, transportation     7,277       8.4     Production, transportation    6,665      8.4
 Total                          75,361              Total                         79,104
Source: American Community Survey: Selected Economic Characteristics 2006, 2007-2011
 The Census does not provide data on the number of jobs within Santa Clarita. It does however,
 ask, whether the employed population works within or outside its City of residence1 and the
 length of time required for the commute to work. In Santa Clarita in 2010, 2.8% of the workers
 walked to work. The mean travel time for workers 16 and over was 32.9 minutes. In the
 General Plan Land Use Element, the City has adopted a goal of at least 1.5 jobs per household
 at buildout, along with policies to promote job development. To accomplish this, the City will
 pursue two jobs for every new household as part of its General Plan. The efforts of the City to
 facilitate development that provides local jobs will help residents afford housing within the City.
 However, because of the housing prices in Santa Clarita, it is likely that low wage service and
 manufacturing jobs will continue to be filled by workers who live outside the City.
 On its website, the City has posted a list of the largest employers in Santa Clarita. Table H-3.7
 shows these employers and the number employed by each in 2011. The two largest (and
 largely overlapping) categories of employers are public agencies and education. There are
 8,711 jobs in education (42.3% of all jobs in the table) and 9,542 jobs (46.6%) of jobs in public
 agencies.
 1
   2010 Census Table P27, Place of Work for Workers 16 Years and Over
                                               H-35                                  October 2013
Housing Element                                                  City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                             Table H-3.7: Largest Employers in the City
 Company                                     Type of Business                          Employees
                                             Public Junior & Senior High School
 William S. Hart Union School District                                                        2,988
                                             Dist.
 Six Flags Magic Mountain                    Theme Park                                       2,230
 Saugus Union School District                Public Elementary School District                1,900
 Princess Cruises                            Vacation Cruise Service                          1,625
 College of the Canyons                      Community College                                1,603
 U.S. Postal Service                         Governmental - Postal Service                    1,564
 Henry Mayo Newhall Memorial Hospital        Health Care Services                             1,356
 Newhall School District                     Public Elementary School                           854
 Quest Diagnostics                           Medical R&D                                        850
 The Master’s College                        Private Liberal Arts College                       841
 Woodward HRT                                Aerospace Manufacturer                             740
 City of Santa Clarita                       Municipal Government                               633
 Wal-Mart                                    Retailer                                           592
 California Institute of the Arts            Private Art School                                 525
                                             Manufacturer:      Dietary,    Mineral,
 Pharmavite                                                                                     480
                                             Herbal Supplements
 Aerospace Dynamics International            Aerospace Structural Components                    470
                                             manufacturer: Aerospace Structural
 ITT Aerospace Controls                                                                         420
                                             Components
 Aravto Digital                              Business Services                                  400
                                             Manufacturer: Home Improvement
 Contractors Wardrobe                                                                           400
                                             Products
 Total                                                                                       20,471
Source: City of Santa Clarita website:          www.santa-clarita.com; The California Economic
Forecast, May 2011
B.       Overpayment and Overcrowding
The following section addresses two critical components of housing: overcrowding and
overpayment. These two topics are both related to lack of housing affordability and
demonstrate the need for creating more opportunities for affordable housing.
Overcrowding
The Census defines overcrowding in a dwelling as 1.01 or more persons per room. The kitchen,
living, dining and bedrooms are counted as “rooms” but the bathroom is excluded, for purposes
of this definition. A unit is considered severely overcrowded if there are 1.51 or more persons
per room. Overcrowding can indicate a problem with housing affordability. Typically,
October 2013                              H-36

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                     Housing Element
overcrowding results when, in order to cope with high housing costs, households that need
three or four bedrooms squeeze into a smaller apartment, or two families reduce expenses by
sharing an apartment or single-family home.
According to the 2011 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates, 1,359 or 3.5% of Santa
Clarita’s 38,842 owner-occupied units were overcrowded and another 233 or 0.6% were
severely overcrowded. Overcrowding was more frequent among renter households than owner-
occupied dwellings, with 1,934 or 10.2% of the 18,957 rental households reporting more than
1.01 persons per room, and another 171 or 0.9% severely overcrowded households reporting
1.51 or more persons per room.
Among renter households, the amount of overcrowding (a total of 11.1% of renter households)
has decreased compared to the 2000 Census data.
Overpayment
Table H-3.8 shows the housing cost burdens of Santa Clarita renters and owners according to
the 2005 – 2009 American Community Survey (from the SCAG Existing Housing Need Data
Report). 2 Federal standards set the amount that lower income households should pay for rent
at about 30% of their income. Federal Housing Administration (FHA) guidelines for owners set
the proportion of gross income paid for mortgage costs alone at 29% of income, with an
allowance of 41% of gross income for all debt.
Of the total 14,814 renter households in the City, 2,373 are housing cost burdened and 3,976
are severely cost-burdened. Among the 40,188 owner households, 6,819 are cost-burdened
and 7,139 are severely cost-burdened. Table H-3.8 shows these figures as a percentage of
total households.
                        Table H-3.8: Housing Cost Burden in Santa Clarita
                                                                                Total
          Housing Cost Burden                 All Renters        All Owners
                                                                                Households
          Cost Burden 35% to 49.9%                      16.0%         17.0%%              16.7%
          Cost Burden > 50%                             26.8%           17.8%             20.2%
         Source:      SCAG Existing Housing Needs Data Report, - 2005-2009 American
Communities Survey
C.       Households with Extremely Low Incomes
Data from the 2011 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates show that 13,322
individuals (7.6%) of Santa Clarita’s population, and 2,211 families (5.1%), lived below the
poverty level. The rate of poverty for families Countywide was considerably higher at 14.5%.
However, both poverty rates may be underestimated. In a May 2006 report for the Public Policy
Institute of California, Deborah Reed analyzed the cost of living nationwide and concluded that
because California has a substantially higher cost of living than many other areas in the country,
2
  Table H3.8 refers to income as a percent of MFI. This is median family income, a measure used by the
U.S. Census. The median is the midpoint of all family incomes, the point at which half of all families earn
less and half earn more. See Section I F, definitions of Housing Terms, for more information.
                                                 H-37                                       October 2013

Housing Element                                                     City of Santa Clarita General Plan
a California poverty rate of 15% is actually comparable to 18% in terms of the buying power of
California incomes. 3
The poverty level for a three-person family in California 2013 was $19,530. In contrast, the 2013
HUD-established income limit for a family of three at 30% of median (extremely low income) in
the Los Angeles-Long Beach Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) was $22,400.
Based on the 2011 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates, the total number of people
in Santa Clarita living in poverty was 13,322. Of that total most of the people living in poverty
(7,751 or 58%) were adults age 18 to 64. Another 29% were children under age 18. Thirteen
percent were adults aged 65 and over.
Poverty persists, even among working families, because much of the job growth in Southern
California has been in the low-wage service and retail sectors. These jobs, paying less than
$10 per hour, do not provide full-time workers with enough income to lift their families out of
poverty. For example, a full-time worker earning the California minimum wage of $8.00 per hour
earns only $16,640 per year.
Table H-3.9 provides data from the Comprehensive Housing Affordability (CHAS) tables
prepared by HUD for use in Consolidated Plans. These tables are a special run of data from
the 2000 Census. The table summarizes data for extremely low-income, non-elderly
households. (Data for one- and two-person elderly households are in the Special Needs
Section under Elderly.) As shown on Table H-3.9, large numbers of Santa Clarita’s extremely
low income households have excessive housing cost burdens. Nearly three quarters of all
renter and owner households earning less than 30% of median income in 2000 were paying
more than half their incomes for housing.
                                              Table H-3.9:
      Housing Cost Burden for Non-Elderly, Extremely-Low Income Households, 2000
   Housing Cost                                                                          All
                        Renters                        Owners
   Burden                                                                                Households
                        Small       Large    All       Small      Large       All        Elderly      &
                        Related Related Other          Related Related Other             Non Elderly
   Household
   Income                    889        214 10,005         149          10         249           4,348
   <=30% MFI
   Cost Burden >
                            83.8       83.6      78.6     86.6        100         80.3             74.1
   30%
   Cost Burden >
                            74.8       67.3      73.6     86.6        200         76.3             61.9
   50%
   Any     Housing
                            86.5        100      80.6     86.6        200         80.3             74.1
   Problem
  Source: HUD User CHAS Databook from Census 2000 data
http://socds.huduser.org/chas/index.html
3
  Reed , Deborah. (May 2006). “Poverty in California.” California Counts Vol. 7. No. 4. Publisher: The
Public Policy Institute of California.
October 2013                                H-38

  City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                               Housing Element
  D.      Characteristics of Existing Housing Stock
  Increase in Housing Units
  According to the California Department of Finance (DOF), there were 70,926 households in
  Santa Clarita in December, 2012. Between 2008 and 2013, Santa Clarita’s housing stock
  increased by 12,212 units, a majority of which were the result of annexations. .
  Table H-3.10 shows the housing production numbers for the City as tabulated by the DOF.
              Table H-3.10: Increases in Santa Clarita’s Housing Units 2000 – 2012
                              Single-
                 Single-                                                                  Persons
        Total                 Family      2-4     5       Mobile Occupied Vacancy
 Year            Family                                                                   Per
        Units                 Attached Units Units        Homes Units          Rate
                 Detached                                                                 Household
                              (condo)
 2000 52,456         31,784      6,314 2,547        9,571  2,240      50,798        3.16       2.948
 2001 52,750         32,092      6,314 2,573        9,571  2,240      51,121        3.16       2.980
 2002 53,612         32,549      6,314 2,601        9,908  2,240      51,917        3.16       3.021
 2003 54,579         32,857      6,314 2,622 10,546        2,240      52,853        3.16       3.051
 2004 54,810         33,085      6,314 2,625 10,546        2,240      53,077        3.16       3.073
 2005 55,439         33,519      6,314 2,820 10,546        2,240      53,686        3.16       3.083
 2006 55,530         33,606      6,314 2,824 10,546        2,240      53,774        3.16       3.081
 2007 58,568         36,020      6,938 2,824 10,546        2,240      56,715        3.16       3.082
 2008 58,714         36,160      6,937 2,831 10,546        2,240      56,859        3.16       3.089
 2009 61,558         37,000      6,937 2,831 12,542        2,240      56,859        4.11       2.945
 2010 62,055         37,016      7,050 2,674 13,030        2,285      59,507        4.11       2.939
 2011 62,108         37,049      7,050 2,674 13,050        2,285      59,558        4.11       2.945
 2012 62,223         37,144      7,050 2,674 13,070        2,285      59,668        4.11       2.950
 2013 70,926         42,353      8,032 3,047 14,891        2,603      67,820        4.40       3.000
Source: California Department of Finance, Report E-5 revised Mar. 2013
  Table H-3.11 shows that the primary growth of housing stock in the City of Santa Clarita has
  occurred via annexation. In 2012 alone, over 9,000 new housing units were annexed into the
  City. Table-3.11 is presents a more accurate representation of housing numbers because DOF
  data tends to reflect conditions from the prior year.
  Table 3.11 also provides the source for determining whether the City met its RHNA obligation
  between 2006 and 2012. The City’s data shows clearly that 851 units were newly constructed
  in Santa Clarita between 2006 and 2012, 9% of the City’s RHNA obligation of 9,598 units.
  4
   Table B25024 “Units in Structure,” 2006 American Community Survey
                                                H-39                                  October 2013

Housing Element                                              City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                   Table H-3.11: Santa Clarita Housing Growth 2000-2012
          Year                      New Units—City Data       New Units DOF Data
          2000                                           288                           -
          2001                                           931                        294
          2002                                           962                        862
          2003                                           553                        967
          2004                                         1,685                        231
          2005                                           187                        629
          2006                                           146                         91
          2007                                                                    3,038
          Annexed units                                  225           2,643 (annexed)
          New units                                                                 395
          2008                                           102                        144
          2009                                            87                      2,844
          2010                                           103                        497
          2011                                           115                         53
                                                          73
          2012                                                                      115
                                            9,171 (annexed)
           TOTAL                                      14,628                      9,765
         Source: DOF Report E-5 revised January, 2008
Households by Tenure
According to the American Housing Survey, 39,373 or 74% of Santa Clarita's housing units
were owner occupied, and 13,809 or 26% were renter-occupied in 2006.
Vacancy
  According to the DOF, the residential vacancy rate in Santa Clarita has been fairly constant at
approximately 3% to 4%.Housing Stock by Year Built
The majority of the homes in what is now the City of Santa Clarita were developed before
incorporation in 1987. The City is made up of recently-developed suburban communities in
which a significant number of the homes were constructed in 1980 or later. More than one third
of all residences in the City were constructed between 1980 and 1989 (see Table 3.12). In
contrast, average housing stock throughout the County is considerably older, with 78% of the
homes built before 1980.
October 2013                           H-40

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                               Housing Element
The relatively recent development of most of the housing stock means that most of Santa
Clarita’s neighborhoods are in good condition. A survey of housing conditions conducted in
selected neighborhoods found that fewer than 8% of structures were in need of substantial
rehabilitation (see Table H-3.19).
         Table H-3.12: Santa Clarita and Countywide Housing Stock, by Year Built 5
                          Santa     Clarita
        Year Built                           Percent        L.A. County Units   Percent
                          Units
        2005 or later                  888             1.6              19,929          0.5
        2000-2004                    4,502             8.3              99,947            3
        1990-1999                    7,557            13.9             204,407          6.1
        1980-1989                   18,532            34.1             397,708         11.8
        1970-1979                    9,777            18.0             481,406         14.3
        1960-1969                   10,318            19.0             497,799         14.8
        1950-1959                    1,551             2.9             733,349         21.9
        1940-1949                      672             1.2             414,421         12.3
        Before 1940                    498             0.9             506,452         15.1
        Total                       54,295             100           3,356,418          100
       Source: 2006 ACS and California Dept. of Finance Report E-5 2007
Home Prices and Rental Rates
Table H-3.13 summarizes a survey of the advertised rents in 808 rental units listed online in
May, 2008. The table shows the range of rents and the median rent (the point at which half of
the rents are higher and half lower) for units of different sizes. The income needed to afford the
rent was calculated at two and a half (2.5) times the monthly rent, or about 40% of gross
income, based on information provided by property managers surveyed. The cost of utilities is
not included.
                        Table H-3.13: Market Rents, Santa Clarita 2008
                       #     of                 Average       Median      Income to Afford at
   Unit Type                                    Rent          Rent
                       Units    Rent Range                                2.5 X Average Rent6
   1         bedroom
                           167     $740-1769       $1,177        $1,275                 $35,310
   apt/house
   2         bedroom
                           372  1,000-2,795          1,609         1,590                 48,270
   apt/house
   3         bedroom
                           197  1,097-3,200          2,178         2,100                 65,340
   apt./house
    4        bedroom
                            72 1,650-7,000           2,869         2,800                 86,070
   apt/house
  Source: www.4rentinla.com ,
                                              H-41                                   October 2013

Housing Element                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Table H-3.14 shows the maximum rents that the Los Angeles County Housing Authority will
approve for tenants with Section 8 vouchers. The “fair market” rents in each area are
designated by HUD through a process in which the local housing authority submits a survey of
area rents and recommendations for maximum allowable rents, and HUD staff review and
approve or change the recommendations. HUD-approved “fair market rents” are set for the
whole County or metropolitan statistical area and may be lower than median rent in many
communities, making it difficult for renters with Section 8 vouchers to find apartments that the
housing authority will approve. Table H-3.14 shows that, when compared with the median rents
in Table H.3.13, HUD-approved maximum rents fall below both the median and the average
rents for Santa Clarita. Nevertheless, the rent range in Table H-3.13 shows that there are units
available at a cost that the Section 8 program would approve. So renters with Section 8
vouchers may have a hard time finding apartments that rent at a cost the housing authority will
approve, but some units at “fair market” are available in Santa Clarita.
                          Table H-3.14: Section 8 Fair Market Rents
                          Bedroom Size               Rent
                          0 Bedroom (studio)                      $ 911
                          1 Bedroom                              $1,101
                          2 Bedrooms                             $1,421
                          3 Bedrooms                             $1,921
                          4 Bedrooms                             $2,140
                          5 Bedrooms                             $3,151
                         Source: Housing Authority, County of Los Angeles
Table H-3.15 and Exhibit H-3.1 shows the average price for single-family homes and
condominiums in Santa Clarita in December, 2012, and the percentage decline from the
average price in the same zip code in January, 2012. It should be noted that price declines
have not occurred uniformly throughout the City.
October 2013                            H-42

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                           Housing Element
                 Table H-3.15: Home Sales in Santa Clarita, December 2012
                # of Home Average        % Change # of Condo Average            % Change
   Zip Code     Sales         Price      from 1/12 Sales           Price        from 1/12
                12/12         12/12      Price        12/12        12/12        Price
   91321                 14                     22.7          14                      -45.8
                               $400,000                               $84,000
   91350                 20                      8.6          12                       --7.9
                               $359,000                              $220,000
   91351                 16                     -0.2          17                      -23.9
                               $296,000                              $164,000
   91354                 11                     12.9          16                      -13.7
                               $410,000                              $320,000
   91355                  9                     20.5          29                       44.4
                               $449,000                              $311,000
   91381                  8                     -7.2           6                      -17.9
                               $558,000                              $280,000
   91384                 19                     13.1           4                        -5.8
                               $407,000                              $255,000
   91387                 19                     -3.8          18                        -2.7
                               $361,000                              $208,000
   91390                 16                     -.21           1                      -54.9
                               $430,000                              $212,000
   Total                132                                  117
  Source: www.DQNews.com March 2013
Tables H-3.16 and H-3.17 show the costs and income needed to afford single-family homes and
condominiums in December, 2012. The calculations are based on a 10% down payment with
an interest rate of 3.25%. Monthly payments include property taxes, hazard insurance, and
mortgage insurance.
A comparison of housing prices in these tables with the income distribution shown in Table H-
3.4 indicates that condominiums are generally affordable to households earning the median
income in Santa Clarita.
                                           H-43                                 October 2013
Housing Element      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
October 2013    H-44
City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                                         Table
 Cost and Income Needed to Purchase a Sin
               Average        Loan          Do
 Zip Code
               Price 12/12 Amount           Pa
 91351
                  $296,000        $266,400
 91350
                  $359,000        $323,100
 91387            $361,000        $324,900
 91355
                  $449,000        $404,100
 91354
                  $410,000        $369,000
 91321
                  $400,000        $360,000
 91384
                  $407,000        $366,300
 91390
                  $430,000        $387,000
 91381
                  $558,000        $502,200
 Source: www.mortgage101.com
                                         Table
     Cost and Income Needed to Purchase a 
      Zip       Average      Loan         Down
      Code      Price 6/08 Amount         Paym
                                            $16
      91351      $164,000     $147,600
                                             $8
      91321       $84,000       $75,600
      91387      $208,000     $187,200      $20
                                            $25
      91384      $255,000     $229,500
                                            $31
      91355      $311,000     $279,900
                                            $22
      91350      $220,000     $198,000
                                            $32
      91354      $320,000     $288,000
                                            $28
      91381      $280,000     $252,000
       Source: www.mortgage101.com
                                           H-45
Housing Element                                                  City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Foreclosures
The subject of foreclosures on mortgage loans for homes and condominiums has been of
national and statewide concern since 2007 due to the large number of families that have lost
their homes since that time. In many cases, foreclosures have occurred on loans that were
made subject to adjustable interest rates and/or balloon payments that seemed reasonable in
an expanding housing market, but which became excessive for homeowners in an economic
downturn and contracting housing market. In the context of the Housing Element, foreclosures
are an issue because they result in displaced households that may have trouble finding
adequate, affordable replacement housing; they may result in vacant housing stock that is
subject to vandalism or lack of maintenance; and the foreclosure crisis affects the economy due
to loss of jobs in construction, finance, real estate, and related industries.
Foreclosures pose a number of problems for the Santa Clarita community by displacing families,
depressing housing prices (which are continuing to fall as demonstrated by Table H-3.15), and
leaving some neighborhoods with vacant housing that is not adequately maintained.
A more extensive discussion of foreclosures is provided in the section of the Housing Element
entitled Non-Governmental Constraints (Part VII), which discusses current programs that help
families facing foreclosures and programs that might address the maintenance issues resulting
from vacant, foreclosed units.
The City does not have a count of how many foreclosed units are vacant at any one time, nor
does the housing conditions survey conducted by City staff in February 2008 separately report
properties that appeared to be vacant and unmaintained (See Table H-3.19 and related
discussion).
        Table H-3.18: Foreclosures in Santa Clarita, From March 2012 to March 2013
                                     Zip Code
                                                      Foreclosures
                                     91321                     113
                                     91350                     177
                                     91351                     187
                                     91354                     146
                                     91355                     162
                                     91381                     104
                                     91384                     146
                                     91387                     218
                                     91390                     139
                                     Total                   1,392
                   Source: City of Santa Clarita Community Development Department
October 2013                               H-46
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                             Housing Element
Mobile Home Parks
There are 16 mobile home parks in the City of Santa Clarita, comprising 2,009 spaces (See
Exhibit H-3.3). On its website, the City provides a list of these parks along with contact
information. Of these individual spaces, 1,964 are subject to the City’s mobile home space rent
control ordinance, with 436 spaces reserved for seniors. In addition to regulating the amount
that park owners can charge owners of park residents for space rent, City ordinance also
regulates the closure of mobile home parks, requiring that the owners provide notice and pay for
the relocation of mobile homes to another comparable park within the City of Santa Clarita.
Space rent for mobile homes is adjusted annually subject to appeal to a five-member
adjustment panel.
                                            H-47                                   October 2013

Housing Element      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
October 2013    H-48
City of Santa Clarita General Plan Housing Element
                                                   H-49 October 2013
Housing Element                                                  City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Two mobile home parks in Santa Clarita have applied for change in use. The Caravilla Mobile
Home Park finalized the conversion process to become a tenant-owned park in 2008, but was
unable to sell any spaces to tenants. The Tentative Tract Map submitted as part of the
conversion process has been extended a number of times, but it is unknown if the park will be
able to sell at least one space to a tenant by the final deadline.
The owner of Canyon Breeze Mobile Home the Park has received a Final Permit to close the
park in 2008 however the closure was never finalized. Due to the economic downturn of 2008,
the park owner was unable to finalize compensation agreements with the all park residents, and
was unable to close fully and turn the space into a commercial retail development. There were
originally 90 owner-occupied mobile homes in this park. As of this date, fewer than 25 owner-
occupied units remain. The balance of the spaces are occupied by tenants living in units owned
by the Park.
Housing Condition
As shown in Table H-3.12, almost 60% of the City’s housing stock has been constructed since
1980. The relatively recent development of much of the City means that most of the housing
has been built pursuant to recent building codes and seismic standards, is served by adequate
sewer and utility systems, has access to adequate schools and parks, and is maintained in a
safe, habitable condition for residents. A few portions of the City have older housing units, in
which property maintenance issues arise more often. These areas are regularly monitored by
the City’s Community Preservation Section to ensure that property maintenance issues are
addressed immediately before the properties deteriorate into a blighted condition. Lack of
maintenance can have a negative effect not only on the value of an individual home, but on the
value of adjacent properties in a neighborhood. The City pursues remedies to gain code
compliance, and offers assistance to qualified homeowners with maintenance needs that they
cannot afford to pay for themselves. The City’s Community Preservation program responds to
complaints as well as conducting regular proactive inspections in selected areas where there
are concentrations of structural problems and/or deferred maintenance. The City’s Community
Preservation Division funds rehabilitation loans for eligible property owners who need to replace
building components, and a handy worker program operated by the Senior Center for property
owners who need minor repairs or retrofits to make their homes handicap accessible.
State law requires that the Housing Element address the condition of the City’s housing stock.
To comply with this requirement, staff conducted a windshield survey in 2007 of the areas which
have been identified as having older housing stock with potential for property maintenance
needs. The survey did not identify each property with maintenance issues, but instead
assessed the overall housing conditions in each area surveyed. Table H-3.19 and Exhibit H-3.4
summarizes overall conditions in the survey areas and estimates that between 120 and 208
residential properties in the survey areas, or between 4% and 7% of all properties surveyed are
in need of some maintenance or rehabilitation to meet minimum habitability standards of the
City.
Examples of the property characteristics considered in staff’s survey to determine overall
housing conditions within these areas included the following:
       Neighborhood infrastructure and planning issues: Irregular lot lines and/or substandard
        lots; inadequacy of the streets, parking and lighting; abandoned, vacant and unhealthy
October 2013                             H-50

  City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                                  Housing Element
            properties; no curbside house numbers; incompatibility of residential uses with adjacent
            commercial and industrial property.
           Health and safety: Overcrowding; unsanitary conditions in garbage or other areas;
            visible/overfilling garbage cans; mildew; lack of ventilation.
           Landscape: Overgrown or poorly irrigated lawns/landscape, including overgrown trees,
            leaf buildup, poor landscaping, injured, diseased or dead plants; flammable vegetation in
            a fire hazard area.
           Structural conditions: Deferred maintenance; worn, weathered, or split porch beams;
            faulty siding; damaged/cracked/broken windows; damaged garage door; warped,
            sagging or missing garage door; damaged or stained walls; damaged roof shingles;
            missing screens; chipped, peeling, or faded paint; chipped stucco; asphalt or cracked
            concrete driveways; concrete damage from tree roots; dilapidated fencing; poorly
            built/faulty balconies; inadequate gutters and storm drains.
                               Table H-3.19: Housing Condition Survey, 2007
                                                                            Estimated          Estimated
                                                                                                                Homes
 Survey Area                              Unit types           Rating4 # Needing % Needing
                                                                                                                Surveyed
                                                                            Rehab              Rehab
 Newhall (Areas 1-5)                      SFR, MFR             B+                   15-25          10-15%              475
 Newhall (Areas 6, 9-15)                  SFR                  A                     0-14              0-9%            380
 Newhall (Areas 13, 17-24)                SFR, MFR             B                    25-35          16-20%              420
                                          SFR,       MFR,
 Newhall (Areas 16, 30-33)                                     B                    25-35          16-20%               30
                                          MH
 Placerita and Sand Cyn.                  SFR                  B+                   15-25          10-15%              160
 Saugus (Areas 34-41 and 47-
                                          SFR                  A                     0-14              0-9%            511
 52)
 Canyon Country (Areas 57-64) SFR, MFR                         B+                   15-25          10-15%              515
 Canyon Country (Areas 65-69) SFR, MFR                         B                    25-35          16-20%              400
 MFR = Multi-Family; SFR = Single-Family;
 MH = Mobile Home                                                                120-208                             2,891
Source: City of Santa Clarita Community Development Department, 2007
  4
     Blighted Conditions/Deterioration Checklist: Based on the exterior evaluation of residential dwellings in the
  specified areas, structures are to be rated according to the following grade scale:
  A – Good = No visible factors of deterioration evident
  B – Deferred Maintenance (minor repairs) = 1-2 factors of visible deterioration evident
  C – Substandard Conditions, suitable for rehabilitation = 3-5 factors of visible deterioration evident
  D – Substandard Condition, not suitable for rehabilitation = 6 or more factors of visible deterioration evident
  (specified areas will be grouped under grades A-D)
                                                         H-51                                              October 2013

Housing Element      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
October 2013    H-52
City of Santa Clarita General Plan Housing Element
                                     H-53          October 2013
Housing Element      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
October 2013    H-54
City of Santa Clarita General Plan Housing Element
                                                   H-55 October 2013
Housing Element                                              City of Santa Clarita General Plan
The following paragraphs summarize the areas surveyed, and the housing conditions that were
documented in staff’s survey. The survey areas were determined based on overall housing
conditions, Community Preservation areas and an age of structures summary.
       Newhall Area
   Areas 1-5 in Newhall are comprised of mostly single-family homes and some multi-family
   buildings. This area received a “B+”, indicating a need for only minor deferred maintenance.
   In this area, the most common visible factors of deterioration were poorly landscaped front
   lawns, asphalt driveways in disrepair, faded paint, chipped stucco, and overgrown
   vegetation. The number of homes with these conditions affected the overall grade of this
   area.
   Areas 6 and 9-15 in Newhall are comprised mainly of single-family residences. This area
   received an “A” for the overall grade for maintenance. There were isolated homes that
   showed some deterioration; however, overall this is a well-maintained area in which
   homeowners have preserved the property’s original condition.
   Areas 13 and 17-24 in Newhall have a housing stock made up of a mixture of multi-family
   and single-family residences. Much of this area contains substandard lots that do not meet
   current zoning requirements for width, area, or other residential property standards, and
   most of the homes in this area do not meet the current code requirements. There is a large
   number of commercial properties in the area with insufficient buffers from adjacent
   residences. The area received a “B” for its overall housing condition. The most visible
   factors identified included poorly landscaped and irrigated lawns, poor building structure
   upkeep including dilapidated roofs, and poorly-constructed structures.
   Areas 16 and 30-33 comprised a mixture of residential developments including single-family,
   multi-family, and mobile homes as well as an assortment of commercial and industrial uses.
   Most of the multi-family residences are in decent condition. The single-family homes appear
   to be from a newer development and therefore have not seen much decline in housing
   condition. The mobile home park has some visible impacts that take away from the overall
   condition of this study area. The overall grade of this area is a “B” with some areas of
   deferred maintenance.
       Placerita Canyon and Sand Canyon
   Areas 43-46 are locally referred to as Placerita Canyon, and Areas 70-76 are referred to as
   Sand Canyon. These are historically rural communities that have their own special
   standards to help preserve their rural characteristics. These communities, mostly single-
   family residences, received an overall grade of a “B+” due to lack of maintenance of
   numerous isolated properties. However, most of the properties surveyed in these areas are
   well maintained and in good condition.
       Saugus
   Areas 34-41 and 47-52 in the community of Saugus contain mostly single-family residences.
   This area received an “A” for the overall condition of maintenance. There were isolated
   homes that showed some deterioration; however, overall this is a well-maintained area
   where homeowners preserve the property’s original condition.
October 2013                           H-56

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                Housing Element
       Canyon Country
    Areas 57-64 in Canyon Country have a mixture of multi-family and single-family residences.
    This area was affected by the most recent wildfire (Buckweed) in October, 2007, which
    destroyed and damaged approximately two dozen homes. The area received a “B+” for its
    overall condition. The most visible factors in this area identified as needing improvement
    included poorly landscaped and irrigated lawns, poor building structure upkeep including
    dilapidated roofs, and poorly-constructed structures.
    Areas 65-69 have a mixture of residential developments including single-family, multi-family,
    and mobile homes, as well as an assortment of commercial and industrial uses. Most of the
    multi-family residences are in adequate condition. The single-family neighborhoods in this
    area include newer subdivisions in a good condition of repair, and older development with
    some maintenance conditions noted. The overall grade of this area was “B”, due to some
    areas of deferred maintenance.
       Valencia
    The Valencia community contains mainly mostly single-family residences. The area received
    a cursory review of the housing conditions and property upkeep. Overall the area is
    maintained in good condition. The Valencia area did not receive a grade as it was not part
    of the Citywide survey.
E.      Existing Subsidized Housing at Risk of Losing Subsidies
Section 65583(a)(8) of California housing element law requires each city and county to identify
the assisted housing units in its jurisdiction that are at risk of conversion to market rates within
ten years. The element must conduct an analysis that includes an inventory of all such units, an
estimate of the cost of preserving the existing units or producing comparable new units, and the
availability of nonprofit corporations capable of acquiring and operating these units. Possible
financing sources for preservation or replacement must also be identified. Finally, the analysis
must state the community’s goals, quantified objectives; policies and programs for housing
preservation and production (see Section VIII, Policies and Programs.)
In compliance with these State requirements, the following analysis covers the 10-year period
between 2013 and 2023.
Overview of At-Risk HUD-Assisted Multi-Family Housing Programs
       Section 221 and 236 Mortgages
    In the 1960s and 1970s, the federal government provided a number of different types of
    subsidies to private developers to build housing with rents affordable to low-income
    households. Two of these programs, Section 221 (d)(3) Below Market Interest Rates
    (BMIR) and Section 236, were targeted to households whose incomes were too high for
    public housing but who could not afford market-rate rents. Reduced interest rates of only
    1% to 3% were granted in exchange for agreements that made rents affordable for at least
    20 years. After 20 years, owners could pre-pay their 40-year HUD mortgages and raise
    their rents to market rates. In the 1970s and later, when it became necessary to more
    deeply subsidize units and offset operating cost deficits, HUD added a new subsidy
                                              H-57                                   October 2013

Housing Element                                                 City of Santa Clarita General Plan
    program, Section 8 Loan Management Set-aside. Nearly half of the units in the 221(d)(3)
    BMIR and 236 programs also have the Section 8 Set-aside.
        Section 8 Project-Based Units
    Congress created the Section 8 New Construction and Substantial Rehabilitation Program in
    1973. Unlike the Section 8 tenant assistance program that provides vouchers to individual
    households, these project-based subsidies were attached to the units. However, the
    subsidies did not run for the life of the project; instead, HUD provided a 15- or 20-year
    commitment for rental subsidies. Tenants were required to pay 25% (now 30%) of their
    incomes for rent. HUD sets a “contract rent” for the units and then pays the difference
    between that rent and the tenant’s payment. Families and individuals earning no more than
    30%, 50%, or 80% of area median income are eligible for these units.
    According to the California Housing Partnership Corporation, in 1997 Congress changed the
    rules governing Section 8 contracts when it adopted the Multi-Family Assisted Housing
    Reform and Affordability Act (MAHRAA). This legislation provides funding for expiring
    Section 8 units. Owners are not obligated to renew expiring Section 8 contracts or to
    maintain the affordability of their units. Instead, if they choose, they can decline to renew
    the Section 8 contracts and raise their rents to market rates.
    Owners of many buildings subsidized by Section 221 (d)(3) and 236 are now eligible to pre-
    pay their mortgages. In order to do so, the owner must file a notice of intent and provide a
    year’s notice to HUD and to tenants. In properties that also have Section 8 Loan
    Management Set-aside contracts, the owner’s decision to pre-pay the underlying loan and
    opt out of the Section 8 contract will probably be influenced by whether the Section 8 rents
    are higher or lower than the market rents in the surrounding area. In areas where market
    rates are higher, the owner may want to pay off his HUD obligation so that he/she can
    charge market rates as soon as the Section 8 contract expires. If the owner decides to sell,
    California Government Code Section 65863.11 requires owners of HUD-subsidized
    buildings who put these buildings on the market to give nonprofit organizations the first right
    of refusal.
    Pursuant to California Government Code Section 65863.10, owners must also file a notice
    of intent with the State when they decide to prepay a federally–assisted mortgage, terminate
    mortgage insurance, or opt out of rent subsidy contracts. These notices must be filed twice,
    at one year and at six months before the date of prepayment or termination. The notice
    must also be sent to all affected tenants. The California Department of Housing and
    Community Development (HCD) provide the notification forms and a list of owner
    prepayment notifications on its website at http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/tech/presrv/.
    However, neither HCD nor HUD monitors the notices, including the tenant notices.
Multi-Family Bond-Financed Projects
There are 8 properties in Santa Clarita financed by Multi-Family Revenue Bonds, with affordable
housing regulatory agreements that are monitored by the Los Angeles County Community
Development Commission. One additional property with 14 units is made affordable through a
loan from LA County which was guaranteed by the Federal Housing Authority. These properties
have a total of 296 units with rents affordable to households at 80% or less of County median
income, and 200 with rents affordable to households earning 50% or less of County median
October 2013                             H-58

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                              Housing Element
income. Managers of these units are required to recertify tenant households every two years to
demonstrate that the "affordable" units are occupied by income-eligible households.
The regulatory agreements for these projects are all recorded and run with the land. Thus, if the
project is sold, the new owner must honor the regulatory agreement until it expires. As shown in
Table H-3.20, most of the regulatory agreements have similar expiration dates as the bond pay-
off dates. But in one case the regulatory agreement will continue for 17 years after the bond
pay-off date and in one other case the bond due date outlasts the regulatory agreement by 15.
In the last 10 years one project with 130 total units and 26 units at 80% of median noticed its
tenants in 2006 when the bond and regulatory agreements both expired, and by the end of 2007
this project raised its rent. Tenants unable to pay the new rents had to move. Unlike tenants of
HUD-financed projects who receive Section 8 vouchers when owners pre-pay their mortgages
and raise rent to market rates, tenants in expired bond financed projects do not receive any
program-related assistance when subsidies expire and owners raise the rents. However, the
owner still has to file the state notices and all the relevant paperwork. Neither HCD nor the
bond-issuing agencies monitor the notices to tenants if a bond project pays off the bonds. A
number of localities have passed ordinances requiring the notices to also be sent to the City.
Cities can set up programs that monitor the notices and follow up to make sure that owners
follow all required notice procedures. All the required forms and the State notice list are posted
online at the website of the California Department of Housing and Community Development is
http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/tech/presrv/.
Given that in the planning period 192 units are at high risk of losing their subsidies and
converting to market rates, the City should consider programs to monitor the provision of notices
required by State law (Goal H.4). State and County Subsidized Projects At Risk of Conversion
to Market Rates in the Next Ten Years
The regulatory agreement for Meadowridge, which has 36 affordable units, will expire in 2014.
The bonds were paid off in 2009. Since the owner of Diamond Park recently refinanced and
extended their bond agreements in order to renovate their buildings, it is possible that the owner
of this project may do likewise. The at-risk units could also be protected through purchase by a
nonprofit owner using a combination of bond funds and the 4% tax credit, or replaced through
bond and tax-credit-financed new construction of either mixed-income projects or projects that
are 100% affordable.
If the owners do not refinance, then the renters who live in Meadowridge’s 36 very-low income
units may have difficulty finding other affordable units. Furthermore, if these low-income
residents are forced to move due to rising rents, they will not be eligible for any relocation
assistance. The City has in place a program to monitor these units and work with the owners to
identify a strategy to retain the affordability. (Goal H.4)
The Park Sierra Apartments are also at risk of conversion to market rate in 2015. This building
came into the City’s jurisdiction through an annexation completed in 2012. City staff will work
with the owners and the Los Angeles Community Development Commission to determine if
there are alternatives to maintain the affordability as noted in Goal H-4
Table H-3.20 summarizes the status of projects in the City that are at-risk of losing subsidized
housing units during the planning period. Exhibit H-3.5 provides the locations of the subsidized
affordable housing units
                                                 H-59                                October 2013

        Housing Element                                             City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                     Table H-3.20: Risk Status of State-Subsidized Housing Projects
                                                                      Regulatory       Bonds
                                Funding       Total    80% 50%                                    Risk over 10
 Project Name and Address                                             Agreement        or Loan
                                Source        Units    *      *                                   Years
                                                                      Expiration       Due
 Park Sierra Apartments
                                                                                                  High
 18414 Jakes Way                                 156      78     78 9/2015             9/2030
                                                                                                  (9/2015)
 Santa Clarita, CA 91351
                                Multi-family
 Village Apartments
                                Revenue
 23700 Newhall Avenue
                                Bond             384      39     38 12/2031            10/2014    Very Low
 Santa Clarita, CA
                                L.A. County
 Geoff Palmer & Associates
                                HACOLA
                                Multi-family
 Canyon Country Villas
                                Revenue
 26741 Isabella Parkway
                                Bond             328      66      0 12/2032            12/2032    Low
 Santa Clarita, CA
 Geoff Palmer & Associates
                                HACOLA
 Diamond Park                   Multi-family
 27940 Solamint Road            Revenue
                                                 256      26     26 10/2031            2/2026     Very Low
 Santa Clarita, CA              Bond
 Geoff Palmer & Associates      HACOLA
 Meadowridge                    Multi-family
 23645 Meadowridge Drive        Revenue                                                Bonds
                                                 176       0     36 10/2014                       Very High
 Santa Clarita, CA              Bond                                                   paid-off
 JH Real Estate Partners        HACOLA
 Sand Canyon Villas             Multi-family
 28923 Prairie Lane             Revenue
                                                 215      22     22 12/2032            12/2032    Very Low
 Santa Clarita, CA              Bond
 Geoff Palmer & Associates      HACOLA
 Sand Canyon Ranch              Multi-family
 28856 N. Silver Saddle Cir.    Revenue
                                                 255      51      0 5/2033             5/2033     Very Low
 Santa Clarita, CA              Bond
 Geoff Palmer & Associates      HACOLA
 Hidaway Apartments
                                L.A. County/
 27077 Hidaway Avenue                              67     14      0 N/A                2024       Very Low
                                FHA Loan
 Santa Clarita, CA
                                               1,837     296    200
 Total
*Indicates number of units affordable to households earning no more than 80% or 50% of Area Median
        Income.
Source: Los Angeles County Community Development Commission
        October 2013                          H-60
City of Santa Clarita General Plan Housing Element
                                                   H-61 October 2013
Housing Element                                                 City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Federally Subsidized Projects At Risk of Conversion to Market Rates
Valencia Villas, a senior housing project, has 75 units affordable to households at or below 30%
of median income. It is a Section 221 (d)(3) project with a Project-Based Section 8 contract that
expire March 31, 2014. Once the current Section 8 contract expires, it can be renewed
annually. The expiration date for the 221 (d)(3) is 2019 but it is subject to prepayment. When
asked about their plans for this project, the owners said they intend to maintain the project as
affordable until the end of the Section 8 contract and will then consider their options. This
project is at high risk for conversion to market-rate rents.
Santa Clarita has already lost some of its affordable senior housing during the last planning
period. Newhall Terrace, which provided 66 units of affordable senior housing, opted out of its
Section 8 contract in 2007 and converted to market rates. A few Section 8 tenants still reside in
this project, but the units will not remain affordable once these tenants leave.
                Table H-3.21: Risk Status of Affordable Senior Housing Projects
October 2013                              H-62
       City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                         Housing Element
                                                                                               Risk
                                                         Total    Funding       Expiration
Project Name                    Income Target                                                  Over 10
                                                         Units    Source        Dates
Address                                                                                        Years
Owner Contact Info              80%     60%     50%
Valencia Villas                                                   221 (D)(3)    4/2019         High
24857 Singing Hills Drive                            76        76
Santa Clarita, CA 91355                                           Section     8 3/31/2014
661-259-3921                                                      project-based
Goldrich and Kest
310-204-2050
Canterbury Village                                                HUD 202                      Low
23420 Avenida Rotella                                64        64
Santa Clarita, CA 91355
661-255-9797
So CA Presbyterian Homes
818-247-0420
Bouquet Canyon Seniors                                            Tax Credits                  Low
26705 Bouquet Canyon                      264                264 Bond
Santa Clarita, CA 91350
661-297-346
Riverstone/HSC
626-910-0800
Canyon Country Seniors                                            Tax Credits                  Low
18701 Flying Tiger Drive                  180        20      200 Bond
Santa Clarita, CA 91351
661-251-2900
Riverstone/HSC
626-810-0800
Orchard Arms                                                      Conventional N/A             N/A
23520 Wiley Canyon Road                             182      182 Public
Santa Clarita, CA 91321                                           Housing
661-255-5818                                                      operated by
Housing Authority of L.A.                                         L.A. County
County                                                            Housing
                                                                  Authority
Whispering Oak Apartments                                         Los Angeles N/A              N/A
for age 55+                        20                13        65 County loan
22816 Market Street
Santa Clarita, CA 91321
661-259-1583
SHB Financial Corporation
Total Units                        20     444       355      851
Source: City of Santa Clarita and Karin Pally Associates
                                                   H-63                              October 2013
Housing Element      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
October 2013    H-64
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                    Housing Element
Summary of At-Risk Units
In conclusion, there are 268 affordable units at risk of conversion to market-rate housing during
the planning period, including 192family units and 76 senior units. Most of the at-risk units
have rents set at 50% of median income. Table H-3.21 and Exhibit H-3.6 summarizes the
senior housing projects in the City and their risk status.
Preservation or Replacement of At-Risk Units
In order to ensure that existing subsidized housing units in the City remain affordable, financing
sources must to be identified. The most practical finance source for replacement of the at-risk
units at 50% of median income would be a HUD 202 grant, with additional financing from the
City to cover the “gap” between the amount of HUD 202 funding and the full cost of property
acquisition and construction. However, it would also be possible to use federal low-income
housing tax credits (4% or 9% tax credits), combined with City gap financing, a conventional
mortgage, and an Affordable Housing Program grant from the Federal Home Loan Bank.
Estimated replacement costs for the at-risk units are shown in Table H-3.22. These cost
estimates range from $254,822 per unit for financing with low income housing tax credits at 9%,
and $277,487 per unit for low-income housing tax credits at 4%.5 Theoretically, the cost to
replace the 112 at-risk bond-financed units in the City would be between $48.93 million and
$53.28 million. The unit mix for the financing scenario would be 64% one-bedroom and 34%
two-bedroom. The income range would be 26% of units rented at 60% of median income, 46%
of units priced at 45% of median, 5% of units priced at 40% of median and 11% at 30% of
median. Two percent of the units would be rent-free manager units.
Available Funding Sources
The availability of financing to maintain these affordable units has been severely affected by the
dissolution of Redevelopment in the State of California. The AB1X26 legislation and
subsequent AB 1484 legislation have prevented the City from using approximate $6 million
dollars in Redevelopment low/mod housing funds. It is unclear if or when the City (acting as the
Housing Successor) will regain control of the housing bond proceeds which can be used for
affordable housing.
Other housing funds, including 4% and 9% Low Income Housing Tax Credits, HOME, and the
Multifamily Housing Program and conventional low-interest mortgages from banks that makes
community reinvestment loans may not be sufficient to finance continued affordability alone. A
number of pieces of State legislation have been proposed to create additional financing
mechanisms, but to date none have been adopted or shown significant traction with the
legislature. Finally, the general economic downturn has reduced revenue for the City, making it
even more difficult for the City to provide any direct assistance to maintain the affordability of the
at-risk housing unit
5
  The low-income housing tax credit gives investors who invest in affordable housing an annual tax credit.
The 4% percent and 9% figures refer to the approximate percentage of the eligible project costs that
investors may claim on federal tax returns for a 10-year period. Developers submit competitive
applications to the State’s Tax Credit Allocation Committee (TCAC), which awards the credits to the
applications with the most points. Then the developer works with an individual investor or a pool of
investments that provide equity to the project.
                                                H-65                                      October 2013

Housing Element                                                 City of Santa Clarita General Plan
The City has a budget of about $1.1 million per year from Community Development Block Grant
(CDBG) funds; however, all these funds are allocated for debt service, eligible housing and
social service activities, and administrative overhead. The City does not receive an allocation of
HOME funds. However, it has in the past successfully applied to the State for HOME funds,
which were used for a City first-time homebuyer program. In the future, an application could be
submitted for a project to replace or purchase at-risk units, if other funds were not sufficient. A
review of such awards over the past few years indicates that the amount of the HOME award
would likely be less than $1 million.
               Table H-3.22: Replacement Cost Estimates for 192 At-Risk Units
                            Replacement
           Cost Per Unit                         Funding Sources
                            Cost
                                                 9% Tax Credit
                                                 Sources:
               $254,822           $48,925,824 23% First Mortgage
                                                 17% Local Equity (Redevelopment)
                                                 59% LP Capital Contribution
                                                 4% Tax Credit + Bond Finance
                                                 Sources
                                                 23% First Mortgage
                                                 17% Local Equity (Redevelopment)
               $277,487           $53,277,504 25% State Multi-Family Housing
                                                 Program
                                                 35% LP Capital Contribution
          Source: Yasmin Tong and Karin Pally Associates
Cost of Purchase for At-Risk Units
Based on information available in 2008, if the owners of the 268 at-risk units were willing to sell
these units, they might be priced between $130,000 and $160,000 per unit, depending on
condition and location. It is assumed that the units would need rehabilitation. A common cost
estimate for rehabilitation is $25,000 per unit. Adding $25,000 puts the cost per unit between
$155,000 and $175,000, as shown in Table H-3.22. However, the scenario in Table H-3.23
would be applicable only to the 76 senior units in Valencia Villas, since that project has a
Section 8 contract which a new, nonprofit owner/manager could assume. If the owner opted out
of the Section 8 program and paid off the loan guaranteed by the 221 (d)(3) loan guarantee,
converting the rents to market rates, all the existing low-income tenants would receive tenant-
based Section 8 vouchers. Rents in the building would no longer be affordable and it is possible
that if the new rents exceeded the limits allowed by the Los Angeles County Housing Authority,
all the previous tenants would have to find new apartments somewhere else.
October 2013                             H-66
 City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                            Housing Element
         Table H-3.23: Estimated Costs for 76 At-Risk Units with Section 8 Contracts
Cost         Purchase       Rehab         Total Per Total Cost
                                                                    Sources
Estimate     Price          Cost          Unit       Estimate
                                                                    75% Convention Mortgage
                                                                    25%                   Equity
Low              $130,000       $25,000    $155,000 $11,780,000 (Redevelopment)
                                                                    Section 8 Project-Based
                                                                    contract
                                                                    75% Convention Mortgage
                                                                    25%                   Equity
High             $160,000       $25,000    $185,000 $14,060,000 (Redevelopment)
                                                                    Section 8 Project-Based
                                                                    contract
Source: Karin Pally Associates
 Tenants in the two bond-financed projects would not receive any assistance in relocating if the
 owners decide to convert to market rents. The scenario in Table H-3.23 would not apply to
 those units because there is not a Section 8 project-based contract to subsidize the rents.
 Purchase of the bond-financed units would have to be financed with tax credits plus a
 combination of local funds, grants if necessary, and a conventional mortgage. Table H-3.24
 provides scenarios for purchase and rehabilitation of 36 bond-financed units using the low-
 income housing tax credit. The assumed market price for the units is $130,000 per unit.
            Table H-3.24: Estimated Costs for 36 At-Risk Units Using Tax Credits
               Estimated       Replacement
                                                Sources
               Unit Cost       Cost
                                                9% Tax Credit
                                                Sources:
                                                35% First Mortgage
                     171,890        $6,188,040
                                                52%          Local           Equity
                                                (Redevelopment)
                                                13% LP Capital Contribution
                                                4% Tax Credit + Bond Finance
                                                Sources
                                                37% First Mortgage
                     172,169        $6,198,084 45%           Local           Equity
                                                (Redevelopment)
                                                18% LP Capital Contribution
              Source: Yasmin Tong and Karin Pally Associates
                                             H-67                                  October 2013
Housing Element                                                 City of Santa Clarita General Plan
As shown in Table H-3.24, the estimated cost to purchase and rehabilitate the 36 bond-financed
units would be $6,188,040 if financed with 9% tax credits, and $6,198,084 if financed with 4%
tax credits. Because the subsidized units are included with market-rate units within the entire
housing project, the actual purchase and rehabilitation cost would also include the market rate
units in these buildings, which would have to be financed with a conventional mortgage.
Organizational Resources for Preservation or Replacement
       Public Agencies and Nonprofit Corporations
    Federal and state law require that when owners of buildings with expiring federal subsidies
    decide to sell those buildings, they must offer the right of first refusal to nonprofit
    corporations capable of operating multi-family housing.
    There are no nonprofit housing development corporations located in Santa Clarita.
    However, the City is working with a number of nonprofit organizations interested in
    developing affordable housing in Santa Clarita. Southern California Presbyterian Homes
    already owns and operates one project (Canterbury Village). Table H-3.25 lists nonprofit
    entities in Southern California that may be interested in either purchase and rehabilitation, or
    replacement of, at-risk subsidized units.
                 Table H-3.25: Nonprofit Housing Development Corporations
 Organization              Contact Name           Address                           Phone
 Cabrillo      Economic Rodney Fernandez          702 County Square Drive
 Development                                      Ventura, CA 93003                 805-659-3791
 Corporation
 Mercy Housing, Inc.       Mark Trinidad          1500 South Grand Ave, #100        213-743-5820
                                                  Los Angeles, CA 90015
                                                  9065 Haven Ave., Suite 1000
 National Community Rebecca Clark,
 Renaissance                                      Rancho Cucamonga, CA 909-483-2444
                           Executive Director     91730
                           Kim Heinzelman         516       Burchett       Street
 Presbyterian Homes                                                                 818-247-0420
                           Project Devt. Asst.    Glendale, CA 91203
                                                  5400 East Olympic Blvd.,
 Telacu Homes, Inc.
                           Tom Provencio          #300                              323-832-5411
                                                  Los Angeles, CA 90022
                                                  21031 Ventura Blvd., Suite
 Habitat for Humanity      Donna Deutchman        1101                              818-981-4900
                                                  Woodland Hills, CA
       Other Organizational Resources
    The two nonprofit organizations listed below provide information and technical assistance for
    preservation of at-risk housing to tenants, property owners, City staff, and other groups.
    Both these organizations have offices in the City of Los Angeles.
October 2013                             H-68

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                               Housing Element
     The California Housing Partnership Corporation (CHPC) is chartered by the State legislature
     to provide education and technical assistance concerning expiring uses to cities, nonprofit
     housing organizations, and tenants. CHPC has offices in Los Angeles and San Francisco.
     Staff at the Los Angeles office can be contacted at:
         California Housing Partnership Corporation
         800 Figueroa Street
         Los Angeles, CA 90017
         (213) 892-8775
     The Coalition for Economic Survival, located in the City of Los Angeles, provides information
     and assistance on expiring use issues to tenants, nonprofit housing organizations and to
     City staff.
         Larry Gross, Executive Director
         Coalition for Economic Survival
         514 Shatto Place, Suite 270
         Los Angeles, California 90020
         Telephone: (213) 252-4411
         www.cesinaction.org
F.       Energy and Water Conservation for Housing
The State of California has taken a strong stand on encouraging conservation of energy and
water resources at the local level through adoption of conservation policies and programs. As
further explained in the Conservation and Open Space Element of the General Plan, legislation
was passed in 2006 setting limits on greenhouse gas emissions in order to address concerns
about climate change. The State has also directed local agencies to adopt guidelines for water
conservation in landscaping, and the California Building Code establishes building standards for
low-flow plumbing fixtures and energy conservation in new construction.
With respect to resource conservation in housing development, the public benefits of saving
water and energy, in terms of carbon reduction and maintaining water supplies, are
supplemented by the benefits to individuals of saving money on utilities. Energy-conserving
appliances, efficient heating and cooling systems, adequate insulation, and low-flow plumbing
fixtures will yield significant long-term savings to both renters and homeowners, particularly with
the higher cost of fuel experienced in 2008.
In response to State mandates and local concerns for resource conservation, the City has taken
a number of steps to ensure that energy and water conservation are considered in approvals of
new residential development. In the General Plan, the City has adopted wide-ranging policies
to encourage environmentally responsible development (Conservation and Open Space
Element). The City has adopted California Title 24 regulations for all new residential
construction. Landscape plans are required to limit turf grass and use drought-resistant planting
techniques. Energy-conserving appliances and lighting are required. The City encourages use
of LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) building techniques, and has
received LEED certification on a public building.
                                               H-69                                 October 2013
Housing Element                                                 City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Programs for Existing Development
The City of Santa Clarita currently offers the following programs for enhancing the energy
efficiency of existing residential structures:
       AB 811:
        In Partnership with the County of Los Angeles, the City of Santa Clarita is participating in
        the development of a program to use Assembly Bill 811 funds for a program that would
        provide energy audits, energy efficiency upgrades as well as installation of photovoltaic
        solar power systems on residential units for little or no out-of-pocket cost to the property
        owner. The City also maintains a directory of local solar installers and retailers providing
        residents quick and convenient access to qualified vendors in the Santa Clarita Valley.
       Community Energy Partnership/Energy Audits:
        The Community Energy Partnership is an organization that brings resources and staff
        from the City, Southern California Edison, and the Energy Coalition to provide a variety
        of services throughout the community including free energy audits and retrofits.
       Federal Weatherization Program:
        The City offers public outreach and information on the Federal Weatherization Program
        which offers as much as $6,500 for income-qualified residents to receive energy
        efficiency upgrades to their home.
       ENERGY STAR® Products and Incentives:
        The City offers public outreach and information on ENERGY STAR® products including
        a search tool that enables the user to locate local retailers of ENERGY STAR® products
        as well as a list of incentives and rebates offered for the purchase of specific energy
        efficient appliances and products.
Programs for New Development:
The City of Santa Clarita currently offers the following programs for new development. In
addition to offering in-house programs, the City actively encourages the development
community to take advantage of programs offered by Southern California Edison and the
Southern California Gas Company.
       Community Character and Design Guidelines:
        The Community Character and Design Guidelines is a document adopted by the City
        Council in March 24, 2009. The purpose of the document is to define a variety of
        “green” development policies that should be included in all new projects that require
        constructions. A portion of the guidelines define design elements for energy efficiency in
        residential, commercial, mixed use, industrial and business park. Requirements for
        single-family and multi-family developments can be found on the City’s website at:
        http://www.santa-clarita.com/cityhall/cd/planning/archdesign.asp
       California New Homes Project (CNHP):
        The City of Santa Clarita partners with Southern California Edison in implementing the
        California New Homes Project. Through a combination of education, design assistance
        and financial support, the CAHP works with building and related industries to exceed
        compliance with the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 6, 2008 Building
October 2013                              H-70

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                Housing Element
        Energy Efficiency Standards for Residential and Nonresidential Buildings (Standards), to
        prepare builders for changes to the standards and create future pathways beyond
        compliance and traditional energy savings objectives. Participation is open to single-
        family, low and high rise multi-family residential new construction built within Southern
        California Edison's service territory. Information on the program can be found at:
        http://www.sce.com/b-rs/bb/cali-new-homes/california-new-homes-program.htm
       Sustainable Communities Program (SCP):
        The City of Santa Clarita partners with Southern California Edison in implementing the
        Sustainable Communities Program. The SCP targets projects able to commit to energy
        efficiency goals at least 15% greater than Title 24 Energy Standards for single and multi-
        family residential projects. Certification to a recognized green building rating system (i.e.
        LEED-NC® Silver) is strongly encouraged. Information on the program can be found at:
        http://www.sce-scp.com/ProjectCenter/Default.aspx?tabid=1721
       Advanced Home Program (AHP):
        The City of Santa Clarita partners with the Southern California Gas Company in
        implementing the AHP. The Performance-Based approach provides incentives for
        building homes that exceed the California Building Energy Efficiency Standards (Title 24)
        by at least 15 percent. These homes can also qualify for the ENERGY STAR® for
        homes label, which is widely recognized for energy efficiency. Information on the
        program can be found at: http://www.socalgas.com/construction/ahp/
Community-Based Energy Conservation Programs
On its website, the Southern California Gas Company, which provides services to Santa Clarita
residential and commercial customers, offers a number of programs aimed at increasing energy
efficiency. These include an energy and efficiency online survey and residential rebates for
upgrading to energy efficient appliances or making energy efficient home improvements.
Rebates are also available to owners of multi-family properties if they install certain energy
efficient systems. Incentives for building new homes that exceed California Title 24 by 15% are
offered to residential and commercial builders.
The power company, Southern California Edison (SCE), offers a wide variety of energy
conservation programs. These programs include free home energy audits online and rebates
on energy efficient appliances. SCE also has several programs to reduce rates for low-income
households. SCE’s website is www.sce.com.
ASSERT a Lancaster-based nonprofit organization, works with both Southern California Edison
(SCE) and the Southern California Gas Company to provide weatherization programs to eligible
low-income households in the City of Santa Clarita. Depending on income, a household may be
able to obtain a new, energy efficient refrigerator through a program operated by SCE.
Publications on sustainable building practices for residential and commercial properties can be
found on the website of Global Green at www.globalgreen.org. Global Green is a national
nonprofit organization that works to educate the public about renewal energy sources and
sustainable development practices.
                                               H-71                                    October 2013

Housing Element                                                 City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Residences in the City of Santa Clarita are served by one water wholesaler, Castaic Lake Water
Agency (CLWA), and three water purveyors including the Newhall County Water District (a
division of CLWA), Santa Clarita Water Company and Valencia Water Company. All four have
conservation information on their websites and urge customers to conserve water. Newhall
County Water District offers a cash rebate for the installation of water efficient sprinklers.
October 2013                           H-72
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                 Housing Element
IV.       SPECIAL HOUSING NEEDS
Government Code Section 65583(1)(7) requires “An analysis of any special housing needs,
such as those of the elderly, persons with disabilities, large families, farm workers, families with
female heads of households and families and persons in need of emergency shelter.” This
section of the element identifies special housing needs within the City of Santa Clarita.
A.        Housing for the Elderly
Housing element law does not define “elderly.” Depending on the program or source, there are
a number of different age cutoffs for “elderly” and “senior.” According to the U. S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development (HUD) website, housing limited to older persons is exempt
from the age discrimination provisions of the Fair Housing Act if:
       HUD has determined that the dwelling is specifically designed for and occupied by elderly
        persons under a federal, state or local government program; or
       It is occupied solely by persons who are age 62 or older; or
       It houses at least one person who is 55 or older in at least 80% of the occupied units, and
        adheres to a policy that demonstrates intent to house persons who are 55 or older.6
The HUD 202 program is the only federal housing finance program designed specifically for
older persons. It limits eligibility to persons who are age 62 or older.
Prior to the dissolution of Redevelopment, California Health and Safety Code Section 33334.4
instructed redevelopment agencies that the Low and Moderate Income Housing Fund must be
expended “to assist housing available to all age groups in at least the same proportion as the
number of low-income households with a member under age 65 years to the total number of
low-income households of the community as reported in the most recent census.” The
dissolution process is still in progress, and it is unclear if or when the Low and Moderate Income
Housing bond proceeds may become available for the City to use, and whether the original
requirement for proportionality of expenditures based on age groups might still apply.
The issue of what age groups to include in the term “elderly” is important because the Housing
Element asks jurisdictions to determine the needs of this age group for housing and asks
whether the supply of housing is adequate to the need. In this document, the group “elderly”
includes persons age 65 and older.
There were 16,732 persons aged 65 or older in 2011. Of these, 2,175 or 13% were 85 or older.
As age increases after age 65, the proportion of men to women in the population drops.
Overall, 42.1% of the age 65 and older population are male and 57.9% are female.
Between 2000 and 2006, the number of persons aged 65 and older increased by 2,176
persons. This represents a 20.2% increase in the proportion of the population that is age 65
and older. Countywide, during the same period, the population in this age group grew by
18.3%. As of 2011 there were 1741 persons in the City age 65 or older living below the poverty
level , which represented 10% of the entire population 65 years or older and
6
  http://www.hud.gov/offices/fheo/seniors/index.cfm
                                                 H-73                                 October 2013

Housing Element                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Tenure
Of the persons 65 or older who identified themselves as heads of household, 5052, (73%) were
homeowners and 1,853 were renters. While 54% of the renters had housing costs of 35% or
more of their monthly income, only 26% of the owners had housing costs that high.
Income
       Table H-4.1: Household Income of City Residents Persons Aged 65 and Older
            Income                         Number                 Percent
            < $14,999                                      881                    12.8
            $15,000 to 24,999                            1,265                    18.3
            $25,000 to 39,999                            1,598                    23.1
            $40,000 to 49,999                              489                      7.1
            $50,000 to 74,999                              929                    13.5
            $75,000 to 99,999                              988                    14.3
            $100,000 to 149,999                            583                      8.4
            $150,000 to 199,999                              50                     0.7
            $200,000 or more                               123                      1.8
            Total                                        6,909                     100
           Source: 2006 American Community Survey
Using the income limits for 2006 shown above in Table H-4.1, 31.1% of all senior households
meet the criteria for very low or extremely low income and about 30.2% meet the criteria for low
income (51% to 80% of median income). Altogether, in 2006, 38.2% of one-person senior
households had incomes at or below 80% of median income. The income limits for two-person
households are higher so even more households would meet the criteria.
Some lower-income seniors who qualify for a subsidized rental unit in Santa Clarita are having
increasing difficulty paying the rent. There are several reasons for this: (1) costs for food, gas
and medical care have increased sharply, and pensions and social security have not kept pace;
(2) some affordable senior units, which are financed by tax credits are set at 60% rather than
50% of median income, making the rent on those units more expensive; (3) even subsidized
rents are subject to annual increases, usually keyed to a standard index such as CPI.
Table H-4.2 provides data from the 2000 Census on the cost burdens of lower income elderly
households in Santa Clarita.
Household Size
In 2006, 9,716 (77%) of the 12,631 persons age 65 or older lived in family households. Of
these, more than half (4,363 persons), identified themselves as the head of household. Of the
October 2013                            H-74
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                              Housing Element
2,668 persons living in non-family households, 1,853 (70%) were women living alone and 690
(26%) were men living alone.
Group Quarters
In 2006 there were 247 persons age 65 or older living in group quarters such as nursing homes.
Housing Costs
According to the Santa Clarita Valley Senior Center, more than 700 persons age 55 and older
requested help with housing in 2007. Assistance provided can include help finding a low-cost
unit, and help applying for a Section 8 voucher. However, according to the Los Angeles County
Housing Authority, the waiting list for a Section 8 voucher is extensive and the wait time could
be as much as two years.
Senior renters and home owners are considered to be "housing cost burdened" if they pay more
than 30% of their household income for housing. Housing costs over 50% of the household
income represent a severe housing cost burden.
     Table H-4.2: Housing Cost Burden for Elderly Households in Santa Clarita in 2000
                                      Elderly        Elderly      All   Santa     Clarita
          Housing Cost Burden
                                      Renters        Owners       Households
          Household Income
                                                554          314                   2,602
          <=30% MFI
          Cost Burden > 30%                 68.6%         76.1%                   73.8%
          Cost Burden > 50%                 57.8%         65.8%                   65.8%
          Household Income
                                                541          524                   2,554
          >30% <=50% MFI
          Cost Burden > 30%                 76.3%         68.5%                   85.7%
          Cost Burden > 50%                 58.8%         38.9%                   63.7%
          Household Income
                                                439        1,014                   4,414
          >=50% <=80% MFI
          Cost Burden > 30%                 65.8%         47.7%                   69.3%
          Cost Burden > 50%                   8.0%        26.1%                   32.4%
Source: HUD User CHAS Databook from Census 2000 data
Resources
There are 851 rental units in six rental properties in Santa Clarita restricted for those 55 and
older (or, in the case of Canterbury Village, funded by a HUD 202, age 62 and older), with renter
qualifications not to exceed 60% or 50% of median income. In all, there are 355 units with rents
set at a level affordable to households at 50% of median income, of which 20 units are market-
rate units whose tenants have Section 8 vouchers; 444 units with rents set at 60% of median
income, three units with rents at 80% of median income.
                                              H-75                                  October 2013
 Housing Element                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                        Table H-4.3: Senior Rental Housing in Santa Clarita
                                                  Units at Units at Total
 Name of Project Address and Phone                                                 Finance Source
                                                  60%       <50%       Units
                      24857 Singing Hills Drive                                    221 (D) (4)
 Valencia Villas      Santa Clarita, CA 91355                     76          76   Project-Based
                      (661- 259-3921                                               Section 8
                      S.    Cal.     Presbyterian
                      Homes
 Canterbury
                      23420 Avenida Rotella                       64          64   HUD 202
 Village
                      Santa Clarita, CA 91355
                      661-255-9797
                      26705 Bouquet Canyon
 Bouquet              Road
                                                       264                   264   Tax Credits
 Canyon Seniors Santa Clarita, CA 91350
                      661-297-346
                      Riverstone Residential
 Canyon Country 18701 Flying Tiger Drive
                                                       180        20         200   Tax Credits
 Seniors              Santa Clarita, CA 91351
                      661-251-2900
                      Housing Authority of L.A.
                      County
 Orchard Arms
                      23520     Wiley    Canyon                 182          182
                      Road
                      Santa Clarita, CA 91355
 Whispering Oak 22816 Market Street                                                Market        &
 Apartments for Santa Clarita, CA 91321                           13          65   tenant-based
 age 55 +             661-259-1583                                                 Section 8
                                                       444      355          851
 Total Units
Source: City of Santa Clarita and Karin Pally Associates
 A search of the online database on the Community Care Licensing webpage of the California
 Department of Social Services in 2013 found 58 six person or less facilities licensed for
 residential care for the elderly, one licensed for 12 residents, one 99-person facility, and two
 facilities for over 140 elderly residents.. .
 October 2013                               H-76
    City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                          Housing Element
    B.        Housing for Disabled Persons
    Needs
    The 2011 ACS 1-Year Estimates indicate there are 14,851 persons in Santa Clarita with
    disabilities. Table H-4.4 shows the data for 2011 on persons with five different types of
    disabilities. It should be noted that many people may have more than one disability. For
    example, a person with a mental or physical disability may also have a self-care or employment
    disability. The largest category is that of persons with ambulatory disabilities.
                                     Table H-4.4: Persons with Disabilities7
                                                                      Sensory
                               Total
             Type of                         Self-      Cognitiv       (vision                   Independent
                              with a                                              Ambulatory
            Disability                       Care       e                and                        Living
                             Disability
                                                                      hearing)
         Age
                                                                                                            N/A
          5 to 17 years             734         146           686           382            47
                                                                                                         3,027
         18 to 64 years          7,677        1,693         3,034         2,673         4,048
                                                                                                         2,709
            65+ years            6,440        2,099         1,546         3,299         4,158
                                                                                                         5,736
         Total Disabled        14,851         3,938         5,266         5,402         6,354
Source: 2011 American Community Survey 1-year Estimates
    Physical Disabilities
    Persons with physical disabilities can be affected by a variety of housing issues, among which
    affordability and accessibility are some of the most frequent. They often need housing that is
    specially adapted to their needs with ramps, doors and turnarounds wide enough for
    wheelchairs, and with other adaptations for access. Income may also be an issue for persons
    with disabilities who are of working age. Persons whose only income is Supplemental Security
    Income may not be able to live independently as, according to staff at the Center for
    Independent Living, there are a limited number of rental units in the City affordable to individuals
    living on Supplemental Security Income (SSI), which is about $866 per month in 2013.
    The City has a procedure whereby property owners can request a reasonable accommodation
    to make changes in their property in order to make the property accessible for a disabled
    7
      The 2005 ACS definition of disability is based on three questions:
     (1) Does this person have any of the following long lasting-conditions: blindness, deafness, or a severe
    vision or hearing impairment? And (b) a condition that substantially limits one or more basic physical
    activities such as walking, climbing stairs, reaching, lifting, or carrying?
    (2) Because of a physical, mental, or emotional condition lasting 6 months or more, does this person
    have difficulty in doing any of the following activities: (a) learning, remembering, or concentrating? And (b)
    dressing, bathing, or getting around inside the home?
    (3) Because of a physical mental, or emotional condition lasting 6 months or more, does this person have
    any difficult in doing any of the following activities: (a) going outside the home alone to shop or visit a
    doctor's office? (b) working at a job or business?
                                                         H-77                                       October 2013
Housing Element                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan
person. The Residential Rehabilitation Program provides grants for reasonable accessibility
accommodations. The California Department of Housing and Community Development provide
a model procedure, in its online document Building Blocks for Effective Housing Elements at
http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/housing_element/index.html.
Persons with Developmental Disabilities
               Table H 4.5: Persons with Disabilities by Employment Status
                             Category                                   Number        % of Total
                                                                                      Population
Age 16-64, Employed Persons with a Disability                              3,593              2.0%
Age 16-64, Not Employed with a Disability (in the labor force)               769               .4%
Age 16-64, Not Employed with a Disability (not in the labor force)         7,677              4.3%
Persons Age 65+ with a Disability                                          3,315              1.8%
Total Persons with a Disability                                           15,534              8.7%
Total Population (Civilian Non-Institutional)                            177,415             100%
Source: American Community Survey, 1-Year Estimates
October 2013                             H-78
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                  Housing Element
                     Table H 4.6: Persons with Disabilities by Disability Type
                                                                         Number          % of Total
                                                                                         Population
Total Disabled Ages 5-64                                                    15,009               8.4%
    Sensory Disability (hearing/vision)                                      3,622               2.0%
    Cognitive Disability                                                     3,720               2.0%
    Ambulatory Disability                                                    4,095               2.3%
    Self-care Disability                                                     1,839               1.0%
    Independent Living Disability (Age 18-64)                                3,027               1.7%
    Total Disabilities for Ages 5-64                                        16,303                 N/A
Total Disabled Ages 65 and Over                                              6,440               3.6%
    Sensory Disability (hearing/vision)                                      3,229               1.8%
    Cognitive Disability                                                     1,460                .8%
    Ambulatory Disability                                                    4,158               2.3%
    Self-care Disability                                                     2,099               1.2%
    Independent Living Disability                                            2,709               1.5%
    Total Disabilities for Ages 65 and Over                                 13,655                 N/A
Total Population                                                          177,415                100%
Source: American Community Survey, 1-Year Estimates
The tables above specify the type and prevalence of disabilities of the residents of Santa
Clarita. However, any particular individual may have more than one developmental disability.
According to Section 4512 of the Welfare and Institutions Code a "Developmental Disability"
means a disability that originates before an individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be
expected to continue, indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability for that individual which
includes mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism. This term shall also include
disabling conditions found to be closely related to mental retardation or to require treatment
similar to that required for individuals with mental retardation, but shall not include other
handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.
The State Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides community based
services to approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and their families
through a statewide system of 21 regional centers, four developmental centers, and two
community-based facilities. The North Los Angeles Regional Center (NLACRC) is one of 21
regional centers in the State of California that provides point of entry to services for people with
developmental disabilities. The center, which is located in the City of Santa Clarita, is a private,
non-profit community agency that contracts with local businesses to offer a wide range of
services to individuals with developmental disabilities and their families.
NLACRC provides housing for its developmentally disabled child and adult clients (called
consumers) through contracts with residential facilities licensed by Community Care Licensing.
NLACRC serves 1,977 consumers in and around Santa Clarita, including 781 adults and 1,196
children. Approximately 1,695 are located within the City zip codes. There are eight adult
residential facilities that contract with NLACRC in Santa Clarita. Most of NLACRC’s child clients
live at home with their families.
                                              H-79                                      October 2013

Housing Element                                                 City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Table H 4.7 from the NLACRC Santa Clarita Branch, charged by the State of California with the
care of people with developmental disabilities, provides a closer look at the disabled population.
             Table H 4.7 – Individuals with Disabilities by Age and Location, 2012
Zip Code        0-14 Years       15-22          23-54         55-65          65+         TOTAL
Area                             Years          Years         Years         Years
91390                    58            30             54             26            19           187
91387                   178            51             53              2              1          285
91355                   117            52             65              4              2          240
91354                   123            50             35              3              0          211
91351                   123            55             97              6              1          282
91350                   133            62             76             12              3          286
91321                   114            32             51              4              3          204
NLACRC, Santa Clarita Branch
NLACRC does have consumers who live independently in their own apartments or in other
types of rentals. Most of these have Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefits and may also
have some work earnings. They receive services from NLACRC services to assist them to live
on their own. The SSI benefit for consumers in independent living in 2013 is $866 per month.
NLACRC notes that there are seven small, home-based community care facilities in and around
Santa Clarita which provide a supportive living environment for seniors and the developmentally
disabled.
Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently within a conventional
housing environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group living environment
where supervision is provided. The most severely affected individuals may require an
institutional environment where medical attention and physical therapy are provided. Because
developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in supportive housing for the
developmentally disabled is the transition from the person’s living situation as a child to an
appropriate level of independence as an adult.
There are a number of housing types appropriate for people living with a development disability:
rent subsidized homes, licensed and unlicensed single-family homes, inclusionary housing,
Section 8 vouchers, special programs for home purchase, HUD housing, and SB 962homes.
The design of housing-accessibility modifications, the proximity to services and transit, and the
availability of group living opportunities represent some of the types of considerations 103
developmentally disabled residents.
Incorporating ‘barrier-free’ design in all, new multifamily housing (as required by California and
Federal Fair Housing laws) is especially important to provide the widest range of choices for
disabled residents. Special consideration should also be given to the affordability of housing, as
people with disabilities may be living on a fixed income.
In order to assist in the housing needs for persons with Developmental Disabilities, the City will
implement programs to coordinate housing activities and outreach with the Regional Center
and, encourage housing providers to designate a portion of new affordable housing
developments for persons with disabilities, especially persons with developmental disabilities
(Programs H-5.4 and 5.5) .
October 2013                             H-80

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                Housing Element
Mental Illness
According to the Santa Clarita office of the Los Angeles County Department of Mental Health
(DMH), the Santa Clarita DMH office serves 1,068 mentally ill clients. Housing is an issue for
clients on Supplemental Security Income because they receive only $866 per month. Clients
who have Social Security Disability (SSDI) receive varying amounts based on what they paid
into the system, and may be eligible for a supplement. Although some DMH clients are living in
single-family homes, many clients live with family, share a rented apartment, or rent a room.
Like very low income seniors and disabled persons, mentally ill clients of DMH would benefit
from an increase in HUD Section 202 and Section 811-financed housing and an increase in the
number of Section 8 vouchers available.
Resources
Licensed facilities serving consumers of the NLACRC are described in the section on persons
with developmental disabilities. For persons who are unable to live independently, there are five
six-person facilities licensed for adult residential care listed on the Community Care Licensing
web page of the California Department of Social Services. However, according to the Santa
Clarita DMH office, there are no board and care facilities for the mentally ill in the Santa Clarita
Valley. Although there are currently no supportive housing programs in Santa Clarita, nor are
any being planned, there are several agencies, including A Community of Friends and Homes
for Life Foundation that develop supportive housing countywide for persons with chronic mental
illness; these agencies may be able to assist in developing a supportive housing project in
Santa Clarita.
Supportive Housing
While the type of services they need may be different, persons with disabilities have some
common characteristics: (1) their incomes may be low if the disability interferes with their ability
to work or to work full-time, which in turn restricts their access to housing; and (2) they may
need supportive services ranging from attendant care to case management, in order to live
independently. Such services are expensive and, for those with lower incomes, the inclusion of
such services in multi-family rental housing can be very cost-effective.
Government Code Section 50675.14 defines supportive housing as housing that has no limit on
the length of stay, is linked to onsite or offsite services, and is occupied by a target population
as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 53260. Senate Bill 2 requires zoning to treat
supportive housing as a proposed residential use, subject only to those restrictions that apply to
other residential uses of the same type in the same zone. The City has amended the UDC to
allow supportive housing in all residential zones. The amendments were adopted by the City
Council in 2009. Supportive housing programs are not subject to licensing requirements.
C.       Housing for Large Households
Needs
Low-income, large families often live in units that are too small to provide adequate room and
privacy for all family members, in order to be able to afford the rent. According to the 2000
Census, Santa Clarita had 7,476 households, including 1,962 renter households, with five or
more household members. Unlike the City of Los Angeles where most rental units have two or
                                               H-81                                   October 2013
Housing Element                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan
fewer bedrooms, Santa Clarita has an ample supply of larger rental units. In 2000 there were
3,111 rental units with three or more bedrooms.
The U.S. Census considers a housing unit overcrowded if there are between 1.01 and 1.5
persons per room. A unit is considered severely overcrowded if there are more than 1.51
persons per room. Kitchens, living rooms, and bedrooms all count as rooms, but bathrooms do
not. A two-bedroom apartment occupied by six persons would be considered overcrowded. If
occupied by seven people it would be severely overcrowded. As might be expected based on
the recent development of much of its housing stock, overcrowding is less common in Santa
Clarita than in the County as a whole. In Santa Clarita, based on the American Community
Survey 1-Year Estimates, in 2011, 10.2% of rental units were overcrowded and an additional
.9% was severely overcrowded.
Even though the City of Santa Clarita has more large units than large households, overcrowding
conditions still exist due to the gap between income and rent. According to the 2000 Census,
16.6% of 1,962 renter households with five or more household members, and 7.6% of 5,514
owner households with five or more household members, were paying 50% or more of their
income for housing costs.
There are not enough large subsidized housing units in Santa Clarita to meet the needs of
larger lower income families and seniors. The City does not have its own housing authority so
Santa Clarita residents must apply to the County of Los Angeles Housing Authority for Section 8
vouchers. Compared to the enormous need for housing assistance Countywide, the County
Housing Authority has very few vouchers and waiting lists are several years long. In addition,
median rents in Santa Clarita exceed the rent limits imposed by the Section 8 program, because
Santa Clarita’s housing costs are higher than that of Countywide.
Resources
There are 444 subsidized units for low and very low income families within the City.
D.       Housing for Farm Workers
Data on employment by industry and occupation from the 2000 Census and the 2006 American
Community Survey is provided in Tables H-3.5 and H-3.6. The 2000 data on employment by
occupation shows that only 16 people were employed in the combined fields of agriculture,
forestry, fishing, and mining. There is no way to tell from the data whether any of these 16
people was employed as a farm worker, since this occupational category could also include
agronomists, forestry experts, and similar occupations. Most of the remaining agriculture in Los
Angeles County is in the Antelope Valley. There are only four farms left in the Santa Clarita
Valley area, and no working farms within Santa Clarita’s city limits. If there are any farm workers
living in the City, they would have the same needs as other persons with similar incomes. Since
there is no population of farm workers identified as a special needs group in the City, it is
assumed for purposes of the Housing Element that the needs of any possible members of this
group have been addressed in sections of the element dealing with other residents, based on
income levels or other special needs.
October 2013                             H-82

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                             Housing Element
E.      Housing for Female-Headed Households
Needs
According to the 2006 ACS, there are 4,934 female-headed family households in Santa Clarita,
of which 2,160 households (44%) are renters. There are another 3,332 family households
headed by men with no wife present. Of these 1,999, or 60%, are owners and 40% are renters.
Median income for families with female householders is lower than that for any other type of
family. ACS table B19126 shows that female-headed families with children under age 18 have
a median income of $39,465 while single male-headed families with children have a median
income of $60,205. In Santa Clarita, with a median household income of $75,917 in 2006,
female-headed households have just over half (52%) of the overall median income.
Resources
Single Mothers Outreach (SMO) confirms that its nonprofit program provides services that
include food and clothing to about 30 women per month. SMO clients are divorced or separated
women with children whose incomes are high enough that they are not eligible for public
assistance such as Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF), yet low enough that they
do not have enough money to meet their families’ basic needs.
Families eligible for public assistance can obtain help at the Santa Clarita District Office of the
Department of Public Social Services (DPSS). Services for low income families and individuals
are also provided by the Santa Clarita Valley Service Center, a multi-service center operated by
the Los Angeles County Department of Community and Senior Citizens Services.
A network of Santa Clarita churches works with the public sector social service agencies to
provide assistance to impoverished families and individuals, as church resources permit.
There are 444 subsidized units in Santa Clarita available for low- and very-low income families,
but vacancies in these apartment buildings are rare and only 174 units have rents that are
affordable to families with 50% of median income. Another 270 have rents set at 60% of
median income. There are not enough subsidized units to meet the needs of families who are
rent-burdened.
F.      Families and Individuals in Need of Emergency and Transitional Shelter
The City of Santa Clarita is situated in the County Service Planning Area 2 (SPA2), which also
includes:
        a. The areas north along the Interstate 5 to the Kern County boundary;
        b. All of the San Fernando Valley and west on the 101 Freeway to the Ventura County
           boundary; and
        c. Burbank, Glendale, La Canada/Flintridge, San Fernando, and the areas at the foot of
           the San Gabriel Mountains.
The population of SPA 2 is estimated by the County Department of Mental Health at just over
two million. The City of Santa Clarita represents 8.8% of the SPA 2 population ($177,045).
The County of Los Angeles 2007 homeless count estimated that SPA 2 had 6,411 homeless.
Using the 8.8% figure for the proportion of SPA 2 homeless in Santa Clarita, it is estimated that
                                             H-83                                    October 2013

Housing Element                                              City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Santa Clarita may have up to 564 homeless. This is currently the only information that is
available to determine the number of homeless persons.
The Santa Clarita Community Development Corporation (SCCDC) operates a Cold Weather
Shelter in Santa Clarita during the winter months. Data provided by SCCDC shows that during
the winter of 2012-2013, shelter was provided to a total of 224 homeless persons including
members of 10 homeless families. Tables H-4.8, H-4.9 and H-4.10 provide data on the client
type, age and race or ethnicity of the people who used the winter shelter and its daytime case
management program. There were 151 single adult males and 36 single adult females during
the shelter season. Ten families with 20 children under age 18 also used the program. There
were also 25 youth ages 18 to 24. Over one-third (35.7%) were age 25 to 44 and another
24.6% were age 45 to 54. The majority (59.5%) of clients were White, 18% were Latino, and
10% were African American. There were eight clients who identified themselves as either
American Indian or Alaska Native.
In the 2011-2012 winter shelter period, the Santa Clarita Emergency Winter Shelter housed 254
persons, including 19 families with 32 children.
The 2012-2013 winter shelter period saw an decrease in the number of persons utilizing the
Santa Clarita Emergency Winter Shelter from the previous year.
           Table H-4.8: Number of Homeless Clients in 2012-2013 Winter Shelter
                          Client Type                 Shelter Number
                          Single Adult Males                       151
                          Single Adult Females                       36
                          Families                                   10
                          Adult Family members                       17
                          Child Family members                       20
                          Unduplicated Total                       224
          Source: Santa Clarita Community Development Corporation
              Table H-4.9: Age of Homeless Clients in 2012-2013 Winter Shelter
           Age                                       Number            Percent
           Children 17 and under                                  20               9.7
           Youth 18 to 24                                         25              12.0
           25-44                                                  74              35.7
           45-54                                                  51              24.6
           55-61                                                  29              14.0
           62 +                                                    8               3.9
           Total                                                207
          Source: Santa Clarita Community Development Corporation
October 2013                            H-84
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                Housing Element
        Table H-4.10: Race/Ethnicity of Homeless Clients in 2012-2013 Winter Shelter
              Race/Ethnicity                          Number            Percent
              American Indian or Alaska Native                       8               3.7
              Asian                                                  0                 0
              Black or African American                            21              10.3
              Native Hawaiian or other Pacific
                                                                     0                 0
              Islander
              Latino or Hispanic                                   39              18.0
              White                                               149              68.7
              Total (children not included)                       217
             Source: Santa Clarita Community Development Corporation
There is no emergency shelter in the City of Santa Clarita that is open 12 months a year.
During the winter months (December through March 15), the Santa Clarita Community
Development Corporation operates a Cold Weather Shelter funded by the Los Angeles
Homeless Services Authority (LAHSA) on a site approved only for temporary use. In an
agreement with the City of Santa Clarita, the site must be rotated every three years to a different
location. Currently, there are no known transitional or supportive housing units for either
individuals or families in the City limits.
On April 28, 2009, the City of Santa Clarita adopted an ordinance that allows transitional and
supportive housing in all residential zones. In approving this ordinance, the City of Santa Clarita
identified three areas where homeless shelters would be permitted by right. The three areas
include the Valencia Industrial Center, Rye Canyon Business Park, and areas of the Centre
Pointe Business Park. These three areas comprise approximately 416 acres within the City and
are located in primarily developed areas. These areas are primarily built-out with industrial and
commercial uses with approximately 20% of the area vacant. There are existing hotels,
schools, and government buildings in the project area with residential uses and residentially
zoned lands adjacent. The lot size ranges from under a half an acre to over 25 acres in size.
The methodology for selecting these areas is as follows:
        The identified area is supported by resources such as public transit, trails, and proximity
         to major employment centers;
        They are located along major corridors in the City allowing for easy access for patrons;
        The areas allow for commercial developments that could easily accommodate the
         building and lot size required for a homeless shelter with an FAR of 1:1; and
        The location is not adjacent to residences and schools.
                                                H-85                                   October 2013

Housing Element                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Resources and Solutions
The SCCDC Emergency Winter Shelter operates from about December 1 to March 15 each
year. The Emergency Winter Shelter provides overnight shelter, food, clothing, medical and
mental health services as well as other assistance and referrals. The shelter is not open during
the day. Daytime case management for shelter residents and for homeless families is provided
through a contract with another service provider at Bethlehem Church. Families who comply
with case management objectives can receive motel vouchers for up to one month.
In 2008, Lutheran Social Services, which has an office in Canyon Country, will also provide
motel vouchers for homeless families in Santa Clarita. This effort will supplement services
provided at the Emergency Winter Shelter, which is open only between December and March
and is not open during the day. The voucher provides up to 90 days of shelter. Lutheran Social
Services will provide vouchers for up to 90 days of shelter for to up to five families per month; if
each family uses the vouchers for the maximum of 90 days, the vouchers will assist 20 families
per year.
Eviction Prevention Services
Lutheran Social Services operates an eviction prevention program, providing one-time
payments to assist with housing costs in order to help families wish short-term cash-flow
problems stay in their homes. Moving costs can also be provided under this program for
households who need to move to a lower-cost apartment.
DPSS Homeless Assistance Program
The Department of Public Social Services continues to provide one-time homeless assistance to
families eligible for CalWorks. Covered expenses include up to 16 days in a motel and move-in
costs for permanent rental housing. Funds are also available to prevent eviction by paying two
months of overdue rent or mortgage payments
October 2013                           H-86
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                              Housing Element
V.      PROJECTED HOUSING NEEDS AND SUITABLE SITES
A.      Regional Housing Needs Assessment
Future Housing Needs
California housing element law requires regional Councils of Governments (COGs) throughout
the State to periodically make projections of anticipated growth in employment and population
within the area they serve. Based on this projection, the COGs calculate a fair share of the
need for new housing in each jurisdiction of their member counties. The projected housing
needs generated from this process are known as the Regional Housing Needs Assessment
(RHNA). Each city or county in a COG planning region must ensure that its housing element is
consistent with the RHNA prepared by that COG, and must identify sufficient land in the General
Plan land use element, appropriately zoned, to accommodate the housing growth estimated by
the RHNA.
The City of Santa Clarita is located within the COG planning area of the Southern California
Association of Governments (SCAG), which includes the counties of Ventura, Los Angeles, San
Bernardino, Riverside, Orange, and Imperial. In 2012, SCAG calculated the Regional Housing
Needs Assessment, (RHNA) for its six-county region, assigning a portion of future housing units
at four income levels to each city and county in the planning region, including the City of Santa
Clarita. Like other cities in the SCAG region, Santa Clarita must identify sufficient land,
appropriately zoned, to accommodate the housing growth within the City as estimated by
SCAG.
For the housing element planning period between October 2013 to September 2021, SCAG has
estimated the number of new housing units needed in Santa Clarita to meet its fair share of the
region’s housing needs, through the RHNA process, as shown on Table H-5.1. These
estimates include not only the total number of new units needed (8,322), but a breakdown by
income level for very low, low, moderate, and above moderate households.
California Housing Element Law Section 65583 a (1) also requires the jurisdiction to estimate
the future needs of extremely low income households. This number may either be estimated
from census data or the jurisdiction may presume that 50% of its allocation of very low income
households will qualify as extremely low income., The City of Santa Clarita will presume that the
estimated need for very low income units will include 1,104 units (50% of very low income units)
affordable to extremely low income households.
                                            H-87                                    October 2013

Housing Element                                                 City of Santa Clarita General Plan
  Table H-5.1: Santa Clarita Housing Needs Regional Housing Needs Assessment, 2013-
                                                2021
    Income Level                                 Number of Units       Percent
    Very Low (50% or less of median)                          2,208                       26.5%
    Low (51% to 80% of median)                                1,315                       15.8%
    Moderate (80% to 120% of median)                          1,410                       16.9%
    Above Moderate (>120% of median)                          3,389                       40.7%
    Total                                                     8,322                        100%
   Source: Southern California Association of Governments
Area median income in Los Angeles County in 2008 has been determined by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Community Development (HUD) to be $61,900. According to
guidelines published annually by HUD, an extremely low income family of four in the Los
Angeles Metropolitan Statistical Area earns $24,850 or less, a very low income family of four is
one that earns no more than $41,400, while a low-income family of the same size earns up to
$66,250.
During the previous housing element period (1998 to 2005), an additional 828 units were
constructed within the City limits. Between 2006 and 2012, new construction in Santa Clarita
met 9% of the City’s RHNA allocation.
The 2007-08 economic down-turns have substantially slowed new housing construction within
the City. Many housing developers have put a hold on construction of approved subdivisions.
Although home sales have recovered somewhat in Southern California during the last year
(Data Quick News reported a 13.8% gain in sales during August 2008 over the same time last
year), home prices have not rebounded, and sales within Los Angeles County were down by
3.2%. With housing prices flat or falling, the cost of construction rising, and tightening
restrictions on lending, several local homebuilders have indicated to staff that new housing
construction may be delayed through 2010 and beyond.
However, since the City does not produce new housing units itself, but can only establish
suitable zoning and facilitate the permitting process for builders, actual housing production is a
function of market factors beyond the City’s control. For planning purposes, the City’s efforts to
ensure that adequate sites are zoned for production of housing to meet the RHNA numbers and
its good faith efforts to identify and remove constraints on housing development, are sufficient to
meet State requirements.
B.       Adequate Sites Analysis
State Requirements for Adequate Sites
California Government Code Section 65883(a)(3) requires that housing elements include an
inventory of land suitable for residential development, including vacant sites and sites having
the potential for redevelopment, and an analysis of the zoning and infrastructure available to
serve these sites. This inventory is used to identify sites that can be feasibly developed for
housing within the planning period in order to meet the Regional Housing Needs Allocation
October 2013                              H-88

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                              Housing Element
(RHNA). This section of the Housing Element contains the required inventory of adequate sites
for new housing that can be developed to meet the City’s housing needs within the planning
period.
Available Land Inventory for Housing within the City of Santa Clarita
In evaluating sites suitable for new housing units, potential development constraints such as
slopes, ridgelines, fault and flood hazards, environmental resources, access, availability of
infrastructure, and other property characteristics were evaluated to ensure that each site can
feasibly support the number of potential dwelling units allocated to it. Housing sites were also
evaluated based on proximity to public transit and support services for residents, such as
neighborhood commercial uses, schools, and parks. Potential residential sites include vacant
and underutilized land that is currently zoned for residential or mixed uses, and land within
pending specific plans that will be designated for residential uses. The sites identified for new
housing are shown on Exhibit H-5.1; they include 24 separate areas which are labeled by
number. A brief description of each site suitable for future housing development is provided
below:
It should be noted that based upon information contained in the various elements of the General
Plan and associated Environmental Impact Report, adequate capacity exists for both domestic
water and sewage services during the program years of this Element.
Additional information and attributes regarding each of the described parcels, including an aerial
photograph for each site, is contained in the appendix for this element.
                                             H-89                                   October 2013

Housing Element      City of Santa Clarita General Plan
October 2013    H-90
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                  Housing Element
Housing Site 1 is located in the community of Valencia, on the south side of Magic Mountain
Parkway west of Citrus Street, and contains 28.2 acres. Based on the OVOV land use map
designation of Regional Commercial (RC) (18-50 units/acre) and the inclusion of the density
bonus, a total of 1,760 units could be built on the project site. A realistic estimate of units to be
built on Site 1 is 450 units. The current zoning of Regional Commercial allows for multi-family
dwellings at a density up to 50 units/acre.
         Assessor Parcel Numbers: 2861-058-058, 2861-059-038, 2861-059-037, 2861-059-039,
         2861-059-042, 2861-059-045, 2861-058-014, 2861-058-049, 2861-058-050, 2861-058-
         051, 2861-058-052, 2861-058-053, 2861-058-054, 2861-058-055, 2861-058-056
The site is currently vacant and occupied by a parking lot for the existing shopping mall. This
area is not utilized for parking of the existing regional mall. Major portions of the site are
currently used for temporary uses such as carnivals, construction staging for materials,
recreational vehicle show and off-site parking for various uses. In addition, the property owner
has presented conceptual plans to the City highlighting residential uses in this location. The site
is currently under a single ownership. In addition, there is currently existing residential and
mixed use developments in the general area with densities over 40 units per acre including the
Madison mixed use project. As an infill site, all infrastructure is available to the property and the
site is readily developable. The site is suitable for very low and low-income units. Facilities in
this area include the McBean Transfer Station, a pedestrian paseo system, and the City of
Santa Clarita and County of Los Angeles Civic Center. The City of Santa Clarita and Los
Angeles County are in discussions regarding developing a strategic plan for this area that would
include upgrading City and County facilities and providing provisions for housing opportunities in
the area.
Housing Site 2 is located on the north side of the City in Bouquet Canyon, and contains one
vacant 36.3-acre parcel on the west side of Bouquet Canyon Road, south of Copper Hill Drive.
The Urban Residential 5 (UR-5) General Plan designation allows 18-30 units/acre. This
classification along with the density bonus allowances would allow for up to 1,360 units.
However, based on the site’s topography, floodway and other constraints, an estimated 300
units may be reasonably accommodated on the property. The current zoning is Urban
Residential 5, which allows up to 30 units per acre.
         Assessor Parcel Number: 2812-008-022, 2812-008-008
The site is currently vacant and under a single ownership. The site contains one house that is
approximately 50 years old that could easily be accommodated within the development of the
site. The area around the project site is located in an area that has seen minimal development
as it was built prior to the City’s incorporation in 1987. However, in the areas to the east and
south, there are existing group quarters and multi-family development with over 20 units per
acre. In addition, there are existing approvals in the general area for additional multi-family
units exceeding this density. All needed infrastructure is available to the property and the
majority of the site is readily developable. The site is suitable for very low and low-income units.
Discussions for developing the site have occurred with the property owners over the last
decade.
                                               H-91                                     October 2013

Housing Element                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Housing Site 3 is located in the community of Canyon Country, generally southwest of the
western terminus of Via Princessa. This vacant site contains 66.8 acres, with a General Plan
designation of Urban Residental-5 (UR-5) (18-30 units/acre). The General Plan would allow
approximately 2,500 units with the density bonus provisions. The site has hillside topography
and lacks urban infrastructure. The General Plan calls for Via Princessa to be extended to
facilitate development of this property and the City has certified an EIR for this roadway
extension and is currently seeking funding for the project. Based on site conditions, it is
estimated that a maximum of 700 units may be accommodated on Site 3, which may include
very low and low-income units. The current zoning is Urban Residential 5, which allows up to
30 units per acre.
         Assessor Parcel Numbers: 2836-014-057, 2836-014-056
This vacant site is under the ownership of two entities at this time. It is located adjacent to the
City’s sports complex and a high school and there are attached and detached condominiums in
proximity to the site. However, both properties are dependent on each other for infrastructure
improvements to build the project. Both property owners have previously contacted the City
regarding development of the site.
Housing Site 4 is located on the south side of Golden Valley Road, approximately one mile west
of Sierra Highway. This vacant 58.4-acre site is designated Urban Residential-5 (UR-5) (18-30
units/acre). Under the General Plan and with density bonuses, the project site would allow
approximately 2,200 units. The property contains hillsides and existing oil wells which will affect
ultimate residential density. It is estimated that up to 850 units may be built on the site. All
urban infrastructure needed to support development is available to the property, and the site is
suitable for very low and low income units. The current zoning is Urban Residential-5 (UR-5),
which allows up to 30 units per acre, with an overlay of MOCA – Mineral and Oil Conservation
Area.
         Assessor Parcel Numbers: 2836-013-135, 2836-013-173, 2836-013-911, 2836-013-912,
Currently, there are only a limited number of extracting oil wells and they are focused on the
west side, therefore there is enough space to fit the units in without too much disruption to the
wells. A number of the existing wells are injector wells (basically injecting steam or water into
the ground to loosen up the remaining oil deposits) which are not as much of a nuisance as the
extraction wells. There are a number of the wells being abandoned by the State in the area.
This site is currently owned by a non-profit agency that acquires properties for a local school
district. This property is excess land from a high school which is located adjacent to the site.
The property owners have spoken to the City about the possibility of utilizing the site for the
placement of workforce housing that would be affordable, especially to entry-level instructors.
The agency requested that the U-5 land use category be placed on this site.
October 2013                             H-92

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                               Housing Element
Housing Site 5 is located in the northeastern portion of the City, east of Sierra Highway and
north of Soledad Canyon Road. This primarily vacant 26.1-acre site is designated Urban
Residential-5 (UR-5) (18-30 units/acre). The General Plan, with density bonus provisions,
would allow over 750 units. Based on hillside topography, it is estimated that the site could
accommodate a maximum of 200 units, including very-low and low-income units. Infrastructure
is available to support development of the site. The current zoning is Urban Residential-5 (UR-
5) (30 units/acre).
         Assessor Parcel Numbers: 2839-020-001, 2839-020-002, 2939-020-003, 2839-020-004,
         2839-020-005, 2839-020-008, 2839-020-009, 2839-020-010, 2839-020-011, 2839-020-
         012, 2839-021-006, 2839-020-006, 2839-020-007, 2839-020-005, 2839-021-009, 2839-
         020-004, 2839-020-003, 2839-021-010, 2839-021-016, 2839-021-018
These vacant parcels are located in an area that would be ready for development since sewer
facilities were recently brought to the area. There are existing attached housing units adjacent
to the site with densities that allow for these types of housing opportunities. The area has been
identified as a possible candidate for the use of CDBG funds to pay for additional infrastructure
improvements. An entitlement was previously filed on a portion of the site.
Housing Site 6 is located on the south side of Soledad Canyon Road, approximately one mile
east of Bouquet Canyon Road. This underutilized 35.1-acre site is designated Mixed Use-
Corridor (MX-C) (18-30 units/acre). The General Plan with inclusion of the density bonus
provisions would allow over 1,300 residential units on the site. The property contains an idled
auto speedway and is primarily flat. The site is adjacent to a Metrolink commuter rail station. It
is estimated that up to 450 units may realistically be built on the site. All urban infrastructure
needed to support development is available to the property, and the site is suitable for very-low
and low-income units. The current zoning is Mixed Use-Corridor (MX-C) (18-30 units/acre).
         Assessor Parcel Numbers: 2836-011-018
This single ownership site is adjacent to the Metrolink station and major transportation route and
is only used on a limited basis. The representatives for the land, which is long-time family
owned, have been in contact with the City of Santa Clarita discussing the possibility of
development in the future. The location has all of the attributes for development of residential
units.
Housing Site 7 is located on the southwest intersection of Bouquet Canyon Road and Valencia
Boulevard. This existing 27.4-acre site is designated Mixed Use-Corridor (MX-C) (18-30
units/acre). The General Plan, with the inclusion of the density bonus, would allow over 1,025
units on the project site. The property is currently flat and contains existing commercial
development including a nursery. The site is traversed by an earthquake fault and regional
water transmission line which will affect ultimate residential density. It is estimated that up to
250 units may be built on the site. All urban infrastructure needed to support development is
available to the property, and the site is suitable for very-low and low-income units. The current
zoning is Mixed Use-Corridor (MX-C) (18-30 units/acre).
         Assessor Parcel Numbers: 2811-002-014, 2811-002-069, 2811-002-272, 2811-002-274,
         2811-002-276
The site could support residential units while maintaining the majority of the existing commercial
development. One of the principal property owners has contacted the City regarding the
                                               H-93                                   October 2013
Housing Element                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan
redevelopment of the site as a mixed-use project. The site is located near the Metrolink station
and other transit and transportation routes.
Housing Site 8 is located on the south side of Lyons Avenue, approximately two miles east of
Interstate 5. This 11.6-acre site is designated Mixed Use-Corridor (MX-C) (18-30 units/acre).
According to the new General Plan, 435 units, using the density bonus provisions, are allowed
on the project site. The property contains an existing shopping center and bowling alley. A large
portion of the site is occupied with a defunct movie theatre that is still occasionally used for
assembly uses. It is estimated that up to 150 units may realistically be built on the site. All
urban infrastructure needed to support development is available to the property, and the site is
suitable for very-low and low-income units. The current zoning is Corridor Plan (18-30
units/acre).
        Assessor Parcel Numbers: 2829-007-048, 2830-001-015, 2830-001-025, 2830-001-027,
        2830-001-029, 2830-001-036, 830-001-037, 2830-001-038, 2830-001-039, 2830-001-
        041, 2830-001-042, 2830-001-043, 2830-001-051, 2830-001-208, 2830-001-209, 2830-
        001-214.
The commercial project site would lend itself to mixed-use development. The site is located
adjacent to a City park, elementary school and other services. Adjacent to the site on two sides
are higher density condominium projects. The site is currently able to accommodate multiple
pedestrian and vehicular access points. The existing facilities were part of the first major
commercial center in the General Plan area and is toward the end of the building’s useful life
cycle.
Housing Site 9 is located on the north side of Soledad Canyon Road, approximately one mile
west of Sierra Highway. The 5.4-acre site is currently developed with various retail uses in a
strip commercial configuration. The site is designated Mixed Use-Corridor (MX-C) (18-30
units/acre). The General Plan would allow over 200 units with the density bonus provisions
allowed by the State. It is estimated that up to 75 units may be realistically built on the site. All
urban infrastructure needed to support development is available to the property, and the site is
suitable for very-low and low-income units. The current zoning is Mixed Use-Corridor (MX-C)
(18-30 units/acre).
        Assessor Parcel Numbers: 2803-032-001, 2803-032-025, 2803-032-034, 2803-032-35,
        2803-032-042, 2803-032-043.
Given that the frontage of the site is on a major roadway corridor and the fact that there is over
60% percent of the building square footage is vacant, a mixed-use development would be a
logical choice on this location. The project is located on a major transportation corridor and is
adjacent to commercial, medical and entertainment services. The project site is in close
proximity to a new community college campus and this site would be a logical location for
student and staff housing alternatives. In addition, the high voltage electrical transmission lines
along the frontage of the site were recently placed underground. The City has identified this
corridor for revitalization.
Housing Site 10 is located on the south side of Lyons Avenue, adjacent to Interstate 5. This
3.9-acre site is designated Mixed Use-Corridor (MX-C) (18-30 units/acre). The property
contains an isolated commercial shopping center with limited access. The General Plan would
allow approximately 150 units to be built on the site. It is estimated that up to 90 units may be
October 2013                            H-94

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                 Housing Element
built on the site. All urban infrastructure needed to support development is available to the
property, and the site is suitable for very-low and low-income units. The zoning is Corridor Plan
CCP) (18-30 units/acre).
        Assessor Parcel Numbers: 2825-015-015
Due to the lack of highway frontage, proximity to Interstate 5 and single ownership, the site is an
excellent candidate to support residential units with a mixed use component. The site has a
number of vacant units and its sitting limits the amount of long term tenants. In addition, the site
lends itself to residential uses based upon its close proximity to a major freeway corridor, it is
set back from the road network and the built environment surrounding the site.
Housing Site 11 is located on both the north and south side of Soledad Canyon Road, east of
the intersection of Sierra Highway. The site is 29.4-acre and contains a number of older and
vacant commercial uses in addition to an existing small mobile home park. The site is
designated Mixed Use-Corridor (MX-C) (18-30 units/acre). The General Plan would allow over
1,100 residential units to be built on the properties. The property contains a floodway which will
affect ultimate residential density. It is estimated that up to 275 units may be realistically built on
the site. All urban infrastructure needed to support development is available to the property,
and the site is suitable for very-low and low-income units. The current zoning is Mixed Use-
Corridor (MX-C) (18-30 units/acre).
        Assessor Parcel Numbers: 2844-003-005, 2844-003-004, 2844-003-006, 2844-003-006,
        2844-003-009, 2844-003-003, 2844-003-902, 2844-005-028, 2844-005-020, 2844-005-
        016, 2844-001-056, 2844-001-056, 2844-001-024, 2844-001-026, 2844-001-804, 2844-
        001-038, 2844-001-063, 2844-001-046, 2844-001-072, 2844-001-068, 2844-001-033,
        2844-001-032
This site has multiple property owners, however, the City of Santa Clarita has facilitated a series
of meetings with these property owners to possibly combine the properties into one master plan
area. Once the housing market rebounds, the project should move forward. The plan would
focus on mixed use and could contain income-restricted uses.
Housing Site 12 is located on the north side of Newhall Avenue, approximately two miles west
of Sierra Highway. This site is designated Community Commercial (CC) with a Mixed Use-
Overlay (minimum 18 units/acre). The general plan would allow 138 units to be built on the site
with the allowable density bonus provisions. The 3.7-acre property contains oak trees with an
existing commercial center, park-and-ride lot and vacant land which will affect ultimate
residential density. It is estimated that up to 65 units may be built on the site. All urban
infrastructure needed to support development is available to the property, and the site is
suitable for very-low and low-income units. The current zoning is Community Commercial (CC)
with a Mixed Use Overlay (MU) which requires a minimum of 18 units per acre.
Assessor Parcel Numbers: 2833-016-037, 2833-016-044, 2833-016-900.
The project was divided into two phases for the site. The first phase, a 1.62-acre former
Caltrans park and ride lot, was approved for development of 30 very-low to low income units by
the Planning Commission in July of 2011. Initially funding was to be from Redevelopment
Agency funds, but with the demise of Redevelopment, the project is on hold until additional
funding could be found. The rest of the project site is partially owned by the City and an
additional 31 very-low to low income units could be built once additional funding is secured.
                                                H-95                                   October 2013
Housing Element                                                  City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Housing Site 13 is located on Centre Pointe Parkway, south of Soledad Canyon Road. The
22.8-acre site is approved for 87 single family homes. The nonprofit applicant, Habitat for
Humanity, is building the project for veterans and the units will meet the criteria for very-low and
low as part of the federal loan requirements. Construction is expected to begin in late 2014.
Tentative Tract 070239
Housing Site 14 is located in Canyon Country, generally north of the Santa Clara River at the
future Newhall Ranch Road. The site is vacant and consists of 263.71 acres. Designated as
Urban Residential-3 (6-11 du/ac) on the Land Use Map, the site can accommodate
approximately 500 units based on its hillside topography. A development entitlement has been
approved on this property allowing 380 multi-family units and 119 single-family units. These
multi-family units are proposed to be sold at the moderate range, although they are not
restricted by covenant to remain affordable. All urban infrastructures are available to support
residential development. The current zoning of Urban Residential-3 (UR3) (11 units/acre) allows
for the approved development.
         Tentative Tract 60258
Housing Site 15 is located north of the Santa Clara River, extending between Bouquet Canyon
Road and future Golden Valley Road, and includes 698.4 acres designated as Urban
Residential-3 (6-11 units/acre). This site was previously subdivided and is approved for 657
multi-family residential and 439 single-family residential homes, of which 290 single family
residential units have been built. The site is served with all infrastructure capacity to support the
approved housing project. Environmental constraints on the site, which include hillsides,
riparian areas near the river, archeological resources, and oak tree woodlands, have been
mitigated pursuant to an approved environmental document. Some housing units in Site 15 are
expected to be priced at the range of moderate-income households, although no units have
been restricted by covenant to remain affordable. The current zoning is Urban Residential-3
(UR-3), which allows up to 11 units per acre.
         Tentative Tract 53425
Housing Site 16 consists of approximately 1,000 acres and is designated as Specific Plan on
the Land Use Map. The site, known as Whittaker-Bermite, generally extends south of Soledad
Canyon Road between Golden Valley Road and Railroad Avenue, and is currently vacant. The
site was historically used as munitions manufacturing facility and ceased operations in the mid-
1980’s. Since that time, clean-up has been occurring under the review of DTSC. Portions of
the site have already been deemed cleaned. Remediation continues on other portions of the
site. It is envisioned that construction could begin on the site in the next 3-4 years. A specific
plan (the Porta Bella Specific Plan) has been approved for the site which allows a maximum of
2,911 dwelling units. The presence of hillsides, oak trees and other environmental factors were
considered in the environmental document prepared for that project. Housing units in Site 16
are expected to be priced at the range of moderate-income households, although no units have
been restricted by covenant to remain affordable. Urban infrastructure will need to be extended
to this site to support future residential development. It is envisioned that the existing plan will
be revised to possibly allow for additional units. With this revision, it is expected that additional
units will be requested including allowances for approximately 350 low and very-low units. The
current zoning is Specific Plan to reflect the adopted Porta Bella Specific Plan.
         Tentative Tract 51599
October 2013                             H-96

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                               Housing Element
Housing Site 17 is located between State Route 14 and Sand Canyon and north of the Union
Pacific railroad lines. The site consists of 185 acres and is included in the Vista Canyon
Specific Plan. The general plan and zoning designation for the site is Specific Plan (SP). The
project site is approved for 1,091 residential units with a combination of low, moderate and
market rate housing types. The project is proposing to construct a Metrolink commuter rail
station on the project site and thereby creating a transit friendly project. No additional land use
entitlements are required from the City for this development.
        Tentative Tract 69164
Housing Site 18 consists of 4.2 acres located on the north side of Golden Valley Road, west of
Sierra Highway. The property is designated as Mixed Use-Neighborhood (MX-N) on the Land
Use Map (6-18 units/acre). The site is currently vacant and all urban infrastructure is available
to serve future residential development. No site constraints were identified. Nine single-family
homes have been approved on this site, available to market-rate buyers. The current zoning is
Mixed Use-Neighborhood (MX-N) (18 units/acre), and no zone change is required for
development.
        Tentative Tract 67374
Housing Site 19 consists of 5.14 acres designated as Urban Residential-3 (6-11 units/acre) on
the land use map. The site is located on the west side of Sierra Highway, north of Golden
Valley Road, and has been approved for construction of 111 multi-family dwellings, of which 12
units were constructed prior to this update. All infrastructure has been provided to the site and
constraints were addressed during project design. The site is currently zoned Urban
Reseidentail-3 (11 units/acre) and no zone change is required. These units will meet RHNA
requirements for moderate units.
        Tract 53419
Housing Site 20 contains approximately 300 acres designated as Urban Residential-2 (5
units/acre) on the land use map. The site contains hillsides and oak trees which affect potential
residential density. The Site is located adjacent to Golden Valley Road at its intersection with
Via Princessa. The site has been approved for 498 single-family dwellings, including 94 units
for a senior citizen community. These units have not yet been constructed; however, a school
has been constructed as part of the approved development project that will support the eventual
construction of these homes. Housing units in Site 20 are expected to be priced at the range of
moderate to market-rate households, although no units have been restricted by covenant to
remain affordable. All urban infrastructures are in place to support future residential
development. Current zoning is Urban Residential 2(5 units/acre), and no zone change is
required.
        Tract 52414
Housing Site 21 contains approximately 500 acres designated as Specific Plan. This area is
located in Downtown Newhall, generally adjacent to Main Street, Railroad Avenue and Lyons
Avenue. Site 15 contains the Downtown Newhall Specific Plan, which was adopted by the City
in 2006, and will accommodate up to 712 additional dwelling units, including both single and
multi-family. This plan allows mixed-use development in proximity to a Metrolink rail station,
and the site is therefore suitable for all income levels. Residential units at a density up to 30
                                               H-97                                   October 2013
Housing Element                                                 City of Santa Clarita General Plan
units per acre are expected to be developed in the specific plan area, pursuant to the form-
based zoning allowed by the plan.
        Street Boundaries – Bounded by 13th Street to the north, Newhall Avenue to the west,
        Race Street to east and Newhall Avenue to the south, including portions of Pine Street.
        A full description for each Assessor’s parcel in this area is contained in the Appendix for
        this element.
It is envisioned that transit-oriented development would occur in the area surrounding the rail
station. The City is also speaking to property owners in the area regarding partnerships to
develop housing as part of mixed-use development. Lastly, there are a number of vacant and
underutilized parcels that would support additional residential units.
Housing Site 22 is located between Sites 6 and 15, and consists of approximately 33 acres on
the south side of the Santa Clara River, west of Golden Oak Road. The site is designated as
Urban Residential-5 (UR-5) on the land use map (18-30 units/acre). A subdivision map has
been approved on this site which allows 319 residential units, which have not yet been
constructed. The homes in Site 22 are intended for above-moderate income levels. The site is
zoned Urban Residential 5(30 units/acre), and no zone change is required for development.
        Tentative Tract 62322
Housing Site 23 is located in Canyon Country, south of the Santa Clara River and extending
from Oak Spring Canyon Road to the eastern City limits. This 193-acre site is designated Non-
Urban-5 (1 unit/acre) and Urban Residential-1 (2 units/acre) on the land use map. An
entitlement has been approved for 99 single-family residential homes, which are anticipated to
be constructed during the planning period. The site contains numerous oak trees and is
adjacent to the Santa Clara River. All infrastructure was installed during development of the
subdivision, and environmental constraints were addressed in environmental document and
project design. These homes will be available to market-rate buyers. The site is zoned Non-
Urban 5 (1 unit/acre) and Urban Residential 1 (2units/acre) and no zone change is required.
        Tentative Tract 63002
Housing Site 24 is located south of Soledad Canyon Road and west of Camp Plenty Road and
consists of 18.6 acres, designated as Urban Residential-3 (11 units/acre). This site has been
approved for 147 single-family units and is currently vacant, as construction has not
commenced. All urban infrastructure is available to support residential development on the site.
Homes on this site are expected to be priced for moderate-income households, although no
homes are proposed to be restricted by covenant for affordability. The site is zoned Urban
Residential 3 (11 units/acre) and no zone change is required.
        Tentative Tract 62343
Zoning for Suitable Sites
As set forth in the above descriptions of the suitable sites, all of the sites are currently zoned to
allow development of proposed or approved units within their boundaries, and have the
appropriate General Plan land use designation for each of these sites. . Less than 50% of the
October 2013                            H-98

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                            Housing Element
Low and Very-Low units are contained within areas not designated as UR-5 (30 units per acre)
residential uses only.
Suitable Sites Summary
Based on the above analysis of suitable sites for new housing, it is estimated that over 11,155
new dwelling units may be accommodated by the General Plan Land Use Map, which will be
sufficient to meet the RHNA requirement for 8,322 units during the planning period. In addition,
suitable sites have been identified for households of various income levels, as summarized
below:
       Number of sites available for very low and low income households (at 30 du/acre or
        more): 4,511
       Number of sites available for moderate-income households: 3,430
       Number of sites available for market rate and unrestricted income households: 3,214
                                            H-99                                  October 2013

Housing Element                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan
VI.      GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING PRODUCTION
Among the options available to cities to promote housing affordability is the authority to facilitate
construction of new dwellings by removing the constraints imposed by local government. Such
constraints may include processing requirements for development applications, design and
development standards, density limitations, fees and exactions, and the time and uncertainty
associated with obtaining construction permits. State law requires each city undertaking a
Housing Element to analyze the governmental constraints imposed on new development that
may result in making housing unavailable or unaffordable. If any such constraints are identified
that curtail the production of affordable housing and are not necessary to protect public health,
safety and welfare, then the element should evaluate alternative measures that will allow
housing to be built to serve the community’s needs. The purpose of this section of the Housing
Element is to review the governmental constraints applied to various types of housing in the City
of Santa Clarita, and to identify any constraints that may reasonably be modified or removed in
order to promote housing development and affordability.
A.       Land Use Controls – General Plan
Land uses allowed within the City are determined by the General Plan Land Use Map and the
Unified Development Code (UDC). The General Plan contains many principles that are
collectively known as smart growth, including transit-oriented development, walkable
neighborhoods with access to services, non-motorized mobility options, promotion of balanced
jobs and housing, live-work units, and mixed-use development. A summary table of land use
districts that allow residential development is contained in Table H-6.1.
October 2013                             H-100

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                               Housing Element
          Table H-6.1: General Plan Land Use Districts Allowing Residential Uses
      Land Use District            Density*         Type of Residential Development Allowed
Non-Urban 1 (NU 1)                               Single-family homes in low density, rural
                               1 du/20 acres
                                                 environment.
Non-Urban 2 (NU 2)                               Single-family homes in low density, rural
                               1 du/10 acres
                                                 environment.
Non-Urban 3 (NU 3)                               Single-family homes in low density, rural
                               1 du/5 acres
                                                 environment.
Non-Urban 4 (NU 4)                               Single-family homes in low density, rural
                               1 du/2 acres
                                                 environment.
Non-Urban 5 (NU 5)                               Single-family homes in low density, rural
                               1 du/acre
                                                 environment.
                                                 Single-family homes on large lots, at interface
Urban Residential 1 (UR 1)                       between rural and urban areas. Clustering of
                               2 du/acre         units encouraged to preserve natural features
                                                 and open space. Supportive commercial and
                                                 institutional uses allowed per zoning.
                                                 Single-family homes in neighborhoods of
                                                 medium       density    typical   of   suburban
Urban Residential 2 (UR 2)                       development patterns. Clustering of units
                               5 du/acre
                                                 encouraged to preserve natural features and
                                                 open space.        Supportive commercial and
                                                 institutional uses allowed per zoning.
                                                 Single-family homes, duplexes, triplexes and
                                                 small-scale multi-family dwellings consistent
Urban Residential 3 (UR 3)
                               6 – 11 du/acre    with a predominantly single-family residential
                                                 neighborhood. Supportive commercial and
                                                 institutional uses allowed per zoning.
                                                 Single-family detached and attached homes,
Urban Residential 4 (UR 4)                       and      multi-family   dwellings.   Supportive
                               9 – 18 du/acre
                                                 commercial and institutional uses allowed per
                                                 zoning.
                                                 Multi-family dwellings including apartment and
Urban Residential 5 (UR 5)                       condominiums up to 3 stories. Supportive
                               18 – 30 du/acre
                                                 commercial and institutional uses allowed per
                                                 zoning.
                                                 Multi-family dwellings in combination with
Mixed Use Neighborhood                           commercial and office uses along major
                               6 – 18 du/acre
(MXN)                                            arterial corridors, subject to Conditional Use
                                                 Permit.
                                                 Multi-family dwellings in combination with
                                                 commercial and office uses along major
Mixed Use Corridor (MXC)       11-30 du/acre
                                                 arterial corridors, subject to Conditional Use
                                                 Permit.
                                                 Multi-family dwellings within transit-oriented
Mixed Use Urban Village
                                                 urban      centers,    in    combination    with
(MXUV)                         19-50 du/acre
                                                 commercial, office, and public uses, subject to
                                                 master plan approval.
Regional Commercial (CR)       18-50 du/acre     Housing may be approved in the context of a
                                           H-101                                     October 2013

Housing Element                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan
      Land Use District             Density*         Type of Residential Development Allowed
                                                  mixed use project, subject to discretionary
                                                  review (conditional use permit or master plan)
                                                  Housing may be approved in the context of a
 Community       Commercial
                                11-30 du/acre     mixed use project, subject to discretionary
 (CC)
                                                  review (conditional use permit or master plan)
                                                  Housing may be approved in the context of a
 Neighborhood Commercial
                                6-18 du/acre      mixed use project, subject to discretionary
 (CN)
                                                  review (conditional use permit or master plan)
*Density is shown as the number of dwelling units per gross acre.
With regard to the densities shown for each district in Table H-6.1, the Land Use Element states
that the maximum density or intensity is not guaranteed for any land use category. In
determining the allowable density for each property shown on the Land Use Map, consideration
will be given to topography; availability of roads and infrastructure; existing development
patterns; potential land use conflicts; public health, safety, and welfare; presence of
environmental resources; and other site constraints. The upper range of residential density will
be granted only when the reviewing authority determines that all other applicable General Plan
policies, codes, and requirements can be met on the site.
Another potential governmental constraint to new home construction that was addressed in the
General Plan was restrictions on mixed use development. The General Plan increases the
range of opportunities for residential/commercial mixed use development in various locations
throughout the City. The Mixed Use Corridor district encourages moderate-density residential
units along commercial corridors as infill development, on underutilized sites, or in combination
with commercial-residential mixed use projects. The Mixed Use Urban Village district was
added to promote development of transit-oriented urban centers near Metrolink stations and bus
transfer stations, requiring a residential component and allowing density of up to 50 dwellings
per acre in combination with regional commercial and institutional uses. Prior to this language
being adopted in the General Plan, mixed uses were allowed only with a conditional use permit
and were not specifically encouraged or required in these areas. Residential units as
components of mixed use development are also allowed in various commercial designations,
with approval of a conditional use permit or master plan, as noted on Table H-6.1.
The land use designations have allowable density in the Urban Residential land use categories,
up to 30 dwellings per acre in UR-5 and up to 50 dwellings per acre in Mixed Use Urban Village
and Regional Commercial areas. These changes increase opportunities for compact residential
development in urban areas that are supported by services, infrastructure, and transportation,
and to remove governmental constraints imposed by the more stringent density limits in the
prior General Plan.
The residential land use designations also provide for development of walk-able neighborhoods
by allowing neighborhood-oriented commercial services within residential areas without a
general plan amendment, provided that such sites are properly zoned, no greater than five
acres in area, and maintain specified separation requirements from other service areas. This
measure was added to the General Plan language to allow neighborhood services such as
groceries, drugstores, coffee shops, mail services, and other limited commercial development
within walking distance of surrounding residences.
October 2013                             H-102
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                               Housing Element
B. Land Use Controls - Zoning
Zoning Districts in Unified Development Code
Zoning within the City is regulated by the Unified Development Code (UDC), which includes
both Title 17 (Zoning Ordinance) and Title 16 (Subdivisions) of the City’s Municipal Code. Zone
districts are described in UDC Division 17.30. The UDC is updated regularly to maintain
compliance with new State statutes and current City policies. With the adoption of the General
Plan Update in 2011, it was necessary to update sections of the UDC to conform with the new
General Plan. This occurred in 2013. Table H-6.2 shows the UDC zoning districts That
correspond to the 2011 General Plan land use designations.
                            Table H-6.2: Residential Zoning Districts
       Zoning District             Residential Uses Allowed*          Zoning District Density
                             Maximum density 0.05
                             dwelling units/acre; Single-family
                             dwellings on 20-acre min. lots;
                             Caretakers residence; Residential
 Non-Urban 1 (NU1)                                                 1 dwelling unit/20 acres
                             care home; Second units;
                             Transitional housing; mobilehome
                             park (with CUP); Supportive
                             housing.
                             Maximum density 0.1 dwelling
                             units/acre; Single-family dwellings
                             on ten-acre min. lots; Caretakers
 Non-Urban 2 (NU2)           residence; Residential care home;     1 dwelling unit/10 acres
                             Second units; Transitional housing;
                             mobilehome park (with CUP);
                             Supportive housing.
                             Maximum density 0.2dwelling
                             units/acre; Single-family dwellings
                             on five-acre min. lots ;Caretakers
 Non-Urban 3 (NU3            residence; Residential care home;     1 dwelling unit/5 acres
                             Second units; Transitional housing;
                             mobilehome park (with CUP);
                             Supportive housing.
                             Maximum density 0.5dwelling
                             units/acre; Single-family dwellings
                             on two -acre. min. lots Caretakers
 Non-Urban 4 (NU4)           residence Residential care home;      - 1 dwelling unit/2 acres
                             Second units; Transitional housing;
                             mobilehome park (with CUP);
                             Supportive housing.
                                             H-103                                   October 2013

Housing Element                                           City of Santa Clarita General Plan
     Zoning District          Residential Uses Allowed*           Zoning District Density
                       Maximum density 1.0 dwelling
                       units/acre ;Single-family dwellings
                       on43,560-sq. ft. min. lots;
                       Caretakers residence; Residential
 Non-Urban 5 (NU5)                                             1 dwelling unit/acre
                       care home; Second units;
                       Transitional housing; mobilehome
                       park (with CUP); Supportive
                       housing.
                       Maximum density 2.0dwelling
                       units/acre; Single-family dwellings
 Urban   Residential 1 on20,000 sq. ft. min. lots;
                                                               2 dwelling units/acre
 (UR1)                 Caretakers residence; Transitional
                       housing; mobilehome park (with
                       CUP); Supportive housing.
                       Maximum density 5.0dwelling
                       units/acre; Single-family dwellings
 Urban   Residential 2 on5,000 sq. ft. min. lots; Caretakers
                                                               5 dwelling units/acre
 (UR2)                 residence; Mobilehome park(with
                       CUP); Transitional housing;
                       Supportive housing.
                       Maximum density 11.0 dwelling
                       units/acre Single, 2-family and
                       multiple family dwellings on 5,000
                       sq. ft. minimum. lots; Caretakers
 Urban   Residential 3
                       residence; Community care               11 dwelling units/acre
 (UR3)
                       facility(with CUP); mobilehome park
                       (with CUP) ; Transitional housing
                       Joint live/work units (with CUP);
                       Supportive housing.
                       Maximum density 18.0dwelling
                       units/acre; Single, 2-family and
                       multiple family dwellings on 4,500
                       sq. ft. minimum. lots; Caretakers
 Urban   Residential 4 residence; Community care facility      18 dwelling units
 (UR4)                 (with CUP); mobile home park (with      /acre
                       CUP); Transitional housing; Joint
                       live/work units (with CUP); Rooming
                       house; Rehabilitation facility;
                       Supportive housing.
October 2013                        H-104
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                            Housing Element
       Zoning District           Residential Uses Allowed*          Zoning District Density
                           Maximum density 30.0 dwelling
                           units/acre Single, 2-family and
                           multi-family dwellings on 4,500 sq.
                           ft. min. lots; Caretakers residence;
 Urban Residential 5 Community care facility (with
                                                                 18-30 dwelling units/acre
 (UR5)                     CUP);mobilehome park(with CUP) ;
                           Transitional housing; Joint live/work
                           units (with CUP); Rooming house:
                           Rehabilitation facility; Supportive
                           housing.
                           Minimum Density 11.0 units /acre,
                           Maximum density 30.0 dwelling
                           units/acre; Single, 2-family and
                           multi-family dwellings on 5,000 sq.
                           ft. min. lots; Boarding house;
 Mixed Use Corridor                                              11-30 dwelling units
                           Caretakers residence; Community
 (MXC)                                                           per acre
                           care facility (with CUP);Transitional
                           housing; Joint live/work units (with
                           CUP); Rooming house:
                           Rehabilitation facility; Supportive
                           housing.
                           Minimum Density 6.0 units /acre
                           Maximum density 18.0 dwelling
                           units/acre; Single, 2-family and
                           multi-family dwellings on 5,000 sq.
                           ft. min. lots; Boarding house;
 Mixed Use                                                       6-18 dwelling units
                           Caretakers residence; Community
 Neighborhood (MXN)                                              per acre
                           care facility (with CUP);Transitional
                           housing; Joint live/work units (with
                           CUP); Rooming house:
                           Rehabilitation facility; Supportive
                           housing.
                           Minimum Density 19.0 units /acre
                           Maximum density 50.0 dwelling
                           units/acre; Single, 2-family and
                           multi-family dwellings on 5,000 sq.
                           ft. min. lots; Boarding house
 Mixed      Use     Urban                                        19-50 dwelling units
                           Caretakers residence; Community
 Village (MXUV)                                                  per acre
                           care facility (with CUP);Transitional
                           housing; Joint live/work units (with
                           CUP); Rooming house:
                           Rehabilitation facility; Supportive
                           housing.
                                            H-105                                 October 2013
Housing Element                                           City of Santa Clarita General Plan
      Zoning District       Residential Uses Allowed*             Zoning District Density
                      Minimum density 20 dwelling
                      units/acre for sites 5 ac or greater;
                      11 dwellings per acre for sites less
                      than 5 ac, there is no maximum;
 Mixed Use
                      Single-family, multi-family,
 Overlay (MU)                                                  N/A
                      live/work, lofts condominiums,
                      apartments;20-30% of site area to
                      be commercial uses; Minor use
                      permit required.
                      Multi-family units (with
                      MUP);Community care facility(with
                      CUP); Live-work units (with MUP)
 Regional Commercial                                           18-50 dwelling units
                      Residential Health Care Facility
 (CR)                                                          /acre
                      (with CUP); Supportive Housing
                      (with CUP); Transitional Housing
                      (with CUP).
                      Multi-family units (with
                      CUP);Community care facility (with
                      CUP);Live-work units (with
                      CUP);Mobilehome park (with CUP)
 Community            Residential Health Care Facility
                                                               18 dwelling units/per acre
 Commercial (CC)      (with CUP); Supportive Housing
                      (with CUP); Transitional Housing
                      (with CUP) Homeless Shelter (with
                      MUP or permitted by right in
                      Homeless Overlay Zone).
                      Multi-family units (with CUP
 Commercial
                      Community care facility(with
 Neighborhood                                                  18 dwelling units/per acre
                      CUP);Live-work units (with CUP)
 (CN)
                      Community care facility(with CUP).
                      Live-work units (with
                      CUP);Homeless Shelter ( with MUP
 Business Park (BP)   or permitted by right in Homeless        No residential
                      Overlay Zone)
                      .
 Industrial (I)       Live-work units (with CUP);
                      Homeless Shelter ( with MUP)             No residential
                      Single Family Homes, Residential
                      Service Care Home, Second Units,
 Open Space (OS)                                               One unit/40 acres
                      Supportive Housing, Transitional
                      Housing,
                      Single Family Homes, Residential
 Open-Space-          Service Care Home, Second Units,
                                                               One unit/5 acres
 Agriculture (OS-A)   Supportive Housing, Transitional
                      Housing,
October 2013                       H-106
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                               Housing Element
       Zoning District             Residential Uses Allowed*            Zoning District Density
                              Single Family Homes, Residential
  Open Space- National Service Care Home, Second Units,
                                                                     One unit/40 acres
  Forest (OS-NF)              Supportive Housing, Transitional
                              Housing,
                              Single Family Homes, Residential
  Open Space–Bureau of
                              Service Care Home, Second Units,
  Land        Management                                             One unit/40 acres
                              Supportive Housing, Transitional
  (OS-BLM)
                              Housing,
                              Single Family Homes, Residential
                              Service Care Home, Second Units,
  Public/Institutional (P/I)                                         N/A
                              Supportive Housing, Transitional
                              Housing, Homeless Shelters
                              Subject to the standards of the
  Specific Plan (SP)                                                 Varies
                              Specific Plan
                              Subject to the standards of the
  Corridor Plan (CP)                                                 Varies
                              Corridor Plan
* CUP indicates requirement for a Conditional Use Permit pursuant to UDC Section 17.24,
approved by Planning Commission after a public hearing. Other projects require Minor Use
Permit (UDC Section 17.23). Other uses are permitted by right in the zone district, provided that
all new construction requires Development Review pursuant to UDC Section 17.22.
Specific Plans
In addition to the zone districts summarized in Table H-6.2, the City’s UDC contains a Specific
Plan category that allows for development of large, master-planned communities in which
residential unit types and densities may be flexible, as specified in the approved planning
document.
The Specific Plan Zone provides for the preparation of comprehensive, long-range planning
documents called specific plans, provided for in State law to establish uses and standards in
master-planned developments which also address infrastructure, financing, and implementation.
The allowed uses and densities are specified in the adopted specific plan document. Within the
City of Santa Clarita, the following specific plans incorporating residential uses have been
adopted:
       The Porta Bella Specific Plan was approved in 1994 for the 989-acre Whittaker Bermite
        site, located in the center of the City. The site was used for over 80 years for production
        of military explosives and flares by various manufacturers before operations ended in
        1987. During those years manufacturing and testing of various chemicals on the site
        involved use and improper disposal of hazardous materials, resulting in chemical
        contamination of both soil and groundwater. Directly beneath the site lies the Saugus
        Aquifer, a significant groundwater source for the Valley. Since manufacturing operations
        ended, remediation of soil and groundwater contamination (including per-chlorate) has
        been on-going. The Porta Bella Specific Plan proposed re-use of the property for mixed
        uses, including 1,244 single-family units, 1,667 multi-family units, 96 acres of
        commercial and office uses, 407 acres of open space, and 42 acres of recreational use.
        However, more work is needed to ensure site clean-up and the location of uses in an
        appropriate manner to avoid future health risks.
                                              H-107                                   October 2013

Housing Element                                                  City of Santa Clarita General Plan
       In December 2005, the City of Santa Clarita adopted the Downtown Newhall Specific
        Plan as a foundation for facilitating redevelopment and enhancement of the area. The
        specific plan encompasses twenty blocks (550 acres, including Hart Park) and provides
        opportunities for mixed-use and transit-oriented development. Approximately 700 new
        dwelling units and 250,000 square feet of new commercial space are projected by the
        specific plan, in addition to existing housing and business in the area. Both new
        development and redevelopment are accommodated in the specific plan.
       The North Valencia Specific Plan was adopted in 1998. The project encompassed 707
        acres generally bordered by Newhall Ranch Road, Bouquet Canyon Road, and Magic
        Mountain Parkway, east of San Francisquito Creek. The Specific Plan provided for a mix
        of residential and commercial uses, open space, and an industrial center. A significant
        segment of the Santa Clara River was preserved as open space as part of the specific
        plan. The residential portions of this project have since been constructed.
       The North Valencia Specific Plan No. 2 was adopted in 2000 for 596 acres in the
        northern portion of the City generally located north of Newhall Ranch Road west of
        McBean Parkway. The Specific Plan called for mixed use development, including
        residential, industrial and commercial uses. A major component of this project was
        preservation of open space in environmentally sensitive areas along San Francisquito
        Creek. The residential portions of this project have since been constructed.
       The Fair Oaks Ranch Specific Plan was adopted by Los Angeles County in 1986 for 988
        acres in the eastern portion of the City generally located north of State Route 14 and Via
        Princessa. The Specific Plan area was annexed to the City in 2012. The Specific Plan
        called for primarily residential development with some supportive commercial uses. The
        project is on its last phases of construction.
       The Vista Canyon Specific Plan was adopted in 2011 and is located between State
        Route 14 and Sand Canyon and north of the Union Pacific railroad lines. The site
        consists of 185 acres. The project site is approved for 1,091 residential units with a
        combination of low, moderate and market rate housing types. The project is proposing
        to locate a Metrolink commuter rail station to the project site and thereby creating a
        transit friendly project. The project approval is currently in litigation.
Development Standards
In addition to controlling residential density, unit types, and lot sizes, the Unified Development
Code and various specific plan documents contain requirements for residential construction that
may impose constraints on the creation of new housing opportunities. These requirements are
called development standards, and typically include restrictions on building height, minimum
yard and open space areas, and parking. State law requires that the Housing Element review
various development standards to determine if they constitute a governmental constraint on new
housing development. Table H-6.3 provides a summary of the City’s development standards as
set forth in the UDC. As described above, specific plans and planned development projects
may have different standards established through the approval process for each project.
October 2013                              H-108

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                  Housing Element
                       Table H-6.3: Residential Development Standards
       Standard                          Unified Development Code Requirements
                        Allowed lot sizes range from 5,000 to 20 gross acres. Lots may be
 Lot size               smaller in the SP zone with approved entitlement; the City has allowed
                        lots of 2200 sq. ft. in specific plan (SP) areas.
                        Minimum width: 50 – 200 ft. (cul-de-sac width: 40 ft);
 Lot dimensions
                        May be reduced as part of approved SP/CP.
                        Side yard: 5 ft. (reverse corner lot 10 ft.)
                        Rear yard: 15 ft.
 Setbacks               Front yard: 20 ft.
                        Mixed use: 0-25 feet. setback from property line.
                        No requirements other than setbacks and open space in Urban and
 Lot coverage
                        Non-Urban Zones.
                        2 stories, 35 ft. in residential zones, except with approval of CUP;
 Building height
                        Up to 55 feet in mixed use areas, except with approval of CUP.
 Dwelling unit size,
                        No requirements.
 Floor Area Ratio
                        Studio: 200 sq. ft.
                        1 bedroom unit: 300 sq. ft.
                        2+ bedroom units: 400 sq. ft.
 Open space             Single-family detached or town home: 650 sq. ft.
                        50% of open space to be in rear yards;
                        Recreational facilities required for multi-family projects;
                        Mixed Use Overlay requires 200 sq. ft./unit of open space.
                        250 cu. ft. of storage for multi-family unit;
                        1 trash enclosure for each 10 units;
 Architecture    and No metal siding for structures;
 site design            Minimum roof slope 2:12;
                        Screening required for all equipment and utilities;
                        Roof-top equipment prohibited on new single-family structures.
                        Single-family unit: 2 enclosed spaces;
                        Two-family units: 2 spaces/unit;
                        Multi-family units: 1 space for studios; 2 spaces for one-bedroom; 2
                        spaces for two-plus bedrooms; plus 1 guest space/2 units for projects
                        with over 3 units. All spaces to be enclosed (except guest parking).
                        Mobile home park: 2 spaces per unit plus one guest per 2 units (may be
                        uncovered);
                        Senior/disabled: 0.5 space/unit with plot plan review and deed
                        restriction plus guest parking;
 Parking
                        Mixed use: same as above except allowance for shared guest spaces;
                        Specific plans: parking may be reduced;
                        Residential services/care home; 2 spaces;
                        Second unit: 1 space/2 bedrooms;
                        Residential health care: 0.5 space/unit;
                        Community care: 0.5 space per room;
                        Shared parking allowed with a CUP;
                        Tandem parking allowed in multi-family developments with a Minor Use
                        Permit.
                                               H-109                                    October 2013

Housing Element                                                  City of Santa Clarita General Plan
        Standard                         Unified Development Code Requirements
                         Permitted within Mobilehome Park Overlay Zone by right, provided the
                         following requirements are met:
                                 Minimum lot area: 3 acres
                                 Minimum space area: 1,500 sq. ft.
                                 Minimum space width: 30 ft.
                                 Minimum lot area for each mobile home space: 3000 sq. ft.
                                 Maximum building height: 2 stories or 25 ft.
  Mobilehome parks
                                 Front yard, street side yard setback: 5 ft.
                                 Side yard setback: 5 ft.
                                 Rear yard setback: 5 ft.
                                 Screening required from adjacent streets.
                         Mobilehome parks in other zones require approval of conditional use
                         permit by Planning Commission at public hearing; discretionary review
                         with conditions of approval.
                         Secondary access required for any development of 150 or more
                         dwelling units (75 or more in wild-land fire areas). Further restrictions
  Access
                         for substandard road width. (This requirement applies to subdivisions
                         only)
  Storm-water            On-site storm-water runoff treatment is required for projects meeting
  treatment              minimum requirements
The minimum UDC requirements for residential uses summarized in Table H-6.3 have been
determined by the City to be necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare of City
residents. The requirements for minimum lot size, dimensions, and setbacks are necessary to
prevent overcrowding, and flexibility is allowed through the planned development process to
create smaller lots provided the design is approved. Minimum requirements for open space and
maximum lot coverage ensure that residents have adequate access to outdoor living space,
gardens, patios, sunlight, and fresh air. On-site parking requirements are needed to ensure that
vehicle parking does not clog neighborhood streets, and that residents have convenient access
to their vehicles; parking reductions are allowed for senior and disabled housing units, and
allowance for shared parking is made through the planned development and specific plan
processes. In addition, shared parking is allowed with approval of a conditional use permit.
Requirements for adequate emergency access and treatment of storm-water are necessary to
protect public safety and water quality. As with conventional residential dwellings, the standards
for mobile home parks are designed to ensure adequate open space and parking. The
architectural standards for residential uses are minimal, and include no metal siding, pitched
roofs, adequate trash enclosures, and equipment screening. Many of the required development
standards have been put in place for retention of a quality of life for both existing and future
residents or they have been put in place for public safety reasons. However, Program H 5.4
includes flexibility for a number of development standards including open space and building
height. These standards are typical zoning requirements found throughout California; no
unusual standards that pose a significant constraint to the production of housing were identified.
Special Standards and Requirements
Some portions of the planning area are subject to development constraints due to the presence
of hillsides and ridgelines, flood potential, seismic hazards, environmental issues, or other
special circumstance. Special development standards may apply to housing in such areas, in
October 2013                              H-110
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                               Housing Element
order to protect public safety and property values. The following special development standards
are established by the City’s Unified Development Code and adopted specific plans:
As an example of how these special development standards act to restrict residential density,
the City approved three projects in which density was reduced due to the Hillside Ordinance. In
the Keystone project, the developer proposed 979 units and the project was approved for 499
units, a reduction of 49 percent. The Golden Valley Ranch project originally proposed 847 units
and was approved for 499 units, a reduction of 41 percent. The Beneda project proposed 60
units and was approved for 30, a reduction of 50 percent. Despite potential reductions in
residential density within these areas, however, the City has determined that the special
designations are needed to protect significant environmental resources and protect public
safety. Hillsides, ridgelines, and floodplains must be protected from over-development in order
to prevent erosion, flooding, damage from landslides, and preserve scenic views. Preservation
of significant oak trees is defined in the General Plan as a community goal because these trees
are important biological resources. Downtown Newhall has been identified as a significant
historical resource area because of the large number of historic buildings and sites within this
district; the specific plan is intended to maintain community character in keeping with the historic
nature of the area. Therefore, no changes to these special zoning requirements are proposed,
because adequate sites have been identified to meet the City’s housing goals in other areas of
the City that are not subject to these constraints.
                                              H-111                                  October 2013

 Housing Element                                              City of Santa Clarita General Plan
 Table H-6.4: Special Development Standards for Housing
       Applicability                     Special Requirements and Standards
                             Applies to any site with average slope of 10% or more;
                             Requires Permit for Hillside Development Review;
                             Director approval for minor projects, Planning Commission
                              review of major projects;
                             Application may include colored simulations and detailed
                              studies for geotechnical, soil, archeological and biological
Hillside areas
                              conditions, tree studies, slope analysis, and grading
                              information;
                             Detailed architecture and landscaping standards required;
                             Review is discretionary, with approval based on 8 findings;
                             Permitted residential density is based on slope density
                              calculations that reduce density as slopes increase.
                             Requires Ridgeline Alteration Permit approved by City Council;
Ridgeline Preservation       May reduce density and/or increase cost of development;
Overlay Zone                 Discretionary permit required with conditions of approval
                             Requires same findings as conditional use permit.
                             Must comply with FEMA requirements;
                             Requires approval by City Engineer based on hydrology study;
Floodplains
                             May reduce density/intensity of use;
                             No development allowed in floodway portion of floodplain.
Significant Ecological       Requires biological studies and mitigations;
Areas                        May reduce density/intensity of use.
                             Oak Tree Preservation Ordinance requires preservation of
                              significant trees on site;
                             Requires Oak Tree Permit;
Oak Tree Preservation        May require Planning Commission approval;
                             Mitigation may involve replanting or tree preservation;
                             May result in increased costs and/or reduced residential
                              density.
                             Requires development to recognize existing mineral and oil
                              resources;
                             Establishes criteria for development in areas with these state
Mineral      and      Oil     identified resources;
Conservation Overlay         Allows for removal of the commodity while establishing
(MOCA)                        development standards for the health and safety of nearby
                              residents;
                             May result in reduction of residential density based upon
                              location of existing oil wells or quarries.
                             Design guidelines to maintain historic character of area;
Downtown Newhall
                             Must conform to form-based zoning requirements of specific
Specific Plan
                              plan.
Happy Valley, Placerita
&      Sand       Canyon     Special standards adopted to help maintain rural character of
Special       Standards       area.
Districts
 October 2013                        H-112

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                               Housing Element
C. Application Review Requirements
Residential developers and builders seeking to construct new housing look for assurance that
cities provide an “even playing field” and establish clear requirements that do not change over
time. An “even playing field” means that all applicants are subject to the same rules, and “clear
requirements” ensure that multiple levels of review by various entities within a jurisdiction do not
require costly revisions after the project has been determined to meet agency requirements.
Housing developers bear many up-front costs in bringing a project to completion, including land
costs, interest on loans, architecture and engineering costs, preparation of environmental
documents and technical studies, application processing fees, and environmental review fees.
The development of new housing projects can be constrained if agencies add new requirements
or fees during the review process. State law requires that housing elements review the
processing requirements for new housing applications to determine if governmental constraints
limit production of new housing. In this process, it is also useful to review the steps taken to
ensure an even playing field and clarity of requirements for all applicants.
A major consideration for applicants is whether their application is processed as a ministerial or
discretionary review. A ministerial project may be approved or denied based on the project’s
compliance with applicable code requirements, and does not require the discretionary judgment
of a reviewing authority based on policies or guidelines that require interpretation. A
discretionary process, on the other hand, gives the reviewing authority the options to approve,
conditionally approve, or deny the project based on required findings. For the applicant, a
discretionary process may hold more uncertainty in terms of whether the project will be
approved, as well as unknown costs of any conditions added to the project as part of the
approval process.
The California Subdivision Map Act (Sections 66410-66499.58 of the Government Code),
Permit Streamlining Act (Government Code Section 65920 et seq), and Environmental Quality
Act (Public Resources Code Sections 21000-21177) establish timelines for processing
development applications to ensure that applicants are not unduly delayed by public agencies
during the review process. The City’s Unified Development Code is consistent with these
timelines. In order to inform applicants early in the process about the City’s development review
process, the City offers an optional meeting with the Development Review Committee to review
preliminary applications; the cost of this process is applied to the formal application review fee.
The City has also prepared informational materials to guide applicants in how to process various
applications, such as Development Review, Conditional Use Permit, Variance, and Tentative
Subdivision Map. Application requirements for various types of residential development have
been codified in the Unified Development Code, and are summarized in Table H-6.5.
Application review fees are limited by State law to the amount needed to pay for any staff and/or
consultants’ actual time spent reviewing each application to ensure compliance with code
requirements. Application processing fees in the City of Santa Clarita have been established by
Resolution 07-52, which was based on a fee study completed in 2004 and updated annually
based on CPI (most recently in 2012). The fee for each type of application is also included in
Table H-6.5.
                                             H-113                                    October 2013

Housing Element                                              City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                    Table H-6.5: Application Processing Requirements
   Application Type         Application fee                        Description
                                                Optional process designed to inform
                          $1,196; applies to
                                                applicants of City application processing
Preliminary review        formal application
                                                requirements and development standards.
                              when filed.
                                                Takes 4-6 weeks.
                                                Staff review and Planning Commission
Tentative parcel map            $13,170         approval of subdivision to create four or fewer
                                                residential lots. Discretionary.
                         $6,403 plus $211 for
                         easement checking
                                                Engineering review and approval by City
                             plus $145 for
Final parcel map                                Council. Ministerial, based on compliance
                        monument inspection
                                                with the tentative parcel map.
                             and $35 per
                              monument.
                                                Staff and Planning Commission review of
                                                subdivision to create 5 or more residential
                                                lots. Discretionary. Initial approval 2 years,
                                                with up to two discretionary 1-year extensions
                                                approved by Planning Director. Required
                         1-24 lots - $18,454;   findings address zoning consistency, site
Tentative tract map        over 24 lots add     suitability, environmental damage, and
                               $192/lot.        consistency with easements. Development
                                                review required for home construction on
                                                approved subdivision.        Sales office and
                                                model home complex require temporary use
                                                permit, approved for maximum of two years,
                                                and paved parking.
                        $10,102 for 1-10 lots;
                          $10,824 for 11-50
                                  lots;
                         $10,824 plus $81 for
                           each lot over 50;    Engineering review and approval by City
Final tract map              Plus $211 for      Council. Ministerial, based on compliance
                         easement checking      with the tentative tract map.
                             plus $142 for
                        monument inspection
                             and $35 per
                              monument.
                              $2,029 plus       Required for any project resulting in a
CEQA review – initial
                         consultant’s costs (if negative declaration or mitigated negative
study
                                 any)           declaration.
CEQA        review   –     $31,618.deposit;
                                                Required for any project that has the potential
Environmental Impact      costs of staff time
                                                to significantly impact the environment.
Report (EIR)            plus consultant costs.
October 2013                            H-114

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                              Housing Element
    Application Type         Application fee                       Description
California Department         $2,231.25 for
                                                 Required by the State for any project subject
of Fish and Wildlife      negative declaration;
                                                 to CEQA review
fee                         $3,070.25for EIR
County of Los Angeles               $75          Fee for posting environmental determination
Administrative permit              $622          Requires approved by Planning Director
                                                 Requires approved by Planning Director for
                                                 all new permitted structures and initiation of
                                                 all permitted uses; ensures compliance of site
                                                 plan with all applicable zoning requirements.
Development review
                                  $4,679         Director may add conditions of approval;
(Site plan review)
                                                 require improvements, and security to ensure
                                                 completion. Approval for two years with two
                                                 one-year extensions available. No specific
                                                 findings required.
Conditional use permit           $10,497         Requires approval by Planning Commission.
(CUP)                                            Required findings address site suitability, land
                                                 use compatibility, detrimental impacts, and
CUP with no         new           $5,317         code compliance. Initial approval for two
construction                                     years with two one-year extensions available.
                                                 Requires approval by Planning Director or
                                                 Planning Commission for deviations of up to
Adjustment                        $1,033         20% of standard requirements.             Initial
                                                 approval for two years with two one-year
                                                 extensions available.
                                                 Requires approval by Planning Commission
                                                 at public hearing. Required findings address
                                                 special circumstances, property rights,
Variance                         $6,192          detrimental impacts, special privilege, and
                                                 consistency of use with General Plan and
                                                 zoning. Initial approval for two years with two
                                                 one-year extensions available.
                                                 Requires approval by Planning Director for
Non-conforming       use
                                  $1,320         modifications to non-conforming lots or
or structure
                                                 structures.
                                                 Requires public hearings by Planning
                            $21,078deposit;
Zone change                                      Commission and City Council; findings
                           Actual cost of staff
                                                 require consistency with General Plan, UDC
                                   time
                                                 and other development policies.
                                                 Requires public hearings by Planning
                            $21,078 deposit;
                                                 Commission and City Council; findings
General Plan               Actual cost of staff
                                                 require consistency with General Plan, UDC
Amendment                          time
                                                 and other development policies.
                                                 Requires public hearings by Planning
                                                 Commission and City Council; findings are
Master Plan                      $10,497         the same as conditional use permit Approval
                                                 time limits are indicated in the approved
                                                 master plan.
                                           H-115                                   October 2013
Housing Element                                            City of Santa Clarita General Plan
    Application Type       Application fee                        Description
                                              Requires preparation of comprehensive long-
                                              range plan for land use, development
                          $21,078deposit;
                                              standards, infrastructure and public facilities,
Specific Plan            Actual cost of staff
                                              financing, and implementation, to be
                                time
                                              approved by the Planning Commission and
                                              City Council.
                                              Required on some developments to insure
                                              compliance with the approved master plan,
Architectural design                          CUP, or specific plan. Approval is generally
                                $959
Review                                        by the Planning Director. Approval for one
                                              year with a one-year extension available. No
                                              specific findings required.
                                              Requires approval by Planning Director for
                                              minor projects and Planning Commission for
                                              major projects. Application requires submittal
                                              of colored simulations, detailed reports for
Hillside development                          geotechnical, soils, archeological resources,
                              $2,772
Review                                        biology, trees, slopes and grading. Eight
                                              findings required, along with detailed
                                              standards       for    grading,     architecture,
                                              landscaping. Approval for two years with a
                                              one-year extension available.
                                              Requires approval by Planning Director for all
                                              new developments to ensure compliance of
                                              landscape plan with all applicable zoning
Landscape plan                                requirements. Director may add conditions of
                                $980
 review                                       approval; require improvements, and security
                                              to ensure completion. Approval for one year
                                              with a one-year extension available. No
                                              specific findings required.
                                              Requires approval by Planning Director or
                                              Planning Commission.          Required findings
                                              address site suitability, land use compatibility,
Minor use permit              $2,508
                                              detrimental impacts, and code compliance.
                                              Initial approval for two years with one-year
                                              extension available.
                                              Requires review by Planning Commission
                                              and approval by City Council. Required
Ridgeline     alteration                      findings address site suitability, land use
                              $7,604
permit                                        compatibility, detrimental impacts, and code
                                              compliance. Initial approval for two years
                                              with one-year extension available.
October 2013                         H-116
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                Housing Element
    Application Type           Application fee                        Description
                                                    Requires approval by Planning Director or
                              Trimming $105;
                                                    Planning Commission.        Required findings
                               Removals and
 Oak tree preservation                              address site compatibility and detrimental
                              encroachments:
 permit                                             impacts to oak trees, a protected species.
                               1-5 trees $580
                                                    Initial approval for two years with one-year
                            6-plus trees $2,008
                                                    extension available.
                                                    Typically plan check time-frames are 6-8
                                                    weeks and can vary based on plan check
                              Varies based on
 Building plan check                                activity.   Reviews construction plans for
                             project valuation.
                                                    compliance with building, plumbing, electrical,
                                                    fire, and mechanical and conservation codes.
                          Varies from $1,360 to
                                                    Review rough grading plans for compliance
 Grading plan check          $11,086 based on
                                                    with approved plans and applicable codes.
                                cubic yards.
 Standard Urban Storm     Varies from $1,267 to     Ensures compliance with all federal, state
 Water Mitigation Plan        $2,559 based on       and local storm water requirements for
 Review                         project size.       surface water leaving the project site.
Because the application review fees reflect the actual time and cost of review, they are not
considered to be an unusual constraint to housing development. However, as an incentive to
promote production of affordable housing, the City should consider reducing or deferring
payment of such fees when it is deemed to be appropriate.
A variety of housing unit types are allowed in various zone districts, subject to specified review
requirements established in the Unified Development Code. Table H-6.6 describes the review
process required for housing unit types in various zones throughout the City.
                                              H-117                                  October 2013
Housing Element                                                   City of Santa Clarita General Plan
           Table H-6.6: Planning Applications Required for Various Housing Types
                Housing Type                                  Planning Requirements
                                              Allowed in all residential zones with      approval of
 Single-family home on existing lot
                                              Administrative Review.
                                              Allowed in UR-3, UR-4 and UR-5             zones with
 Two-family home on existing lot
                                              approval of Administrative Review.
                                              Allowed in UR-3, UR-4 and                 UR-5 with
 Multi-family home                            Administrative Review; in CR and           CC with a
                                              Conditional Use Permit.
 Community care facility (residential
                                              Allowed in UR-3, UR-4 and UR-5 , and commercial
 facility for elderly/disabled, with meals,
                                              zones with Conditional Use Permit.
 housekeeping and activities)
                                              Allowed within existing structure in all residential
 Residential care home (residence for
                                              zones with no review. If new construction, requires
 up to 6 persons)
                                              Administrative Review.
 Boarding       house     (dwelling    with
                                              Allowed in all residential zones with Administrative
 bedrooms rented to 5 or more persons;
                                              Review.
 may include meals)
 Residential      health     care    facility
                                              Allowed in UR-3, UR-4 and UR-5 CR CC, CN and
 (convalescent homes for elderly, sick,
                                              BP with a Conditional Use Permit.
 disabled)
                                              Mobilehome parks allowed in all residential zones
                                              ,and the CC zone with Conditional Use Permit;
                                              Individual mobile homes allowed on residential lots
 Mobile homes, factory-built housing
                                              if units are less than 10 years old, on permanent
                                              foundations, , with roof eaves of at least 16 inches,
                                              roof slopes of at least 2:12., and non-metal siding.
                                              No special requirements, other than those applied
 Agricultural worker housing
                                              to structure type.
                                              Allowed on parcels of 5,000 square feet. May be
                                              attached or detached. Floor area may not exceed
                                              50% of primary unit; requires 1 parking space per 2
 Second unit on a residential lot with a
                                              bedrooms, located outside of setback; architecture
 primary dwelling unit
                                              must be compatible with primary unit, and separate
                                              entrance      provided.         A    non-discretionary
                                              Administrative Permit is required.
 Single room occupancy                        Not referenced in UDC
                                              Allowed by right in the PI and Homeless Shelter
 Emergency Shelters                           Overlay Zone. In the CC zone, a CUP is required
                                              and in the BP and I zone, a MUP is required.
                                              Allowed in all residential zones with approval of
 Transitional and supportive housing
                                              Administrative Review for new structures..
Processing and Permit Procedures
The application review processes and development standards described in Table H-6.6 are
needed to allow staff to determine that each project complies with applicable code requirements
and development policies of the City.
October 2013                               H-118
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                  Housing Element
Single-family residences are permitted by right in all residential zones subject to the approval of
a Development Review Permit. The purpose of the Development Review is for the Director of
Community Development to ensure that all applicable sections of the General Plan and UDC
are met. The Development Review process generally takes anywhere from 2-6 weeks from
initial submittal to approval. This process may run concurrent with other required review
processing.
Multi–family residences are permitted by right in the UR-3, UR-4 and UR-5 zones subject to the
approval of a Development Review Permit. Multi-family residences can also be constructed in
commercial zones with the approval of a CUP. The purpose of the Development Review is for
the Director of Community Development to ensure that all applicable sections of the General
Plan and UDC are met. The Development Review process generally takes anywhere from 2-6
weeks from initial submittal to approval. The Conditional Use Permit generally takes around 4-6
months, and is subject to the decision of the Planning Commission, based on the findings
identified in Chapter 17 of the UDC.
Due to the unique topography and other natural features of the Santa Clarita Valley, there are a
number other development influences that could impact development processing. Hillside
development density increases as applicants follow the findings identified under the Hillside
Development Ordinance. The hillside projects are subject to the approval of the Planning
Commission in order to ensure the safety of residents while preserving the natural aesthetic of
Santa Clarita’s hillsides. They must also meet the requirements of the Los Angeles County Fire
Department for development in wildland fire zones and the requirements of the California
Department of Fish and Wildlife due to the number of unique species of fauna and flora.
In addition, the Santa Clarita Valley includes areas with natural rivers, streams and creeks
which are subject to floodway standards for public safety. All developments must take these
natural features into consideration when addressing these flooding concerns during the
permitting process.
D. Development Impact Fees, Dedication, and Improvement Requirements
Development Impact Fees
New housing within a community can put a strain on existing facilities and resources. As each
new dwelling unit is constructed, more rainwater flows into flood control channels and more
vehicles use the streets. When families move into new homes more children are enrolled in
schools, play in the parks, and go to the library; more homes must be protected from fire and
crime; and more residents must be provided with clean water to drink and sanitary sewers to
conduct wastewater to treatment plants. It would be unfair to existing residents in a city to
expect them to build and maintain such facilities and services to support new residents who
move into their community. Instead, the builder of each new home is expected to pay for a fair
share of the facilities and services that will be used by future residents of that home. The
method of collecting this fair share contribution to public facilities and services is often through
the adoption of development impact fees.
State law provides for the adoption of development impact fees to fund the construction of
public infrastructure, provided that certain requirements are met. One requirement is that the
fees must be calculated based on a thorough analysis of actual facility needs and costs.
Another requirement is that no dwelling unit will be charged for facilities that it will not use, or for
more than its fair share of the cost of new facilities. In addition, the law requires that money
                                            H-119                                        October 2013

Housing Element                                                  City of Santa Clarita General Plan
collected in the form of development impact fees must be spent for the purpose for which it was
collected within five years, and that fee revenue not be commingled with other funds. Impact
fees are collected to pay for capital facility costs, which may include land acquisition, design and
engineering, and construction; however, the costs of operation and maintenance are not eligible
for funding by impact fees. The courts have upheld the constitutionality of development impact
fees, provided that fees are established on the principles known as nexus and proportionality.
Nexus refers to the principle that fees must have a direct relationship to the services and
facilities used by the new development, and proportionality refers to the principle that the
amount of the fee must be based on the actual impact of the new development. The nexus and
proportionality of impact fees is established through detailed studies of facility needs,
construction costs, and the impact of each new dwelling unit on the facility or service.
In the City of Santa Clarita, development impact fees have been adopted for City facilities as
well as by other agencies to fund regional infrastructure improvements. The type and amount of
impact fees are summarized in Table H-6.7.
     Table H-6.7: Development Impact Fees Charged on New Residential Development
                                                                                Amount for Typical
  Type of Impact Fee                           Applicability
                                                                                      Dwelling
                          Requirement for payment of fee or land
                          dedication is applied at time of tentative map
                          approval; for projects of less than 50 units, fee
                          is required; for 50 or more, land and/or fee
                          may be required. Dedication may include cost
                          of improvements; fees include 20% for cost of
                                                                              Approximately
Park Fees                 improvements. Fee is calculated based on fair
                                                                              $10,000 per dwelling
                          market value of land at 3 acres/1000 people
                                                                              unit. Varies by area.
                          generated, plus 20%. The General Plan does
                          have an overall goal of 5 acres/1,000 people.
                          Credit allowed for private open space up to
                          30%. Dedication or fee payment is required
                          prior to final map recordation or building permit
                          issuance (whichever occurs first).
                          Required by the City to be paid prior to final
                          map recordation or building permit issuance
                          (whichever occurs first), in order to fund any
                          bridges or thoroughfares serving the project
Major Bridge and          that are not otherwise improved by the
                                                                              Average $19,020 per
Thoroughfare Fees         developer; set by City Council based on cost
                                                                              dwelling unit.
                          and area of benefit:
                          Bouquet Canyon = $17,290
                          East side = $17,900
                          Valencia - $22,000
                          Via Princessa = $18,890
                          Required by the City to be paid prior to
Traffic signal                                                                $300 per dwelling
                          occupancy, in lieu of synchronizing signals
timing fee                                                                    unit.
                          affected by the project
                          Required by Santa Clarita Transit to be paid at
                                                                              $200 per dwelling
Transit fee               time of final map recordation or building permit
                                                                              unit.
                          issuance (whichever occurs first); fees pay for
October 2013                              H-120
 City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                Housing Element
                                                                              Amount for Typical
   Type of Impact Fee                         Applicability
                                                                                     Dwelling
                          the procurement and construction of
                          infrastructure improvements to the transit
                          system.
                          Required by school districts to be paid prior to
                          the issuance of a building permit to fund new
                          school facilities.
                          Castaic Union SD: $2.47/sq.ft                      $15,000 per dwelling
 School fees
                          Newhall Unified SD: $2.47/sq.ft                    unit.
                          Saugus Unified SD: $3.18 - $3.99/sq.ft
                          Sulphur Springs Unif. SD: $3.18 - $3.99/sq.ft
                          Wm S. Hart Unif SD: $2.47 – 3.99/sq.ft.
                          Required by the City’s Public Library to be
 Library Facilities and paid prior to the issuance of a building permit
                                                                             $771/dwelling unit.
 Technology Fee           to fund new library facilities and capital
                          equipment
                          Required by Los Angeles County Fire
                                                                             $2,482/single-family
                          Department prior to the issuance of a building
 Fire Facilitates Fee                                                        unit.
                          permit to fund fire station facilities and capital
                                                                             $993/multi-family unit.
                          equipment. The current fee is $.9927/sq.ft.
                          Required by Los Angeles County Sheriff prior       $523/single-family
 Law Enforcement Fee to the issuance of a building permit to fund            unit.
                          station facilities and capital equipment.          $377/multi-family unit.
                          Required by Los Angeles County Sanitation
                          Districts to be paid prior to the issuance of a
                          building permit to fund treatment plant            $5,000 per SFR unit.
 Sewer connection fee     expansion.                                         $13,000 per MFR
                          Single-family residence - $5,000Condominium        unit.
                          – $3,750/du
                          MFR– $3,000/du
                          Required by Castaic Lake Water Agency to be
                          paid prior to the issuance of a building permit
                          to fund water treatment and distribution
                          facilities.
                          Single-family residence with 3 bedrooms:
                          $6,374-11,427
                          Add per bedroom $637-1,143                         $8,900 per dwelling
 Water connection fees
                          Add per 1000 sq. ft. additional flat landscape:    unit.
                          $1,160-2,080
                          Add per 1000 sq. ft. additional slope
                          landscape:
                          $496-889MFR with 2 bedroom: $3,208-5,752
                          Add per additional bedroom: $637-1,143
                          MFR 1-bed or studio: $2,571-4,609
                          Typical single-family home: 2,500 square feet,
 Total impact fees for                                                       Single-family:
                          3-bedroon home.
 typical dwelling:                                                           $62,196
                          Typical multi-family home: 1,000 square feet,
                                                                             Multi-family: $40,463
                          2-bedroom apartment.
Source: City of Santa Clarita Community Development Department
                                              H-121                                   October 2013

Housing Element                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan
All of the impact fees adopted by the City of Santa Clarita have been calculated based on
detailed analysis of service needs and projections, planned facility expansions, costs of these
expansions, and the nexus and proportionality of each dwelling unit with respect to needed
infrastructure. The fees are required to ensure that adequate infrastructure and facilities are built
in a timely manner and are available to support new development. As shown on Table H-6.8,
the City’s impact fees are not significantly higher than those adopted by Los Angeles County for
the unincorporated portions of the Santa Clarita Valley.
Fees applied by other agencies are also supported by required studies, and apply to other cities
in Los Angeles County as well. These fees are not under the purview of the City, although some
of them may be collected by the City on behalf of the various districts. For purposes of
comparison, the following table summarizes fees applied to similar typical units in comparable
agencies with land use jurisdiction in north Los Angeles County.
October 2013                            H-122

               City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                          Housing Element
                                   Table H-6.8: Fees Required for Housing Development - North Los Angeles County, 2013
                        (Assumptions: Single-family residential subdivision, 100 lots, average 3-bedroom house, 2500 square feet)
                                                                                                      Los Angeles County
                            Santa Clarita                         Palmdale                                                                 Lancaster
Type of Fee                                                                                           (Santa Clarita Valley)
                            Tract                 Lot             Tract               Lot             Tract                Lot             Tract                 L
Application Review Fees
Tentative Tract map
                                          32,854           329                 6,500              65             21,436               214                 7,913
review
Initial Study (CEQA)                       2,029             20                  950              10               3,022                30             included
Final map check                           14,874           149                 8,925             89              33,600               336                 9,090
                                                           Building and Safety Plan Check, Grading Plan Check, Public Improvement Plan Check, Permit, and Ins
                                                                                                                                            Based on Valuation a
                                                                                                                                                    Development
Drainage Fees                                n/a            n/a              440,700          4,407                  n/a               n/a             465,900
Traffic, Bridge, Signals
                                       1,902,000        19,020               434,100          4,341             412,300             4,123              310,100
Fees
Fire Fees                                248,175         2,482               116,125          1,161             248,200             2,482              179,100
Public Facility Fee                           n/a           n/a              149,200          1,492                  n/a               n/a                   n/a
Park Fee                               1,000,000        10,000               792,600          7,926             28,0000             2,800              253,400
Library Facilities Fee                    74,000           740                    n/a            n/a             84,600               846                    n/a
School fees (Elem &
                                       1,995,000        19,950             1,212,500         12,125           1,995,000           19,950             1,062,500
HS)
Water Connection Fee                                                         911,800          9,118
                                         890,000         8,900                                                  890,000             8,900            1,600,000
AVEK or CLWA                                                                   6,468          6,468
Sewer Connect. Fees
                                         500,000         5,000               619,000          6,190             500,000             5,000              619,000
(LA Co)
Urban           Structures
                                              n/a           n/a                   n/a            n/a                 n/a               n/a                   n/a
Program
Transit                                   20,000           200                    n/a            n/a                 n/a               n/a                   n/a
Law Enforcement                           50,200           502                    n/a            n/a             50,200               502                    n/a
     Sources: Los Angeles County General Plan Draft Housing Element, 2013, page 3-42; City of Palmdale Planning Department, 2013; City of
     Santa Clarita Planning Department, 2013; City of Lancaster Planning Department, 2013; and telephone calls to special districts
                                                                                            H-123                                     October 2013
Housing Element                                                   City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Of concern to the residential builder is not only the amount of fees to be paid, but also the time
at which fee payment is due. For those fees that are required to be paid prior to issuance of
building permits, the builder must be prepared to fund the cost of infrastructure many months
prior to sale of the home. Therefore, fees which are required earlier in the process must often
be financed through loans, for which interest must be paid until the homes are sold. One way
agencies can assist builders to provide new residential units is to allow deferral of impact fees
until later in the development process or upon sale of the homes, when funds will be available to
pay for construction costs and fees. However, agencies are often reluctant to allow fee deferral
because it may be harder to collect fees if the builder fails to complete the project for some
reason, or if the builder sells the product to homeowners without paying the fees. It is
suggested that, where appropriate, the City consider fee deferrals to promote construction of
affordable units when payment conditions are part of an affordable housing agreement or other
approved form of surety.
Dedication Requirements
In addition to impact fees, new development is required to dedicate land where needed to
construct infrastructure improvements to support the residents it generates. These requirements
are most commonly applied to dedication of land along street frontages for additional right-of-
way needed to widen roads in order to carry additional traffic. All new housing projects are
required to dedicate full street right-of-way and construct improvements within the interior of the
project. Where the project boundary abuts a public street, right-of-way dedication is required
along the project frontage, and street improvements are required to be constructed. Street
right-of-way may also be used for placement of sewers, storm drains, and utility easements.
Other dedication requirements may include land or easements for drainage facilities to convey
storm-water through the development to approved off-site channels. As with impact fees, the
requirement for land dedication and improvements must meet the tests of nexus and
proportionality; that is, the requirements placed on the project must be directly related to the
project’s impacts on infrastructure systems, and must represent a fair share contribution based
on the project’s share of the facility needs.
The requirement to dedicate right-of-way and/or easements for public improvements to support
development is typical of all California cities and is specified as a subdivision requirement by the
State Subdivision Map Act. There are no unusual requirements in the City of Santa Clarita for
dedication of land to construct infrastructure.
Construction of Improvements
In addition to payment of impact fees and requirements to dedicate land for public
improvements, housing developers are also required to construct all of the public improvements
within their project boundaries, and those off-site improvements needed to support their housing
project. Examples of the types of improvements required of developers include the following,
along with the relevant section of the Unified Development Code:
        Street improvements, including curb and gutter for lots less than 20,000 sq ft.; street
         trees; bus stops & shelters; street maintenance fee for slurry seal; and enhanced
         pedestrian paving (16.21.070 and 17.51.070)
        Walls, fences, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains (16.21.090)
October 2013                              H-124

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                 Housing Element
       Water mains and fire hydrants (16.21.100)
       Fencing along drainage courses (16.21.120)
       Street lighting for (16.21.130)
       Street trees (16.21.150)
       Parkway planting strips (16.21.160)
       Sidewalks (16.21.170)
       Underground of utility lines less than 34 KV (17.51.070)
Impact of Requirements on Homebuilders
In order to evaluate the effect on homebuilders of the requirements for impact fees and
dedications, staff contacted three homebuilders who have done a substantial amount of
construction within the City. Staff asked them whether fees and dedication requirements
represented an impediment to construction of new housing in the city. In response, these
builders indicated that while the fees add to the cost of the residential units, the community
benefits provided by the fees assist in the marketing of the units, and the cost of the fees is
ultimately recovered in the home price. In addition, the developers of larger development
projects typically construct many of the regional improvements needed to support their projects,
and are therefore eligible for fee credits commensurate with construction costs. The effects of
the impact fees and other development requirements are more onerous for developers of small
projects, in which it is not possible to allocate costs over a large number of units.
E. City Incentives to Promote Affordable Housing Production
State law (Government Code 65915) requires cities to grant incentives to promote affordable
housing development, provided that a minimum number of affordable units are constructed and
restricted by covenant to remain affordable for specified periods of time. In addition, State law
requires that cities provide density bonuses for affordable housing production, up to a maximum
of 35 percent over the units allowed by the General Plan Land Use Map. For example, if a
housing project is to be built on a 10-acre site and the General Plan allows a density of 18 units
per acre, the General Plan density would be 180 units. A density bonus of 35 percent would
yield another 63 dwelling units, for a total of 243 units allowed on the site. In exchange for the
additional units, the housing developer would ensure that a certain percent of the units will be
priced at affordable levels and will remain affordable over the time period required by the law.
The City of Santa Clarita has complied with State requirements to provide incentives and
density bonuses to promote affordable housing construction by incorporating these provisions
into the Unified Development Code. In addition, the City has adopted other incentives to
promote development that meets General Plan goals and objectives. Incentives offered by the
City are described below.
       Density bonuses for affordable housing are allowed in the UR-3, UR-4, Ur-5,and SP,
        zones per State law (up to 35%); requires written statement as to how concessions are
                                               H-125                                  October 2013

Housing Element                                                 City of Santa Clarita General Plan
        necessary to provide for affordable housing, and adoption of an a affordability
        agreement ensuring maintenance of affordability;
       Fee waivers or reductions may be granted for affordable projects with “significant
        community benefits”;
       All projects are eligible for expedited review process;
Conclusion
In order to promote production of more housing units, including affordable units, the City will
review its governmental constraints and identify areas in which changes might be made. For
example, the following measures are recommended for consideration:
    1. Allowing deferral of certain fee payments until later in the construction process, provided
        that assurance of payment is guaranteed;
    2. Granting density bonuses in excess of minimum State requirements for projects that
        meet City goals and objectives;
    3. Providing for parking reductions for affordable units, based on a study that shows that
        low-income households have fewer cars.
F. City Codes and Enforcement of Housing Provisions
All new housing in the City is required to conform to the 2010 California Building, Mechanical,
Plumbing, and Electrical Codes as amended by the City in 2011, which may be amended from
time to time in the future. In addition, new construction must adhere to Title 24, Part 6, of the
California Code of Regulations, California's energy efficiency standards.
In addition to requiring code compliance for new construction, the City has the authority and
responsibility to ensure that owners of existing housing units maintain their units in a safe and
sanitary condition. The City has adopted the Neighborhood Preservation Code and enforces
the provisions of this code through the Community Preservation Division of the Community
Development Department. While most Community Preservation actions taken by the Division
are initiated in response to complaints, the Division takes pro-active measures to regularly
inspect certain areas of the City in which code compliance issues are known to occur.
Conducting windshield surveys of these areas informs staff of potential problems such as
vacant structures which are unsecured, broken windows or doors, poorly maintained
landscaping, accumulation of trash and debris, deteriorated roofs, and general lack of
maintenance. When identified, these problems are addressed through enforcement actions
which progress through notification and voluntary compliance to possible citation, if the situation
is not addressed.
Structures may become substandard for various reasons such as fire or disaster events,
damage from water leaks or falling trees, lack of maintenance, or general deterioration. When a
structure is damaged to the point that it is not economically feasible to repair, the structure may
be declared a nuisance and the enforcement agency may order its vacation and demolition.
Section 17980 of the California Health and Safety Code contains procedures for the abatement
of substandard buildings. Subsection (B)(2) of this statute requires that, as part of the decision
October 2013                              H-126

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                Housing Element
to require vacation of a substandard building, the enforcement agency “give full consideration to
the needs for housing as expressed in the local jurisdiction’s housing element.” The City’s
Building Official is responsible for deeming a property as substandard, based on its lack of
compliance with minimum code standards. The City’s procedure requires that the property
owner be notified of the City’s requirement to repair substandard structures. Only in the case of
structures that are deemed to be an imminent threat to public safety is the order given to
demolish the structure. In keeping with State requirements, a policy has been added to this
element requiring that consideration be given to housing needs as part of any decision to order
the removal of substandard dwelling units.
The City has established various funding programs to assist eligible low-income owners in
improving deficient properties, in order to preserve and maintain housing units in a safe
condition. As part of its commitment to preserving and improving affordable housing stock, the
City will continue to fund the following three programs: the Residential Rehabilitation Grant
Program, the Property Rehabilitation Grant program, and the Handyworker Program. All of
these programs target low- and moderate-income homeowners who need larger and more
costly repairs than they can generally afford. These programs are more fully described below.
       The Residential Rehabilitation program provides grants of up to $5,000 per household
        for major home repairs such as heating units and roof replacement, which require the
        services of licensed contractors. The City has provided 27 units with Residential
        Rehabilitation grants in fiscal year 2011-12, and plans to provide a comparable such
        grants in fiscal year 2012-13.
       The Property Rehabilitation Grant program provides grants of up to $1,000 per
        household for property repairs such as walls, fences, and gates; brush clean-up; tree
        trimming; and repairs to outbuildings and accessory structures, including detached
        garages. The City has provided two of these grants in fiscal year 2011-12, and plans to
        provide a comparable number of grants in fiscal year 2012-13.
       The Handyworker Program is operated by the Santa Clarita Valley Committee on Aging
        though a grant of CDBF Funds from the City. The Program provides grants of up to
        $2,500 per household to complete minor repairs which can be completed by unlicensed
        persons, with most repairs performed by handy-worker staff at the Santa Clarita Valley
        Committee on Aging. Typical handy-worker repairs may include, but are not limited to,
        roofs, windows, floors, walls, doors, heating and air conditioning units, and electrical
        systems. Safety upgrades, disabled access, and energy-efficiency improvements are
        also provided as needed. The Handyworker Program has provided over 70 households
        with these grants in fiscal year 2011-12, and plans to grant a comparable number of
        additional grants in fiscal year 2012-13.
G. Housing Issues for Persons with Disabilities and Special Needs
Federal and State laws protect the rights of persons with disabilities to ensure that they have the
same opportunities as able-bodied persons in terms of fulfilling the basic human needs of
access, employment, provision of goods and services, and housing. The term “disabilities” is
broadly defined by these laws, and can include both physical limitations and mental illness. In
addition, addiction to drugs or alcohol has been defined as a disability.
Some persons with special needs may not be disabled, but may be unable to provide adequate
housing for themselves and their families due to other circumstances beyond their control.
                                             H-127                                    October 2013

Housing Element                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan
Women and children who leave abusive home environments often need housing on a temporary
basis while the mother seeks education and/or employment opportunities. Persons may
become homeless due to death of a spouse or parent, divorce, loss of employment, bankruptcy
or foreclosure, or other unexpected situation.
There are a variety of options available to house persons with special needs. One of the least
costly and simplest options is to allow a group of such persons to occupy an existing dwelling
unit as a household unit. In the past, many city codes prevented such a solution by requiring
that dwelling units be occupied only by “family” units in which the occupants were related by
kinship or marriage. Like most other cities, the City of Santa Clarita does not include this
restriction in its Unified Development Code, which defines “family” as “one or more individuals
living together as a single housekeeping unit in a single dwelling, or persons living in a licensed
residential facility of six or fewer residents”. State law provides that up to six residents may
occupy a dwelling unit as a residential care home, without discretionary approval. The City
complies with this State requirement by allowing group homes with six or fewer residents in all
residential zones, provided that if new construction is proposed then Development Review is
required to ensure zoning compliance of the site plan. These homes are often occupied by
disabled persons or persons recovering from addiction.
Residential Health Care Facility for more than six residents are allowed in the UR-3, UR-4 and
UR-5 Zones with the approval of a minor use permit, and in the CR, CC, CN and BP with the
approval of a conditional use permit. These facilities typically include provision of meals,
housekeeping, and various activities for residents, and are often designed for the elderly or
disabled persons. There are no specific sitting or separation requirements for Residential
Health Care Facilities. Parking reductions are allowed for facilities serving elderly and disabled
residents.
Another means of providing for housing needs of disabled persons involves allowing the retrofit
of existing housing units in order to address special needs, such as by providing for construction
of wheelchair ramps, installation of grab-bars, widening of doorways, lowering of counters, and
other alterations. In order to assist persons with special needs to alter their homes for
accessibility, the City’s Community Development Department has provisions for a process that
lets property owners apply for reasonable accommodation to make accessibility adaptations.
Within the City of Santa Clarita, a temporary homeless shelter facility has operated during winter
months for over 15 years. The Winter Emergency Shelter operates from December through
March and receives most of its funding from the Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority. The
facility is managed by local non-profit organizations which provide staffing and oversight. The
City supports the operation of the shelter through assistance with sitting and provision of grant
funds for operations and management. The City has adopted a homeless shelter ordinance that
allows homeless shelters within the Homeless Shelter Overlay Zone by right with no
discretionary approvals. A homeless shelter is allowed in other areas of the City with a
discretionary approval.
State law also requires that the needs of families for safe and affordable daycare be considered
in the zoning ordinance, by allowing family day care within residential zones without
discretionary approval. The City’s Unified Development Code allows establishment of day care
within a dwelling occupied by the day care provider as their primary residence, in all residential
and mixed use zones and the CR and CC commercial zones. Adult day care homes may
provide care for up to six adults, and family child care homes may provide care for up to 14
October 2013                              H-128

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                             Housing Element
children (including two of the owner’s children), pursuant to State law and the applicable City
requirements.
Within all residential zones in the City, the City’s UDC allows for transitional and supportive
housing is allowed wherever residential units, either single or multifamily are allowed.
                                            H-129                                 October 2013

Housing Element                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan
VII.    NON-GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING PRODUCTION
Housing Market
The housing market continues to be a significant constraint to the production of new affordable
housing units. The housing market has started to recover following the crash in the mid-2000s.
Reflecting this modest recovery, in 2013 Habitat for Humanity received approval for a 87-unit
affordable housing development for United States Veterans and their families. However,
general home values and sales still remain lower than prior to the market crash.
The principal constraint on new housing development in Santa Clarita has been the collapse of
the housing market. Approximately 1,300 Santa Clarita homes were foreclosed in between
March 2012 and March 2013 as shown on Table H-3.18.
Land Cost
Another constraint to housing development is the cost of vacant, easily developable land that
has access to infrastructure and public services. Much of the flat land within the City’s
boundaries has already been subdivided or developed. Marginal land with hillsides, riparian
areas, biological resources, mineral resources, or other constraints is often more difficult and
costly to develop. In 2012, vacant land prices in the City of Santa Clarita that are zoned for
residential use range from $5 to $15 per square foot, or between $217,800 and $653,400 per
acre.
Cost of Construction
Tables H-6.5 and H-6.7 show the cost of fees for single and multi-family housing in 2008. A
combination of escalating costs of land, labor and materials cost along with development impact
fees and zoning requirements have driven up housing production costs. As explained in the
Governmental Constraints section, the high fees that are part of the cost of new units reflect the
real cost of growth in Santa Clarita: the need to provide infrastructure and new schools and
parks. Rising energy prices have affected the cost of construction materials due to
transportation costs. In addition, the cost of steel, lumber, concrete, and other materials have
risen substantially over the last five years.
According to City staff, residential construction costs in Santa Clarita Valley are currently
between $118 and $138 per square foot. Added to this are impact and processing fees
estimated at $64,612 per unit for a 2,000 square foot single-family dwelling and $40,463 per unit
for a 1,000 square foot multi-family unit. So the cost, excluding land costs and builder’s profit,
for a newly constructed single-family home would be between $300,612 and $340,612. Single-
family homes in Santa Clarita are not affordable for households that earn the City’s median
income of $83,579, although such households could find resale condominiums units in their
price range. New multi-family construction would be between $158,463 and $178,463 per unit.
Even though costs are even higher, development of affordable units financed with low-income
tax credits is still feasible because the projects are financed with large equity investments,
deferred or residual receipt loans and low-cost debt. Owners of newly constructed market-rate
multi-family housing with conventional mortgages need high rent payments to support their
buildings.
October 2013                              H-130

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                               Housing Element
Construction and Permanent Financing for Subdivisions and Multi-Family Housing
Given that the inventory of unsold homes is at a 27-year high nationwide and home sales are at
a 17-year low, the availability of financing for new market rate single and multi-family
construction is difficult to assess. Constraints on new housing development are not primarily
due to lack of construction finance but due to lack of a market for new or resale homes.
Planning Department records indicate that between 2008 and 2013, twelve subdivisions with a
total of 1,284 units were approved. Of these units, 188 are single-family and 1,096 are multi-
family. Only five of these units have so far been built. Applications for two additional
subdivision tract maps with 139 single family units have been submitted but not approved.
LandSource and its subsidiaries, including Newhall Land and Lennar, are substantial land
developers in the City of Santa Clarita and surrounding areas. In May 2008, LandSource and
its subsidiaries filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. Lennar’s current and proposed new
home developments in Santa Clarita include West Creek and West Hills in Valencia, River
Village and Newhall Ranch (in unincorporated Los Angeles County.) On its website in 2013
Lennar was still listing new homes for sale in one of its Valencia subdivisions at prices varying
from $300,000 to $700,000 and above. However, according to information on the Santa Clarita
Real Estate Blog, Lennar has halted work in most of its subdivisions.
The availability of funding for affordable housing has been severely affected by the dissolution
of Redevelopment in the State of California. The AB1x26 legislation and subsequent AB 1484
legislation have prevented the City from using approximate $6 million dollars in Redevelopment
low/mod housing funds. The previously proposed affordable housing units depended almost
exclusively on these low/mod housing funds for financing and leverage of other financing
sources. It is unclear if or when the City (acting as the Housing Successor) will regain control of
the low/mod housing funds.
Other housing funds, including 4% and 9% Low Income Housing Tax Credits, HOME,
CalHOME, and the Multifamily Housing Program are not sufficient to finance an affordable
housing project alone. A number of pieces of State legislation have been proposed to create
additional financing mechanisms, but to date none have been adopted or shown significant
traction with the legislature. Finally, the general economic downturn has reduced revenue for
the City, making it even more difficult for the City to provide any direct assistance in the
development of affordable housing. At this point, the City cannot predict how many affordable
housing units may be constructed between by the end date for this Housing Element.
Single-Family Mortgages
In 2008, help for families in the City of Santa Clarita who are facing foreclosure is as important
as the availability of mortgages for home purchase. Numerous newspaper articles and blogs
such as the L.A. Land blog on the Los Angeles Times website have pointed out that for
homeowners with resetting ARM mortgages who are upside down (owe more than the home is
worth), the best option may be to simply walk away. The penalty for foreclosure is not overly
severe; FHA eligibility criteria for new mortgage loans only require that two years have passed
since a foreclosure and three years since a bankruptcy. However, this option is not
recommended for homeowners. Instead, methods to help homeowners keep their homes must
be identified. Those homeowners who want to save their homes from foreclosure need
                                             H-131                                   October 2013

Housing Element                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan
information and competent mortgage counseling. Resources for free mortgage counseling on
line and by phone include:
      The "HOPE Hotline" (1-888-995-HOPE or www.995HOPE.org), which provides free
       mortgage counseling 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
      The state's English and Spanish language consumer mortgage information websites that
       provide information both for prospective homebuyers and for homeowners facing
       difficulties: www.yourhome.ca.gov and www.sucasa.ca.gov.
Despite the downturn in the housing market, FHA-insured loans still provide very low (3%) or
even no down payment loans for the purchase of single-family homes. Borrowers only have to
be two years from a foreclosures and three years from a bankruptcy. The income-to-mortgage
payment ratio is now 29% of gross income without consumer debt included, and 41% of gross
income including all other debt payments.
Because borrowers are shopping for loans online, the types of loans and terms offered by local
lending institutions no longer limit housing sale or purchase. However, depending on the area
where they are seeking to buy, purchasers may have more or less trouble finding a loan as
lenders try to shield themselves from the risk that housing prices may decline further.
Although some buyers may have trouble finding an affordable loan, uncertainty about the
direction of housing prices in a period when headlines in the newspapers and broadcast news
programs regularly predict further price decreases is probably having a greater effect on home
purchase than problems with obtaining a loan. However, lenders may also be affected by the
possibility that the value of the home on which they are lending may decline over the short run
rather than remaining stable or rising in price. Such concerns could affect the amount the
lender is willing to lend, and the terms of the loan.
Conclusion
Non-governmental constraints to housing production in the City include national economic
conditions affecting the regional housing market, land costs, construction costs such as
materials and labor, and availability of financing. The City has limited authority to alter these
constraints. However, the City can assist housing developers by assisting with land purchase
and financing through the various funding sources it has available to promote affordable
housing development. These programs are described below in Part VIII.
October 2013                             H-132

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                Housing Element
VIII.    GOALS, OBJECTIVES, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
Based on the analysis of existing conditions, housing needs, and constraints contained in Parts
I-VII of this element, the City has developed housing goals, objectives, policies and programs
designed to help meet the needs of existing and future residents for adequate and affordable
housing. This section of the element sets forth the City’s housing goals, along with specific
programs for action. During the next Housing Element update process in 2021, the programs
established in this element will be evaluated to determine the City’s level of success in meeting
its objectives.
As part of the City’s General Plan, the format for this part of the document is similar to the goals,
objectives and policies contained in the other General Plan Elements. However, unlike the
other elements, State law requires that the Housing Element must contain quantified objectives
for meeting its share of the regional housing needs, and specific programs designed to meet the
City’s housing goals.
State guidelines suggest that a goal should express an end or mission to be accomplished,
rather than a specific action. Goals explain the long-range result desired by the City for each
required topic in the Housing Element.
Objectives define the measurable results that the City seeks to accomplish. Unlike goals, they
are specific targets for program outputs, benchmarks for the evaluation of progress. The
section begins with the “Quantified Objectives” required by State law to indicate how many
dwelling units of each income level are planned to be achieved during the planning period. In
addition, the City has established quantified objectives for its rehabilitation and handy worker
programs.
A policy statement guides decision-making and indicates a commitment of the local legislative
body to a particular course of action. A policy is based on and helps implement a general plan’s
objectives. A policy is carried out by implementing programs.
Programs are specific actions to be undertaken by the City to achieve its objectives and meet its
goals. Programs should reflect the results and analyses of the City’s local housing needs,
available land and financial resources, and the mitigation of identified governmental and non-
governmental constraints. Each program must clearly state the time frame for implementation,
identify the responsible agency or officials, describe the City’s role in the program, describe the
specific actions needed to implement the program, and demonstrate the City’s commitment by
identifying funding sources.
Quantified Objectives
State law requires that a City establish quantified objectives for development of new housing
within the planning period. Table H-8.1 summarizes Santa Clarita’s projected new construction
of affordable and market rate units during the period 2013-2021.
The City of Santa Clarita also plans to fund housing rehabilitation grants for 327 single-family
homeowners and provide handy worker grants to another 700 households for a total of 1,027
grants to 600 very low and 427 low income households. These grants will ensure that residents
living in older homes in the City can maintain those homes in safe and sanitary conditions.
                                            H-133                                     October 2013

Housing Element                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan
                Table H-8.1: Quantified New Construction Objectives, 2013-2021
                        Very Low      Low                           Above
                                                   Moderate
                        50%      or 51%        to                   Moderate
 Housing Type                                      81% to 120%                       Total
                        less      of 80%       of                   >120%        of
                                                   of median
                        median        median                        median
 RHNA                         2,208        1,315            1,410            3,389         8,322
                  Table H-8.2: Quantified Rehabilitation Objectives 2013-2021
                                    Extremely
                                                Very Low     Low
                                    Low
                 Housing Type                   50%     or   51% to Total
                                    30%or
                                                less     of  80% of
                                    less    of
                                                median       median
                                    median
                 Single-Family             40
                                                        98          86          224
                 Rehab Grants
                 Handyworker               80          285         155          520
                 Total                    120          383         241          744
Adequate Sites
State zoning law (Government Code Section 65913.1) requires localities to zone sufficient
vacant land for residential use with appropriate standards to meeting the housing needs
identified in the housing element and other sections of the general plan.
Goal H 1: Provide adequate sites to accommodate 8,322 new housing units between 2013 and
2021.
    Objective: Provide adequate sites at a range of densities to accommodate future housing
    needs.
    Policy H1.1.1: Encourage a variety of housing types such as single-family attached
    (townhouses), multi-family units, planned unit developments mixed use housing and other
    housing types that make housing more affordable.
    Policy H1.1.2: Encourage the development of new affordable units through the provision of
    incentives.
    Policy H1.1.3: Replace housing units demolished by the redevelopment agency for
    redevelopment projects.
    Policy H1.1.4: Establish minimum densities for residential land use districts in the Land
    Use Element of the General Plan.
October 2013                             H-134
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                               Housing Element
        Program H 1.1: Affordable Housing Density Bonus
        Administer the City’s existing density bonus program pursuant to Government Code
        Section 65915 (State Density Bonus Law) as amended by SB 1818 in 2004. Provide a
        by-right density bonus of 25% to developers of new housing who make 5% of new units
        affordable to households earning 50% or less of area median income or 10% of units
        affordable to households earning 80% of area median income. The density bonus can
        reach 35% if the project provides 11% of the units affordable to very low households
        (earning 50% of less of median income), 20% of units affordable to households earning
        80% or less of median income or 40% affordable to households earning between 80%
        and 120% of the median income. Provide additional incentives as provided in Unified
        Development Code Section 17.68.030. Developers requesting to use the density bonus
        must submit applications on a form approved by the Community Development Director
        at the time of submitting any entitlement application for a housing development where a
        density bonus is requested. The application shall include, at a minimum, the following
        information:
           A description of how the proposed project meets the criteria for a density bonus
            under Section 65915;
           Concession(s), including parking adjustments, requested by the applicant;
           A depiction of the location of the density bonus housing units within the proposed
            development.
            Objective/Timeframe: Approve at least 121 affordable units to meet the City’s
            Regional Housing Needs Allocation. Ongoing.
            Responsible Department: Community Development
        Program H 1.2: Mixed Use Ordinance
        Implement the City’s Mixed Use provisions as set forth in the General Plan Land Use
        Element, Mixed Use Zones and the Mixed Use Overlay Zone (MU) to encourage a mix
        of residential, commercial, employment and institutional opportunities within activity
        centers along identified corridors throughout the City.
        The purpose of the mixed use overlay zone is: (1) to provide a mechanism to revitalize
        older commercial corridors and specific individual properties; (2) to increase
        opportunities for infill housing; (3) aesthetically improve transportation corridors; (4)
        reduce automobile dependence by creating pedestrian-oriented neighborhoods where
        local residents have services, shops, job, and access to transit within walking distance of
        their homes.
        Incentives for Mixed Use Development include accelerated plan check review; increased
        residential and commercial density opportunities; increased building heights, reduced
        parking requirements, and reduced setbacks along public streets.
             Objective/Timeframe: Approve at least 50 housing units within mixed use
             developments between 2013 and 2021.
                                             H-135                                   October 2013

Housing Element                                                City of Santa Clarita General Plan
           Responsible Department: Community Development Department
      Program H 1.3: Graduated Density Zoning—Newhall Redevelopment Area
      Redevelopment of portions of Downtown Newhall is constrained by the small parcel
      sizes created by small-lot subdivisions in the past. The City will evaluate the feasibility
      of adopting a program for “graduated density zoning” in this target area. This tool would
      offer increased density based on the size of the site, thereby encouraging owners of
      adjoining properties to collaborate in combining parcels to form a larger development
      site or to package adjoining parcels for sale.
          Geographic Coverage:         Newhall Redevelopment Area
          Objective/Timeframe:           Conduct study and make recommendations to be
          completed by 2015.
          Responsible Department: Community Development Department
      Program H 1.3 Land Banking/Write-Downs
      Establish a proactive City land banking strategy to facilitate the development of housing
      affordable to low and very-low income households. Under this program the City would
      acquire properties as they become available and offer the properties to qualified
      developers through a Request for Proposal/Notice of Funding Availability process. Land
      banking efforts could be expanded to include:
              Purchase of appropriate vacant/underutilized sites as they become available;
              Acquisition of surplus properties from other local, State, and federal agencies;
              Purchase of tax-delinquent properties;
              Purchase of bank foreclosed properties; and/or
              Acceptance of donation of land as an in-lieu option as part of a proposed
               Inclusionary Housing Program (discussed later in this section).
          Objectives/Timeframes: Continue interdepartmental team to track available land
          quarterly. Ongoing.
          Responsible Department: Community Development Department
          Funding Sources: CDBG; HOME; development agreements.
      Program H 1.5: Inclusionary Housing Program (Mixed Income Housing)
      Adopt an inclusionary housing program.
October 2013                            H-136

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                 Housing Element
        Also known as inclusionary zoning, inclusionary housing is a local policy or ordinance
        that requires a developer to include a certain percentage of units in a housing project
        that are affordable to low- and moderate-income households. Many communities in
        California rely on inclusionary housing policies to achieve their affordable housing goals.
        Currently, 12 counties and 95 cities in California have inclusionary housing policies. For
        a study of California’s programs see http://www.nhc.org/pdf/pub_ahp_02_04.pdf.
        The advantage of this program for Santa Clarita is that it will ensure that affordable units
        are produced along with market-rate units to meet the needs of the City’s lower income
        working families and seniors. Santa Clarita’s share of the Regional Housing Needs
        Allocation (RHNA) requires the City create to identify 3,523 sites for very-low and low-
        income households zoned to allow density of at least 30 units per acre. Zoning land with
        higher densities will increase the value of the land for both owners and developers. An
        inclusionary ordinance will ensure that the community as a whole benefits when land is
        developed with higher density, by ensuring that affordable housing is provided whenever
        new market rate units are developed on these sites.
        Inclusionary housing policies vary widely based on local market conditions.           Some
        criteria for the City to consider are:
                Inclusionary Housing Percentage: Most communities in California with
                 inclusionary housing policies require at least 10% of the units to be inclusionary,
                 with some communities requiring more than 20%.
        Income Levels Targeted: Most inclusionary housing policies are targeted toward low-
        income households. However, in recent years, the housing costs in California have
        escalated to a point where even moderate-income households have problems obtaining
        affordable housing.         Increasingly, communities are including moderate-income
        households in their inclusionary policies. Nevertheless, jurisdictions should take into
        account the proportion of need in each income category, including the needs of the
        extremely low income population, when designing Inclusionary Housing Programs, and
        prioritized funding for extremely low income housing if possible.
                Applicable Housing Types: In the past, inclusionary housing policies were
                 applied only to rental housing. However, with increasing home ownership costs
                 and income gaps in California, many communities are now applying inclusionary
                 policies to ownership housing developments.
                Exemptions: Small-scale developments are likely to have financial and physical
                 difficulties in meeting inclusionary housing requirements. Most policies have a
                 minimum project size of around 10 units that will trigger the inclusionary policy.
                 Developments that do not meet the minimum project size are often required to
                 pay an in-lieu fee (see in-lieu options below). Although the revenue generated by
                 these fees is not typically sufficient to purchase land and build comparable units
                 elsewhere, it can be combined with other funding sources such as
                 redevelopment set-aside funds in order to purchase and land-bank housing sites
                 as described in Program H 1.4.
                In-Lieu Options to Constructing Affordable Units On-Site:          Most California
                 communities offer one or more of the following in-lieu options:
                                               H-137                                  October 2013

Housing Element                                                 City of Santa Clarita General Plan
             -    Pay an in-lieu fee;
             -    Construct the affordable units off-site;
             -    Donate land so the affordable units can be constructed by another developer;
             -    Purchase affordability covenants on existing market-rate units; or
             -    Extend affordability covenants on affordable housing that are at risk of
                  converting to market-rate housing.
            Geographic Coverage: Some communities apply the inclusionary policy
             throughout their political boundaries, while others have inclusionary policies that
             are applicable only to targeted areas, such as redevelopment project areas.
            Duration of Affordability and Resale Provisions: Inclusionary housing policies are
             intended to create a permanent supply of affordable housing. Rental housing
             units usually have affordability covenants to guarantee long-term affordability of
             these units. Ownership units generally have a mechanism in place to recapture
             part of the financial resources in order to replenish the affordable housing stock
             and prevent assisted households from receiving a windfall from the transaction.
             Recently, affordability controls in inclusionary policies have come to mirror
             redevelopment affordable terms—55 years for rental housing and 45 years for
             ownership housing with resale provisions.
            Incentives for Developers to Offset Costs: Because inclusionary housing shifts
             some of the costs of producing affordable housing to developers, local
             jurisdictions typically offer development incentives or regulatory concessions.
             Incentive options include a density bonus, height increase, shared parking or
             reduced parking requirements, reduced setbacks or landscaping requirements,
             fee waivers or reductions, or other flexibility in development standards.
            Feasibility Study: Many local jurisdictions conduct a technical feasibility study to
             ensure that the minimum housing set-aside requirements, in conjunction with the
             incentives provided to offset costs, do not contribute overall to making the
             development of housing financially infeasible.
          Objectives/Timeframe:        Evaluate the feasibility of establishing an inclusionary
          housing policy which reflects the housing needs of the various income categories
          and housing sizes, including the needs of the extremely low income population, by
          January 2016. If approved in concept, the City will draft and approve an ordinance
          and modify the existing Housing Element by December 2016 and begin program by
          March 2017.
          Responsible Department: Community Development Department
          Funding Sources: General Fund; CDBG;; development agreement
      Program H 1.6 Large Sites Program
           To facilitate the development of housing for lower income households:
October 2013                           H-138

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                Housing Element
            The City will encourage land divisions and specific plans resulting in parcels sizes
            that facilitate multifamily developments affordable to lower income households in
            light of state, federal and local financing programs (i.e., TCAC, HOME, units). The
            City will offer the following incentives for the development of affordable housing
            including but not limited to priority to processing subdivision maps that include
            affordable housing units, expedited review for the subdivision of larger sites into
            buildable lots where the development application can be found consistent with the
            General Plan, applicable Specific Plan and master environmental impact report,
            financial assistance (based on availability of federal, state, local foundations, and
            private housing funds, and modification of development requirements, such as
            reduced parking standards for seniors, assisted care, and special needs housing on
            a case-by-case basis.
               Timeframes: Ongoing, as projects are submitted to the Community Development
               Department.
               Responsible Department:           Community Development Department, Planning
               Commission and City Council.
Assist in the Development of Affordable Housing
Goal H.2: Assist in the development of adequate housing to meet the needs of extremely low,
very low, low and moderate income households (Government Code Section 65583(c)(2)).
    Objective H 2.1: Assist in the development of new and rehabilitated housing to provide at
    least 273 units for households with very low and low incomes.
    Policy H 2.1.1: Target one third of housing subsidies to extremely low income households
    in new affordable development.
    Policy H 2.1.2: Require that all units developed under any of the City affordable housing
    programs remain affordable for the longest possible time or at least 55 years.
    Policy H 2.1.3: Encourage the development of housing affordable to lower income groups
    in areas well served by public transportation, schools, retail, and other services.
    Policy H 2.1.4: Encourage the transition of the homeless population to stable housing.
        Program H 2.1           Affordable Housing Program
        The adoption of AB1x26 and AB 1484 dictated terms of RDA dissolution and severely
        restricted the use of RDA low/mod housing funds (LMHF’s). As the dissolution process
        continues it was determined that LMHF’s not available as recently as February 2013.
        Prior to determining amount of funds available for housing programs the City will need to
        obtain Finding of Completion from DPF.
              Geographic Coverage: Citywide
             Objectives/Timeframe: By Work to obtain Finding of Completion from DPF and
             determine amount of funds available for housing programs. If funding is secured,
                                             H-139                                    October 2013

Housing Element                                              City of Santa Clarita General Plan
           assist in the development of 40 very low-income and 80 low-income affordable
           housing units in the City. Develop by 2015 an additional 20 very low-income units
           and 40 low-income units; and by 2017: develop an additional 20 very low-income
           units and 40 low-income units.
           Responsible Department: Community Development Department
           Funding Sources: HOME; CDBG; Tax Exempt Multi-Family Revenue Bonds; Infill
           Grant; Transit Oriented Development Grant.
      Program H 2.2: Homebuyer Assistance – FirstHOME Program
      The City offers homeownership assistance through the FirstHOME Program.
      FirstHOME provides low- and moderate-income first-time homebuyers with a low-
      interest, second mortgage to be used as a down payment on an owner-occupied primary
      residence. Repayment is deferred until the home is sold, changes title, or ceases to be
      the borrower’s primary residence.
      The primary funding source for this program is HOME funds which are obtained through
      competitive application to the State. While the City intends to apply for HOME funds as
      often as they become available, it cannot predict the outcome of those applications.
          Objectives/Timeframe:       Apply to the State for HOME funds to provide loans
          through the City FirstHOME Program. Submit applications in 2013 any additional
          years as warrented.
          Responsible Department: Community Development Department
          Funding Sources: Federal HOME Funds administered by the State of California.
      Program H 2.3: Homebuyer Assistance – CalHFA
      The California Housing Finance Agency (CalFHA) provides primary and junior mortgage
      loans to first-time homebuyers at below-market interest rates. The City will continue to
      coordinate the FirstHOME Program with CalHFA programs in order to increase the low-
      and moderate-income homebuyer’s opportunity for homeownership.
           Targeted Groups: Low- and moderate-income first-time homebuyers
           Objective/Timeframe: Continue to be a CalHFA participating jurisdiction and
           coordinate the FirstHOME Program with the various CalHFA loan programs
           Responsible Department: Community Development Department
      Program H 2.4: Homebuyer Assistance – Mortgage Credit Certification Program
      The Mortgage Credit Certification (MCC) Program, offers first-time homebuyers a federal
      income tax credit. This credit reduces the amount of federal taxes the holder of the
      certificate would pay. It can also help first-time homebuyers qualify for a loan by
      allowing a lender to reduce the housing expense ratio by the amount of tax savings. The
October 2013                          H-140

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                              Housing Element
        qualified homebuyer who is awarded an MCC may take an annual credit against their
        federal income taxes paid on the homebuyer's mortgage. The credit is subtracted dollar-
        for-dollar from the federal income taxes. The qualified buyer is awarded a tax credit of
        up to 15%, and the remaining 85% is deducted accordingly.
        The City will continue to be a participating jurisdiction in this program so that
        homebuyers in Santa Clarita can benefit from the federal Mortgage Credit Certification
        Program (MCC Program) operated by the County of Los Angeles.
             Targeted Groups: Low- and moderate-income first-time homebuyers
             Objective/Timeframe: Make the County’s MCC Program available in Santa Clarita
             by continuing to be a participating jurisdiction.
             Responsible Department: Community Development Department
        Program H 2.6 Homeless Case Management
        In addition to shelter, those experiencing homelessness need on-going case
        management to address the issues leading to homelessness, and assist them with
        transition to stable permanent housing. Effective case management services may
        include counseling, transportation assistance, job search assistance, and referrals to
        legal, health care, and substance abuse services. Assistance in locating transitional
        shelter or subsidized housing may also be provided.
             Targeted Groups:          Homeless Individuals and Families
             Objectives/Timeframe: Fund homeless case management services connected to
             local homeless shelter operations.
             Responsible Department: Community Development Department
             Funding Sources:          Community Development Block Grants
        Program H 2.7          Collaboration with Non-Profit Affordable Housing Developers
        The City continues to work with non-profit affordable housing developers to create new
        affordable housing units. In 2005-2006 the City conducted a Request for Qualifications
        process in which two developers were chosen to work with the City to develop a mixed-
        use family affordable housing project. Efforts toward the completion of that project are
        on-going.
        The City intends to continue to be responsive to the proposals of other affordable
        housing developers, and will support projects which show promise to provide affordable
        housing for seniors and families, especially those who are extremely low-income.
        Currently, affordable housing developers approach the City informally with projects in
        various stages of development, making it difficult to bring projects to fruition. A formal
        Request for Financial Assistance Application will streamline and clarify this process.
        The Application will include information on the affordable housing goals of the City,
        including the provision of housing for large households and extremely low income
        households.
                                             H-141                                    October 2013

Housing Element                                                 City of Santa Clarita General Plan
             Objectives/Timeframe: Develop a Request for Financial Assistance Application by
             2010. The City will then annually evaluate the program and identify sources for
             funding as they become available.
             Responsible Department: Community Development Department
             Funding Sources:          Community Development Block Grants, Redevelopment
             Set-Aside Funds
        Program H 2.8: Extremely-Low Income Affordable Housing Program
        Encourage the development of housing for extremely-low income households
        (households earning at or below 30% of median, based on HUD calculations for the Los
        Angeles County area). Within each program described in the H.2 Goal, an emphasis will
        be placed on serving the needs of extremely-low income households. . As part of the
        activities in Program H 2.7 - Collaboration with Non-Profit Affordable Housing
        Developers, the City will give preference to programs and projects that have greater
        numbers of housing for very-low income households.
             Objectives/Timeframe:         Ensure that the Request for Financial Assistance
             Application, to be developed by 2010, emphasizes the City’s preference for projects
             that serve the extremely-low income population.
             Responsible Department: Community Development Department
             Funding Sources: HOME; CDBG; Tax Exempt Multi-Family Revenue Bonds; Infill
             Grant; Transit Oriented Development Grant
Conserve and Improve the Existing Housing Stock
Goal H.3: Conserve and improve the existing housing stock through Community Preservation,
rehabilitation loans, and a handy worker program.
   Objective H 3.1: Bring existing housing units up to an established standard of habitability.
   Policy H 3.1.1: Enforce existing standards of habitability.
   Policy H 3.1.2: Provide rehabilitation assistance to income-eligible homeowners for repairs
   related to safety, habitability and accessibility standards.
   Policy H 3.1.3: Provide grants and loans to income-eligible owner-occupants of single-
   family homes for emergency and minor safety, habitability and accessibility repairs.
        Program H 3.1 Proactive Community Preservation
        Conduct proactive Community Preservation activities related to property maintenance
        and public safety issues in selected neighborhoods of Canyon Country and Newhall to
        forestall decline of these neighborhoods and help maintain them in a clean, safe,
        healthy, and secure manner that contributes to community vitality.
October 2013                             H-142

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                Housing Element
        Staff from Community Preservation, Housing, Planning, Building and Safety, Park and
        Recreation, Community Services and Public Works work in close partnership with the
        affected neighborhoods, local law enforcement, fire, emergency services and local
        contractors to achieve code compliance.
            Geographic Coverage: East Newhall, Downtown Newhall, Canyon Country and
        other areas as needed.
            Objectives:
                        Maintenance and improvement of existing homes.
                        Revitalization of neighborhoods in decline.
                        Enhancement of residential property values.
                        Reduction of crime, graffiti and gang activity.
            Responsible Department: Community Development Department
            Funding Source: General Fund
        Program H 3.2: Residential Rehabilitation Program
        The City will continue to administer a program that provides grants to low- and
        moderate-income homeowners to repair their primary residences. Eligible homes are
        those that are within City limits and are owner-occupied. Owners must meet income
        eligibility criteria. Grants of up to $5,000 per year per household are available to provide
        repairs to roofs, HVAC systems, electrical, windows, floors, and address other
        habitability issues.
             Targeted Groups: Low- and moderate-income homeowners
             Objective/Timeframe: Continue to provide 25 Residential Rehabilitation Grants
             per year.
             Responsible Department: Community Development
             Funding Sources: CDBG
        Program H 3.3: Handyworker Program
        The City will continue to provide financial support to the Handyworker Program, operated
        by the Santa Clarita Valley Committee on Aging – Senior Center through a grant from
        the City. The Handyworker Program provides minor home repairs, which are primarily
        performed by Senior Center staff. Grants up to a total of $2,500 in repairs are allowed
        per household, per year. Eligible households are owner-occupied and have incomes at
        or below 80% of the median household income for Los Angeles County, as determined
        annually by HUD. Typical repairs include plumbing, electrical, windows, walls, doors,
        and HVAC. Repairs which are beyond the scope of the Handyworker staff are
                                                H-143                                 October 2013

Housing Element                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan
       subcontracted to local licensed repair persons.
            Targeted Groups: Low- and moderate-income homeowners.
            Objective/Timeframe: Continue to fund the Senior Center to provide 65
            Handyworker grants per year.
            Responsible Department:          Community Development Department through a
            contract with the Santa Clarita Valley Committee on Aging – Senior Center
            Funding Source: CDBG
       Program H 3.4 Property Rehabilitation Program
       The City will continue to administer the Property Rehabilitation Program to provide
       grants to low- and moderate-income homeowners for repairs to the grounds surrounding
       their owner-occupied homes. Typical repairs include driveway repair, tree-trimming,
       fence, wall, and gate repair, and brush clearance Grants are for up to $1,000 in repairs.
            Targeted Groups: Low- and moderate-income homeowners.
            Geographic Coverage: City of Santa Clarita.
            Objective/Timeframe: Provide three Property Rehabilitation grants per year.
            Responsible Department: Community Development Department
            Funding Sources: CDBG
       Program H 3.5: Provide Information for Energy Conservation Programs
       The City of Santa Clarita will create and maintain a website that will be a “one-stop shop”
       that will provide residents, businesses and builders with programs and products that
       assist with energy conservation on existing units. The website will include any available
       programs for lower income residents. In addition, the City will review the existing
       building and development codes with all relevant state programs to implant many as
       recommendations as feasible.
            Timeframe: Ongoing
            Responsible Departments:          Community Development Department and Public
            Works
            Funding Sources: None Required
Preserve Units at Risk of Conversion to Market Rate Rents
Goal H 4: Preserve affordability of existing homes that are at risk of converting to market-rate
rents during the planning period.
    Objective H 4.1.1: Preserve 232 units at risk of losing their subsidies and converting to
October 2013                            H-144

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                 Housing Element
    market rents between 2013 and 2021.
    Policy H 4.1.2: Monitor the status of at-risk units throughout the planning period to identify
    units which are at planned for imminent conversion to market rate units.
    Policy H 4.2: Work with non-profit housing organizations to preserve at-risk units.
        Program H 4.1: Preservation of At-Risk Housing
        Santa Clarita has 496 units for families and individuals in 8 developments, and 956 low
        and very low income units in senior developments that are made affordable to low- and
        very-low-income tenants with state or federal finance. During the 2013-2021 planning
        period, an additional 232 units in three developments are at high risk of losing their
        subsidies and converting to market rates (see Table H-3.20 and Table H-3.21). These
        units include 76 senior units affordable at 50% of median income; and 78 family units
        affordable to households earning 50% or less of median income (very low income).
        Conversion of these units to market-rate rents would be a significant loss of affordable
        housing in Santa Clarita.
        To the extent feasible, the City will work to preserve affordable units at risk of losing their
        subsidies and converting to market-rate rents.
             Objectives/Timeframe: Annually update the status of at-risk housing beginning in
             2014. Make contact with owners and residents of the Valencia Villas by 2014.
             Make contact with the owners and residents of Meadow Ridge Apartments by 2014
             and Park Sierra by 2015. Continue investigating funding options for continuation of
             affordability agreements. Pursue funding as available.
             Responsible Department: Community Development Department
             Funding Sources: Federal and state low-income housing tax credits, bond
             finance, California Multi-Family Housing Program, conventional mortgage funds.
Address and Remove or Mitigate Constraints
Goal 5: Address and, where appropriate and legally possible, remove government constraints
to the maintenance, improvement, and development of housing for all income levels.
    Objective H 5.1: Where possible, reduce or remove government restraints on housing as
    necessary and feasible.
    Policy H 5.1.1: Expedite application review, permitting, and inspection procedures for
    affordable housing projects.
    Policy H 5.1.2: Consider fee reductions and/or deferrals for affordable housing projects
    when deemed appropriate.
                                              H-145                                     October 2013
Housing Element                                                  City of Santa Clarita General Plan
        Program H 5.1: Monitoring of Codes and Ordinances
        The City will regularly monitor the implementation of ordinances, codes, policies, and
        procedures to ensure that they comply with reasonable accommodation for the disabled.
             Timeframe: Ongoing as needed
             Responsible Department: Community Development Department
             Funding Sources: General Fund
        Program H 5.2: Fee Reductions or Deferrals for Affordable Housing Projects
        The City will review affordable housing proposals on a case-by-case basis and authorize
        reduction or deferral of fee payments as deemed appropriate. Projects with units for
        very-low income households will be given priority for any available fee reductions or
        deferrals.
        The City will investigate implementing a fee reduction or deferral ordinance to encourage
        developers to create affordable units for very-low income households.
             Timeframe: Current Policy - Ongoing as needed
             Responsible Department: Community Development Department and City Council
             Funding Sources: General Fund, Redevelopment Set-aside
        Program H 5.3: Expedited Processing for Affordable Housing Projects
        The City will continue an existing program to expedite processing for affordable housing
        projects, including one-stop preliminary review, concurrent application review,
        designation of a primary contact, construction and grading plan review, permitting, and
        inspection.
             Timeframe: Ongoing as applications are submitted
             Responsible Department: Community Development Department
             Funding Sources: General Fund
Equal Housing Opportunities
Goal H6: Promote housing opportunities for all persons regardless of race, religion, sex, marital
status, ancestry, national origin, color, familial status or disability. (Government Code Section
65583(c)(5).
    Objective H 6.1: Promote fair housing practices and prohibit discrimination.
October 2013                             H-146
City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                 Housing Element
    Policy H 6.1.1: Ensure compliance with fair housing laws by adopting development
    guidelines that encourage the development of mixed-income housing in every zone district
    and in every area of the community.
    Policy H 6.1.2: Provide fair housing services that include public information, counseling and
    investigation
    Policy H 6.1.3: Prohibit discrimination in housing.
        Program H 6.1: Fair Housing Programs
        The City contracts with a service provider to provide and coordinate fair housing services
        for residents. The fair housing services provider is required to conduct outreach and
        education activities, distribute literature, provide housing vacancy listings, and publicize
        the availability of fair housing services through various media. The contractor also
        records and investigates inquiries and complaints from residents.
             Targeted Groups: Rental property residents, rental property owners, rental
             property managers, resident managers, rental agencies and real estate brokers and
             agents.
             Objectives/Timeframe:
                Annually allocate funding to support fair housing and tenant/landlord services.
                Provide training to City staff on fair housing laws and responsibilities.
             Responsible Department: Community Development Department
             Funding Sources: CDBG
        Program H 6.2: Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing Choice
        As a Community Development Block Grant entitlement community, the City is required
        to develop an Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing Choice (AI) in conjunction of the
        submission of the Consolidated Plan. The AI will contain:
               Demographic data on housing, income, household make-up, employment, and a
                housing profile;
               Evaluation of current City policies and regulations;
               Evaluation of public sector impacts such as lending practices;
               Description of potential impediments and conclusions;
               Recommendations to address identified impediments.
            Objectives/Timeframes:
               Complete the 2014/2015 to 2018/2019 Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing
                                               H-147                                    October 2013

Housing Element                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan
              Choice (AI) in 2014.
             Implement recommendations of document.
             Submit completed AI to HUD by May 15, 2014.
          Responsible Department: Community Development Department
          Funding Sources: General Fund
      Program H 6.3: Monitor Housing Issues
      The City will monitor legislation, trends, and policy issues related to the development
      and maintenance of affordable housing in the City of Santa Clarita.
           Objectives/Timeframes: Ongoing efforts include but are not limited to:
              Attending housing and legislative review conferences;
              Attending training workshops;
              Training on new legislation, state requirements, policies and procedures
               pertaining to housing programs.
              The City will also participate in regional planning efforts coordinated by the
               Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) and interfacing with
               other local jurisdictions, the County of Los Angeles and the public.
           Responsible Department: Community Development Department
           Funding Sources: General Fund
      Program H 6.4: Mobilehome Rent Adjustment Policies
      The City currently has a Mobile home park rental adjustment policy codified as Municipal
      Code Chapter 6.02. This ordinance is designed to protect park residents, the majority of
      which are of lower income, from unreasonable rent increases. The ordinance also
      provides for the election of a Mobile Home Rental Adjustment Panel.
      The ordinance restricts the allowable annual space rent increases at mobile home parks
      within the City limits to one of the following:
             An adjustment limited to the percentage of the Consumer Price Index increase
              over the previous year (not to exceed 6%), along with a pass-through of increase
              costs of government required services and increased utility costs; or
             An increase based on increases in operating costs and other park expenses,
              substantiated by the park owner through written documentation.
      Park owners are subject to significant notification requirements, and the ordinance puts
      into place a rent increase appeal process which can be initiated by the park residents.
October 2013                             H-148

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                                  Housing Element
              Targeted Groups: Mobilehome Park residents and mobile home park owners
              Geographic Coverage: City of Santa Clarita
              Objectives/Timeframes: Continue to implement the regulations contained in the
              Mobile Home Park Rent Adjustment Procedures, Municipal Code 6.02
              Responsible Department: Community Development Department
              Funding Sources: General Fund
Persons With Disabilities Including Persons With Developmental Disabilities
Goal H 7: The housing needs of persons with disabilities, including persons with developmental
disabilities are typically not addressed by Title 24 Regulations. The housing needs of persons
with disabilities, in addition to basic affordability, range from slightly modifying existing units to
requiring a varying range of supportive housing facilities.
         Program H 7.1: Developmentally Disabled Housing
         Encourage the provision of housing specifically serving the developmentally disabled
         population in new affordable housing projects. Encourage affordable housing developers
         to set aside a portion of the units for the developmentally disabled. Investigate dedicated
         funding for developmentally disabled affordable housing construction and support
         applications for construction funding for affordable housing for the developmentally
         disabled as described below:
         •     The City shall reach out annually to developers of supportive housing for the
               disabled to encourage development of projects targeted for persons with
               disabilities, including persons with developmental disabilities.
         •     The City shall seek State and Federal monies, as funding becomes available, in
               support of housing construction and rehabilitation targeted for persons with
               disabilities, including persons with developmental disabilities.
         •     As the City Council has historically done with senior housing projects, the City shall
               provide the ability to request the City Council for regulatory incentives, such as
               expedited permit processing and fee waivers and deferrals, to projects targeted for
               persons with disabilities, including persons with developmental disabilities.
         •     Assist in the identification of locations, facilitate in obtaining the streamline the
               necessary HCD Community Care licensing, and streamline City land use approvals
               for disabled housing.
                                               H-149                                   October 2013

Housing Element                                               City of Santa Clarita General Plan
            Timeframe: The City will apply for funding at least twice during the planning
            period if funding is available, reach out annually to developers and establish
            specific regulatory incentives by July 2015.
            Objective: The City will encourage the development of 50 housing units; establish
            a process to allow for requests for regulatory incentives; and collaborate with
            developers of supportive housing.
            Responsible Department: Community Development Department
            Funding Sources: General Fund if available and other sources as available.
      Program H 7.2: Developmentally Disabled Services
      The City shall work with North Los Angeles Regional Center to implement an outreach
      program informing families within the City of affordable housing which may be suitable
      for persons with developmental disabilities. Information will be made available on the
      City's website. The City will also:
             Identify local non-profits or other community stakeholders who may be interested
              in expanding their services into providing group housing for the developmentally
              disabled.
             Assist with identification of funding sources and provide City support for funding
              applications for disabled services.
            Timeline: Initiate a cooperative outreach program with the North Los Angeles
            Regional Center by October 2014 and research options for program design and
            funding by March 2015. Continue to work cooperatively with the Regional Center in
            support of persons with disabilities, including persons with developmental
            disabilities.
            Responsibility: Community Development
            Funding Sources: General Fund if available and other sources as available.
October 2013                            H-150

City of Santa Clarita General Plan                                           Housing Element
IX. REDEVELOPMENT FUNDS FOR HOUSING
As of February 1, 2012, the Redevelopment Agency no longer exists pursuant to Assembly Bill
1X26 (AB1X26) and subsequently modified by Assembly Bill 1484 (AB 1484). The former
housing functions, duties, and obligations of the Redevelopment Agency have been assumed
by the City of Santa Clarita as the Housing Successor Agency. When the Housing Successor
Agency became operative, it received all housing assets of the former Redevelopment Agency,
excluding any funds that may have been in the Redevelopment Agency’s Low and Moderate
Income Housing Fund, with the exception of unspent bond proceeds.
AB1484 allows the Housing Successor Agency, in coordination with the Redevelopment Agency
Successor Agency, to request any unspent bond proceeds be returned to the Housing
Successor Agency to further affordable housing goals and objectives. In order to do so, the
Redevelopment Agency Successor Agency must complete a number of requirements to obtain
a “Finding of Completion.” Once a Finding of Completion is obtained, the Successor Agency
may request the unspent bond proceeds be returned to the Housing Successor Agency by
placing the request on a Recognized Obligation Payment Schedule and obtain the approvals of
both the Oversight Board and the Department of Finance.
At the time of the Redevelopment Agency’s dissolution, there was $5,073,940 in unspent bond
proceeds as a result of housing related bonds that were issued by the Redevelopment Agency
in 2008. The total amount of unspent bond proceeds that will be available to fund housing
programs is currently unknown, as the approvals by the Oversight Board and Department of
Finance are not guaranteed and must be obtained. In addition to the unspent bond proceeds,
the Redevelopment Agency Successor Agency has the ability to request outstanding loans
between the City of Santa Clarita and the former Redevelopment Agency be paid back over a
period of time. If that is approved to occur, 20 percent of the funds returned to the City are
required to be set aside for the Housing Successor Agency to implement housing related
projects and programs. The amount potentially available to the Housing Successor Agency
through this mechanism is unknown at this time. There are no other dedicated funding sources
available to fund housing programs at this time as there is no longer any tax increment being
received and subsequently set aside specifically for this purpose.
 
                                          H-151                                  October 2013

