
COMMUNITY FOREST ELEMENT
                  OF THE
   THOUSAND OAKS GENERAL PLAN
            City of Thousand Oaks
      Community Development Department
        2100 Thousand Oaks Boulevard
          Thousand Oaks, CA 91362
                (805) 449-2323
           Adopted: April 11, 2017
Thousand Oaks General Plan
Community Forest Element                                                                Table of Contents
                               Table of Contents
Chapter                                                                                                     Page
1    Introduction
     A.     The Community Forest ............................................................................. 1
     B.     The Benefit of Trees .................................................................................. 2
     C.     The History of Trees in Thousand Oaks ................................................... 4
2    Overview of the Community Forestry Program
     A.     Roles and Responsibilities ........................................................................ 6
3    Issues and Policies
     A.     Establishing a Comprehensive Vision of the ............................................. 7
            Community Forest
     B.     Maintaining the Existing Forest ................................................................. 8
     C.     Extending the Forest ................................................................................ 12
     D.     Achieving the Optimum Environmental .................................................... 14
            Benefit of Trees
     E.     Achieving the Optimum Aesthetic Benefit ................................................ 15
            of Trees
     F.     Assuring Coordination Among City .......................................................... 17
            Departments and with other Jurisdictions
     G.     Community Participation and Education .................................................. 19
4    Related Policies and Regulations
     A.     Community Forest Protection and Maintenance ...................................... 22
            Ordinances and Standards
     B.     The Forestry Master Plan ........................................................................ 25
5    Implementation Measures .................................................................................. 26
                                                                                                                     i
Thousand Oaks General Plan
Community Forest Element                                Table of Contents
                     This page intentionally left blank
Thousand Oaks General Plan
Community Forest Element   Table of Contents
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                      Chapter 1
Community Forest Element                                                     Introduction
                                     CHAPTER 1
                                 INTRODUCTION
This chapter provides an overview of the reasons for preserving and enhancing the
community forest in Thousand Oaks. It discusses the impact trees have on the City and
outlines the objectives of the City’s forestry program.
A.      The Community Forest
The community forest, with its native oak trees, is Thousand Oaks' largest, most visible,
and arguably most important natural resource. Both environmentally and aesthetically,
the forest makes the city a better place to live.
To fully understand the importance of trees to Thousand Oaks it might be helpful to
imagine a completely treeless city. It would be a stark landscape--hot, dry and
monochromatic. The air would be devoid of fragrance, quiet of the sound of birds and
the rustle of leaves. Sidewalks would be hostile places, barren of shade and greenery,
and unadorned by the artful play of shadow patterns created by leaf and limb. The City
could be as much as ten degrees hotter than it is now if its forest cover were suddenly
gone. Stairs would be the only things our children could climb. And without trees, we
would have no living clocks marking the passage of time in our lifetimes--and no green
monuments to the past.
The Thousand Oaks Community Forest program seeks to strengthen the connection
between trees and people in the city. It seeks to maximize the long-term benefits which
trees provide to people by enhancing the environment and care which people provide to
trees. In doing so, the plan aspires toward an ecological ethic in which the human
species lives in creative harmony with the natural and landscaped environment.
Trees are under increasing stresses of human origin. Pavement and structures cover
and compact the soil, depriving roots of room, water, air and nutrients. Trenching
severs existing roots. Car doors and delivery trucks slam into trunks, and vandals
deface trees, scraping off life-carrying tissues under the bark. In many regions, polluted
air affects the natural processes by clogging leaf pores with particulates and toxins or
pouring down acid rain. Reflected heat bakes trunks and foliage, at the same time that
climatic changes are resulting in longer droughts, and threaten hotter summers and
stronger winds. Beset by such stresses, city trees become more susceptible to insects
and disease.
As community forests have declined across the nation, an ever larger proportion of
                                                                                         1

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                          Chapter 1
Community Forest Element                                                         Introduction
equally stressed municipal tree budgets have gone toward removing trees. One of the
goals of selective tree removal is to maintain a progressive planting program that will
help replenish and perpetuate the community forest.
At a time when the world's rain forests are being systematically destroyed,
indiscriminate logging is deprecating world timber resources, and the woodlands of
Europe and eastern North America are succumbing to acid rain, our community forests
are also in crisis. Paradoxically--and perhaps promisingly--it is also a time when
massive reforestation efforts have been proposed to help absorb the carbon dioxide
largely responsible for the worldwide greenhouse effect. By contributing to this effort, it
may be that the aggressive re-greening of our communities will prove an important step
in the restoration of our planet.
The basic means of overcoming the stresses that beset urban trees and restoring the
vigor of the community forest is to plant the right tree, in the right place, with an
appropriate planting area and proper care. Coupled with community education and
participation, these are the essential elements of creating and maintaining a community
forest.
Community forestry combines three professional traditions: that of the arboriculturist,
whose focus of concern is the health of the individual tree; that of the landscape
architect, who helps find the fit between natural environments and human needs,
including the need for beauty; and that of the forester or arboriculturist, whose specialty
is the management of the whole forest and its entire life cycle. It is this holistic
perspective--treating the community forest as an integrated asset that transcends
property lines and political jurisdictions--which separates community forestry from
traditional municipal tree management.
B.       THE BENEFIT OF TREES
In economic terms, the American Forests (AF) organization estimates the amenity value
of a community tree to be twenty-five times greater than the value of a tree grown
strictly for its lumber. According to the AF, such a tree "is appraised more like real
estate than a commodity". Its value derives from the many benefits it bestows on
individual residents, the community and the larger ecosystem. These benefits include:
    •    Trees impart a distinctive character and identity to the City and its various
         neighborhoods. Thousand Oaks is noted for its environmental amenities, which
         trees help create. To come home to a green and shaded community establishes
         a powerful "sense of place".
    •    Trees establish visual harmony and continuity along the City's streets. The
         experience of driving--which is such a large part of the experience of Thousand
         Oaks and southern California—is more pleasurable along tree-lined streets. If a
         single tree is a thing of beauty, a well-designed tree-lined street can be a striking
                                                                                              2

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                      Chapter 1
Community Forest Element                                                     Introduction
     experience. Distinctive plantings on major streets also help orient drivers making
     the City more "imageable" and therefore easier to navigate.
  •  Trees enrich the aesthetic experience of the City, adding pleasing shapes,
     colors, fragrance, texture, scale and seasonal change. The beauty which trees
     add to any landscape is especially appreciated in urban settings, where most
     people live and work and where environmental amenities are harder to find.
  •  Trees soften and screen urban development. Combined with good planning and
     design, they are effective healers of the visual environment, helping to meld
     diverse urban structures and uses with a green unity and adding a natural
     dimension to the City's growth over time.
  •  Trees help reduce perceived noise. Dense foliage that visually screens a noise
     source helps reduce the perceived noise levels in the area.
  •  Trees help increase and stabilize property values. Realtors report that trees
     increase residential property values. Commercial districts, as well, are
     strengthened by the enhanced image trees provide. The economic return to the
     City in the form of property, sales and transfer taxes is substantial.
  •  Trees enhance children's play. They are natural playthings, full of life, and help to
     stimulate a child's imagination and sense of wonder.
  •  Trees enhance people's sense of connection to nature and history. Emotionally
     and symbolically, trees represent people's relation to that which is larger than
     themselves. They allow us to experience the natural world in a tangible form for
     which we feel responsible. Since trees, like people, grow and change through
     time, we identify with them. Since they often live longer than we do, they link us
     to times beyond our own, spanning past and future generations. In short, trees
     become part of our personal environment and as such have an important
     psychological value, enriching people's passage through time as well as space.
  •  Trees enhance civic pride and involvement. Tree planting programs allow
     citizens to participate in creating a city they can be proud of.
  •  Trees provide shade and help cool "urban heat islands", reducing energy costs
     and consumption. During the summer a shade tree may prevent 80 to 90
     percent of the sun's rays from reaching the ground. The daily moisture
     transpired from one large tree can have the cooling effect of five average room
     air conditioners running 20 hours a day. One study showed that air in a two-acre
     oak forest was 7 to 9 degrees cooler than air above a nearby grass fairway and
     37 to 39 degrees cooler than in an asphalt parking lot.
  •  Trees moderate wind. The funneling of wind by buildings within a city, and its
                                                                                         3

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                           Chapter 1
Community Forest Element                                                          Introduction
        strength over large paved areas, can be reduced by vegetation. A 20-mph wind
        can be cut to 5-mph by a loose screen of trees.
    •   Trees absorb carbon dioxide, counteracting the global "greenhouse effect".
        Photosynthesis fixes carbon in the biomass of a tree, where it stays
        "sequestered" as long as the tree lives. In this way, an average tree captures
        nearly half a ton of carbon dioxide over the first 30 years of its life. Worldwide
        planting efforts might therefore give our species the “breathing room” it needs to
        drastically reduce fossil fuel emissions before the atmospheric buildup of carbon
        dioxide throws the global climate system out of control.
    •   Trees produce oxygen and filter airborne particulates, helping to reduce air
        pollution. A tree's production of oxygen replenishes the atmosphere and dilutes
        pollutants. Airborne particulate pollution is also trapped on the surface of leaves,
        which act as significant "scrubbers" or filters--since the surface area of a tree
        may be a thousand times the surface area of the ground beneath it. In addition,
        the heightened humidity around plants condenses on particulates and causes
        them to settle out in a process called "air washing". Some studies even indicate
        that plants directly absorb certain pollutants like sulfur dioxide and nitrogen
        dioxide.
    •   Trees can help reduce soil erosion and surface runoff, leading to a steadier and
        cleaner supply of water. Trees protect soil by breaking the fall of raindrops,
        absorbing water through their roots, covering the ground with protective humus,
        slowing runoff, and knitting the soil with roots. Trees also reduce sediment loss,
        which can drastically reduce water quality. By removing the trees, the slow
        release of water from forested lands can result in excessive runoff and flooding.
    •   Trees provide habitat for birds and other wildlife. Trees are a city's prime
        medium for attracting wildlife. A single oak, for example, can provide home and
        food for as many as 300 species of insects, which in turn provide food for
        numerous species of birds.
C.      HISTORY OF TREES IN THOUSAND OAKS
For the most part, the urban forest now seen in Thousand Oaks is the result of the
City’s regulations and development pattern, an artifact of settlement. It is truly a
"community forest", planted to serve uniquely human purposes--from aesthetics to
home sales--as the area was developed. It is complemented by an extensive natural
open space system that protects approximately 40% of the City’s Planning Area, and
thousands of oaks, sycamores, and other indigenous trees in their native habitat.
Many of the trees in the urban forest, like the City’s residents, have their historical roots
not in the Conejo Valley but all over the world. Eucalyptus from Australia, elms from
Asia, plane trees from Europe, pines and palms from the Canary Islands, ash trees from
                                                                                             4

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                           Chapter 1
Community Forest Element                                                          Introduction
Arizona, and sweet gums from the eastern United States are among the most numerous
species in the City. As people have settled here, they have brought with them a
preference for trees like those they knew in their homelands--often places with
environmental conditions very different from those of Thousand Oaks. The result is a
somewhat eclectic forest, young, and not particularly well rooted in the conditions or
traditions of the region.
There were trees here when the Chumash lived on this land, and some of those trees
still remain today. For millennia, the tree community was of vital importance to the
valley's human community. The Chumash people congregated beneath the oaks each
autumn to harvest the rich supply of fallen acorns, which were ground by stone mortar
and pestle into a flour that was a dietary staple. The Indians also harvested the berries
of a variety of chaparral plants and the seeds of the native bunch grasses and
perennials. Today, oaks still punctuate the City, reminders of an earlier time and
landscape. Along streambeds and in other protected open space areas, other native
species remain from the Conejo Valley's original landscape--California sycamores,
willows, bay laurel, big leaf maples and black walnuts.
The era of the rancho and farmstead left more layers to the valley's landscape, marked
by characteristic species and patterns of trees, and by prolonged grazing that left the
land and surrounding hills covered in introduced grasses rather than native chaparral
and oaks. Driving around town, one still encounters densely planted eucalyptus
windbreaks, rows of elms shading former roadways, and masses of California peppers
(a misnomer--it's from Peru) enclosing and protecting old houses from wind. As with the
native species, these trees convey the texture of an earlier agricultural landscape.
If trees help us read the history of the City's landscape, they are also the means to
make history. Young trees planted today will become the grand community forest of the
next century, profoundly affecting the quality of life in Thousand Oaks while connecting
people today with future generations. Just as in the past, the reasons we plant today
will be read far into the future.
We will, of course, continue to plant for our own satisfaction and pleasure. However, if
we choose species demanding great supplies of water, we may be remembered more
for our shortsightedness than for our leafy legacy. On the other hand, as our knowledge
and perspective expand to encompass the potential effect of tree planting on climate
change and other far-reaching problems, we may be remembered as the first
generation to plant comprehensively for the future well-being of the planet as a whole as
well as for the comfort and delight of our community.
If we choose to keep the long-term health of the planet in mind as we set about
expanding and modifying our forest, our connection with the trees of Thousand Oaks
will become emblematic of the balanced and healthy connection between people and
nature. Our role in the continuum of the life cycle will bring us full circle, to the time the
Chumash gathered under the oaks a millennium ago--a time when people equated trees
with life itself.
                                                                                               5
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                  Chapter 1
Community Forest Element                                 Introduction
                      This page intentionally left blank
Thousand Oaks General Plan    Chapter 1
Community Forest Element   Introduction
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                      Chapter 2
Community Forest Element                                                         Overview
                                       CHAPTER 2
                    OVERVIEW OF THE COMMUNITY
                            FORESTRY PROGRAM
The Thousand Oaks community forestry program is a mutual effort of the City Council,
business people, developers, residents, City staff and other public agencies. This
chapter provides a synopsis of the community forestry program. It introduces roles and
responsibilities relating to trees in Thousand Oaks.
A.       ROLES AND RESPONSIBILITIES
As with any City, developers have played a major role in the creation of the community
forest. All new development is required to have street trees and other landscaping
along streets, median landscaping on major arterials, and protected status for existing
oak and landmark trees of designated sizes.
Currently, the City, through its Public Works Department and Community Development
Department, oversees the planning and installation of all street trees and other
landscaping. References to either the Public Works Director or the Community
Development Director in this document shall refer to the individual director or a
designee. This will often be the City’s Landscape Supervisor or Landscape Architect,
who are also advisors to the department heads. Upon completion of development and
acceptance of the established trees, the City may exercise authority over maintenance
of all trees within the public right-of-way and public service easement. Other public
agencies, such as the Conejo Recreation and Park District, Conejo Open Space
Conservation Agency, Cal Trans, Conejo Valley Unified School District and Southern
California Edison have responsibility for trees in other areas of the City.
Individual residents, homeowners' associations and businesses, besides developing
and maintaining their own landscape improvements, are responsible for preserving oak
and landmark trees on their properties.
These various responsibilities and the means by which they are carried out are
specified in a series of ordinances, resolutions, standards, and planning documents
adopted by the City Council. Their main provisions are summarized in Chapter 4 of this
Element, entitled “Related Policies and Regulations”.
                                                                                        6

Thousand Oaks General Plan                               Chapter 2
Community Forest Element                                 Overview
                      This page intentionally left blank
Thousand Oaks General Plan Chapter 2
Community Forest Element   Overview
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 3
Community Forest Element                                                Issues and Policies
                                      CHAPTER 3
                            ISSUES AND POLICIES
This chapter sets forth the City policies for preserving and enhancing the community
forest.
A.      ESTABLISHING A COMPREHENSIVE VISION OF THE COMMUNITY FOREST
Since the early 1970s the concern of Thousand Oaks for its natural environment has
resulted in a number of ordinances and other measures relating to trees. Taken
together, these documents have guided the City's tree programs over the years.
Among the major purposes of the Community Forest Element is to consolidate and
systematize the City's various laws and policies related to trees into one comprehensive
statement regarding its community forest. The following is a listing of issues and
specific policies that pertain to the enhancement of the community forest.
Topic: Implementation of the Community Forestry Program
Policies
F-1     The community forestry program shall be implemented in accordance with the
        Community Forest Element and the Thousand Oaks Forestry Master Plan
        including the comprehensive goals statement contained in said master plan. The
        statement is an overview of public policy, complementing the existing ordinances
        and providing a single point of reference and coordination among them. It sets
        broad goals and specific objectives by which the success of the forestry program
        in meeting the City's intentions can be judged.
F-2     The community forestry program shall be implemented in accordance with a
        coherent body of City ordinances incorporating provisions of the Forestry Master
        Plan. The City shall ensure that all existing tree-related ordinances are in
        alignment with the Master Plan.
Topic: Review of Community Forest Element and Forestry Master Plan
The discipline of community forestry, the City of Thousand Oaks, and the environment
in general will continue to undergo major changes, which will in turn necessitate flexible
responses. Increasing experience with the City's trees and growing awareness of their
needs and benefits will require periodic adjustments to the City's forestry program and
policies.
                                                                                          7
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                         Chapter 3
Community Forest Element                                                Issues and Policies
Policy:
F-3     The City shall periodically review and update the Forestry Master Plan and
        Forestry Element. The review will include ample opportunity for public
        participation and may result in a revised document for adoption by the City
        Council. Minor changes to the plan, including adjustments, maintenance and
        planting practices, addition of educational materials, and changes to wording or
        facts in the text may be made at any time by the Community Development
        Director and/or the Public Works Director. Changes to policies, ordinances,
        species lists, or tree removal criteria can only be made by the City Council, which
        will seek the recommendations of City staff.
B.      MAINTAINING THE EXISTING FOREST
Topic: Tree Planting and Maintenance Practices
Many trees in Thousand Oaks' community forest are now reaching maturity, resulting in
the need for increased pruning, sidewalk repair and other maintenance. With a
maturing forest, the City can expect greater expenditures for its community forest,
especially compared to the early years when the expense of planting the forest was
largely borne by developers. These costs may be stabilized in time by choosing and
siting trees more carefully and by following a proactive maintenance program. But a
healthy community forest will continue to require a healthy investment of community
resources.
Consistent maintenance standards are essential. Workers are sometimes confronted
with conflicting information and opinions regarding pruning and other maintenance
techniques, not infrequently from residents concerned with work fronting their property.
Policy:
F-4     City tree work shall be performed in accordance with uniform planting and
        maintenance standards and practices, reflecting the best current knowledge of
        tree care. City crews shall apply these standards to all public tree work.
Topic: Training and Collaboration
A high level of experience and training on city crews needs to be maintained. Instituting
standards for all work relating to the City's forest will ensure the longest possible life for
each individual tree, while also increasing job satisfaction due to newly acquired
professional skills.
Policies:
                                                                                              8
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                          Chapter 3
Community Forest Element                                                 Issues and Policies
F-5     A comprehensive training program for City tree-workers, with incentives for
        certification in various aspects of horticulture and arboriculture, shall be provided.
        This program should be centered on regular in-house training sessions. The
        primary goal of these sessions should be to impart to each participant a
        thorough, working knowledge of the standards and practices contains in the
        maintenance manual and current standards of the trade as applied to the City’s
        prevalent tree species.
F-6     Routine collaboration between City tree workers and other City staff involved in
        tree related activities shall be encouraged in order to exchange ideas, to improve
        training, and to solve problems. Topics of discussion should focus on improving
        maintenance practices, pests/diseases, resolution of specific problems
        encountered by City crews, pruning and other technical issues.
Topic: Tree Inventory
Current knowledge of the forest's composition and condition is fundamental to good
forest management. Tree-by-tree information about the forest allows sound decisions
to be made on every level of tree care, from routine servicing of individual trees to
species selections that foster overall forest diversity.
Policy:
F-7     A tree inventory should be developed and maintained to schedule annual work
        programs including planting schedules, maintenance and removal priorities. The
        work programs should be predicated on achieving the maximum long-term health
        and value of the community forest and should be the primary basis for annual
        budget requests to carry out the community forestry program.
Topic: Tree and Landscape Maintenance Practices
Valuable maintenance time and resources must not be expended on tasks which are
not essential to the health of the community forest. A plant requires relatively little
maintenance when it is well adapted to the natural conditions of its site and when its
mature size fits the available space. On the other hand, plants which require more
water than the local climate provides, or are stressed by local soil conditions, or are
planted where they conflict with buildings, available planter space, utilities or traffic flow
will require constant attention. Appropriate maintenance therefore begins with
appropriate plant selection and siting. Once the right plant has been established,
appropriate maintenance consists in large part of allowing it to grow to its natural size
and appearance.
Policies:
                                                                                              9

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                         Chapter 3
Community Forest Element                                                Issues and Policies
F-8     Available maintenance resources should be concentrated on those activities
        which will have the most benefit to the long term health of the community forest.
        Timely and appropriate maintenance will help extend the projected life span of a
        tree, thus reducing future budget requirements. Pruning should be undertaken
        only to rectify hazardous conditions, to enhance the health and natural shape of
        a plant or to remedy conflicts with surrounding uses. Superfluous pruning,
        especially the manicuring of shrubs and trees or pruning to reduce canopy
        coverage, should not be undertaken.
F-9     Turf in medians and publicly maintained parkways should be minimized in favor
        of mulches and attractive drought tolerant plantings to conserve water and
        maintenance funds. The expense, in terms of both water use and labor, should
        be systematically reduced by eliminating turf in public areas other than those
        where the ground surface is actually used for play or other recreational purposes,
        or where grass makes a critical contribution to the visual environment as an
        accent or special feature. .
F-10 Removal of street trees shall only occur in accordance with objective tree
        removal criteria and a clear process of evaluation and consultation. City staff
        should consult with the Public Works Director regarding any proposed street tree
        removal, except in cases of imminent danger to life or property. Appeals should
        be made to the Public Works Director, and the City Council, in that order.
Residents frequently request the City to remove maturing street trees which have
damaged sidewalks or utilities. Although the City will repair the damage and replace
such trees for free at the first occurrence, residents often object to replacements
because they fear similar problems in the future for which they might be responsible.
Topic: Selection of Replacement Trees
Policy:
F-11 The City should replace every street tree removed with an appropriate new tree
        not likely to cause the same problem for which the original tree was removed. In
        addition to other design factors, the conditions and constraints of the site from
        which a tree is removed should be carefully considered in selecting a
        replacement tree. The intent is to learn from past experience while maintaining a
        full forest cover.
Topic: Design Solutions to Reduce Damage
Repaired sidewalks are often re-damaged if a tree is allowed to remain. A mature tree
may well be judged more valuable than the sidewalk, justifying the cost of replacing the
sidewalk on a periodic basis. However, steps can be taken to preserve such trees while
                                                                                          10
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                          Chapter 3
Community Forest Element                                                Issues and Policies
minimizing future repair costs. The same measures can be put in place when a tree is
first installed if the species or situation can be expected to cause problems later.
Policy:
F-12 Special design solutions such as flexible paving and root barriers should be
         utilized, where appropriate, to minimize potential pavement damage from tree
         roots. City staff should consider whether the immediate surroundings of a tree
         can be modified to better accommodate the tree to its site. Techniques to be
         considered include grade beams, bridging, special concrete depth and width,
         concrete reinforcing, root pruning, and alternative street design and layout. In
         such cases, care should be taken that the special solutions provide fully for
         disabled accessibility, pedestrian and traffic safety and other functional
         considerations.
Topic: Tree Protection
Street trees, while a highly visible element of the community forest, comprise only a
portion of it. The privately owned segment of the community forest contains trees that
are of great value to the whole community.
Policies:
F-13 The City's legacy of trees shall be preserved through the rigorous enforcement of
         its Oak and Landmark Tree Ordinances. City staff shall keep current with
         research and practices relating to oak tree preservation and should disseminate
         such information to maintenance personnel, property owners and others
         responsible for the City's oak and landmark trees.
F-14 The City should identify and protect historic trees within the community. The City
         Council should designate specific trees in the City for protection under the
         Historic Tree designation. Such trees should not be damaged, pruned or
         removed without City approval.
F-15 Where practical, the City should strive to preserve mature trees of any species
         when associated with a development proposal.
Topic: Tree Maintenance Practices
The tree maintenance done by landscape contractors and others in the City may be of
inconsistent quality. The quality of care given the trees on private as well as public
property greatly affects the overall health and beauty of the City's forest. Assuring high
quality care also protects the public from potentially hazardous practices and assists
consumers in obtaining the level of service for which they have paid.
                                                                                          11
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 3
Community Forest Element                                                Issues and Policies
Policies:
F-16 All tree pruning on City land not being undertaken by City crews shall be
       approved by City staff. All pruning shall comply with International Society of
       Arboriculture and City maintenance standards. Pruning should not be performed
       solely to reduce canopy coverage except as determined appropriate by the
       Public Works Director.
F-17 and F-18 Repealed.
F-19 City staff should monitor tree pest and disease problems that may affect
       Thousand Oaks and take preventive measures to minimize their impact. Staff
       should also keep abreast of tree problems within both the City and the region,
       and apply prudent and effective means of controlling them. Such means should
       be based on the maintenance of healthy and resistant tree stock, rather than the
       widespread application of pesticides.
F-20 The City shall properly dispose of removed trees and clippings, to control the
       spread of pests and disease and recycle tree waste to the maximum extent
       feasible.
C.     EXTENDING THE FOREST
Topic: Tree Planting
Thousand Oaks is expected to complete the "build-out" of most developable areas by
2030. Developers will continue to provide street trees in these new areas, with guidance
from the City, bringing the initial planting of the community forest to its completion as
well. At the same time, individual property owners and the City will continue to add
trees to areas that have already been developed.
Policies:
F-21 The City shall ensure complete street tree plantings of appropriate species, scale
       and spacing in all new developments. Developers will be required to provide
       street trees in accordance with applicable ordinances. This will ensure that the
       community's character is maintained through a constant, consistent forest;
       significantly reduce the amount of heat the community produces, resulting in
       reduced cooling costs and energy consumption; and help make the City more
       pedestrian friendly. To enhance canopy coverage, alternatives such as narrower
       streets, greater use of medians and bumped-out planting bulbs within the parking
       lane should be considered.
                                                                                          12
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 3
Community Forest Element                                               Issues and Policies
F-22 A diversity of species and ages of trees should be assured throughout the City in
        order to avoid potentially unhealthy monocultures. Plantings along major streets
        should provide for differences between median and curbside plantings or similar
        means of introducing variety while maintaining landscape consistency. Plantings
        along single neighborhood streets may be of a single species, although the use
        of accent species at corners or as an understory is encouraged. City staff should
        use a tree inventory to monitor Citywide species composition and should
        recommend changes to landscape submittals based on achieving the City’s
        objectives. Age diversity should be achieved by immediately replacing individual
        trees as they are removed, by intermixing fast and slow growing species, and by
        planting replacement trees next to declining trees where feasible.
Topic: Tree Selection
Species that are not well matched to the environmental or engineering constraints of
their site may result in problems in the future. Not only do such species perform poorly,
but their performance may discourage people from planting additional trees.
Policies:
F-23 Plant species which are well adapted to the planting site and which will create
        maximum benefits with minimum problems should be planted. Proposed species
        should be carefully evaluated as to their likely performance in a given situation,
        the problems they may pose, and their ability to deliver the benefits that the
        planting is intended to provide. Trees should be selected using species selection
        and design guidelines and the planting palette from the Forestry Master Plan.
F-24 Adequate space and site conditions should be provided for healthy tree growth to
        full maturity. City staff should evaluate proposed planting sites and suggest
        modifications that will provide for the best possible growing conditions for the
        trees. In particular, adequate unconstricted, uncompacted root room and ample
        air space for the trees full growth should be provided. In new developments
        utilities should be undergrounded outside the root zone of street trees. Narrow
        existing parkways should be widened wherever possible. Larger planting areas
        with clusters of trees should be encouraged.
Topic: Replanting Existing Neighborhoods
Policy:
F-25 The City should actively plant or replant existing neighborhoods where trees are
        missing. The City should undertake an active program to assure the full
        complement of street trees in existing neighborhoods. Based on a tree inventory,
        City staff should prioritize those areas most in need of trees. Planting should be
                                                                                           13

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                           Chapter 3
Community Forest Element                                                 Issues and Policies
        carried out either by City crews or through a neighborhood planting program
        combining City support with the volunteer labor of residents. In either case,
        residents should be advised and their comments solicited well in advance of the
        proposed planting, both through community associations and by notices sent to
        all addresses where trees are to be planted. The City should actively seek the
        involvement of homeowners associations, service clubs, businesses and other
        groups.
D.      ACHIEVING THE OPTIMUM ENVIRONMENTAL BENEFIT OF TREES
Topic: Tree Canopy Coverage
As environmental problems increase in magnitude and scope, the environmental
benefits of trees become increasingly important to the community and to the world at
large.
Energy consumption must be reduced as much as possible to support an increasingly
energy-poor world. Unshaded parking lots contribute significantly to the "urban heat
island" effect, as well as increasing the need for air conditioning for neighboring
buildings.
Policy:
F-26 The tree canopy coverage of parking areas should be maximized in all
        developments. City staff shall administer and enforce parking lot landscape
        design guidelines. Furthermore, trees prone to messy insect problems or excess
        leaf/flower drop should be discouraged in parking areas to avoid problems (such
        as tree droppings and stained car finishes) that usually result in the removal of
        trees.
Topic: Water Management
Water is a precious, non-renewable resource in Thousand Oaks. Watering of all
landscaping in the City should reflect the region's natural limitations of rainfall.
Policy:
F-27 The City should adopt a water management plan for all public plantings in the
        City. This will have the following goals: reducing irrigation of medians, matching
        plant choices to available rainfall for all major public plantings, using permeable
        paving where feasible to help recharge groundwater, and using water-conserving
        irrigation systems and practices.
                                                                                           14
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                           Chapter 3
Community Forest Element                                                  Issues and Policies
Topic: Participation in State and National Initiatives
The City's community forest program can have far-reaching implications. The
connection between the City and other organizations devoted to trees can strengthen
and reinforce the City's community forest program.
Policies:
F-28 The City should continue to participate in the "Tree City, USA" program of the
       National Arbor Day Foundation.
F-29 The City should participate in reforestation programs with non-profit
       organizations where appropriate.
Topic: Planting Native Trees
Oaks are the official city trees of Thousand Oaks. The continued use of oaks and other
native species as major thematic trees in the City needs to be assured. These native
trees are particularly high in wildlife value, and are also intricately linked to the character
of Thousand Oaks. Their numbers in the region and in the State are dwindling. Since
oaks in particular are relatively slow-growing and require ample room for full
development, they are sometimes passed over in favor of other species
Policies:
F-30 A variety of oaks and other species native to this area should be planted in
       appropriate situations. The use of oaks should be encouraged where
       appropriate and adequate growing conditions can be provided. The design of
       major streets should seek to create spaces where oaks can be used as an
       accent tree. Oaks should be considered in special planting areas and at
       important intersections and other visually important spots. Any oak or landmark
       tree removed by development should be replaced with trees of the same species,
       as determined by the size of the tree removed and pursuant to the Oak and
       Landmark Tree Ordinances.
F-31 The City should participate in efforts to protect, preserve and plant oaks in the
       State.
E.     ACHIEVING THE OPTIMUM AESTHETIC BENEFIT OF TREES
Topic: Streetscape Themes
Among the main reasons that communities plant trees is for their appearance and the
natural character that they impart to the human environment. To maximize these
                                                                                            15
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                         Chapter 3
Community Forest Element                                                 Issues and Policies
benefits is to maximize the value of the community forest and the quality of life within
the community.
The coherence of plantings on major streets and the expression of neighborhood
identity through distinctive plantings have not always been realized due to the
segmented nature of development. Since the most common visual experience of
Thousand Oaks is from behind the steering wheel of a car, the quality of street tree
plantings has an important impact on how the community is perceived.
Policies:
F-32 An overall image of the community should be developed through coherent
        plantings along it’s major streets. The planting schemes for extensions of major
        streets should extend or improve on the dominant theme and form of the existing
        portions. In addition, the City should prioritize opportunities to increase the
        amount, quality and coherence of plantings on existing arterials, including the
        addition of medians on streets and self-contained planters where medians are
        not possible (such as on overpasses), and recommend these priorities for
        inclusion in the community forest program's annual budget request. Both
        extensions and enhancements should follow the design guidelines of the
        Forestry Master Plan.
F-33 The civic identity of the City should be enhanced by special plantings at major
        intersections and other highly visible places. Developments at major
        intersections should be required to provide special landscape treatments at such
        corners, pursuant to the Guidelines for Landscape Planting. In reviewing
        proposed developments, City staff should assure the compatibility of these
        treatments with the intersection's other corners and with adjacent street
        landscaping. Staff should also include funding priorities for public improvements
        at major intersections and visual nodes in the forestry program's annual budget
        requests.
F-34 The character of the City's neighborhoods should be developed through
        distinctive plantings and design approaches. New plantings should extend and
        enhance the distinctive landscape character and patterns of the regions in which
        they occur, incorporating the design guidelines recommendations and planting
        palette of the Forestry Master Plan.
Topic: Tree Placement
Policies:
F-35 Repealed.
                                                                                          16

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                         Chapter 3
Community Forest Element                                                 Issues and Policies
F-36 A strong complement of street trees should be provided, especially when they
        are planted in easements behind the sidewalk or are otherwise not visibly part of
        the public right-of-way. A clear pattern of street trees is often not discernable in
        some new subdivisions where all planting occurs behind the sidewalk. The
        widespread use of narrow "monolithic" sidewalks immediately behind the curb
        places required street trees in the public service easement, rather than in a
        clearly defined public planting strip. While this placement may benefit trees by
        giving them more root room, it can also reduce their visual impact as well as
        reduce their ability to shade the street. Such plantings should be of a scale and
        regularity which provides both ample shading and a visual consistency to the
        street.
F-37 The City should consider alternatives to existing right-of-way standards to
        provide greater tree coverage between the street and sidewalk. Wide parkways
        in residential areas, meandering sidewalks, and planting areas for clusters of
        plants give consistency to the neighborhood while providing more ample growing
        areas for trees.
Topic: Site appropriate plantings
Trees selected solely for their aesthetic character can be unattractive if they are not well
adapted to site conditions or are drastically pruned to avoid conflicts with other site
features. Ironically, trees which are selected only for aesthetics often detract from the
City's environment through their poor performance.
Policy:
F-38 Environmental factors should be given equal weight with aesthetic considerations
        when making planting decisions. Careful use of the City's tree selection criteria
        and planting palette should be required to assure environmentally appropriate
        selections that also enhance the aesthetic character of the community.
F.      ASSURING COORDINATION AMONG CITY DEPARTMENTS AND WITH
        OTHER JURISDICTIONS
Topic: Coordination Between Departments
Multiple public agencies play important roles in the management of Thousand Oaks'
community forest. As a result, the interconnected nature of the community forest is
sometimes the subject of disconnected decisions. Fostering cooperation among these
major players, and the various constituencies they represent, is a major contribution to
the health and character of the community forest.
Decisions in virtually every City department have an impact on the community forest.
                                                                                            17
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 3
Community Forest Element                                                 Issues and Policies
Because trees are such a widespread part of the environment, they raise concerns and
opportunities relating to most city services from fire protection to libraries.
Policies:
F-39 Close communication and cooperation should be maintained among City
        departments on tree related issues. All City departments should seek the advice
        and assistance of the Public Works Director and the Community Development
        Director in any tree-related decision. City staff should post articles and notices in
        the City newsletter regarding tree related issues as appropriate.
F-40 All functions of the community forest program should be coordinated within the
        City. City staff responsible for implementing the community forestry program shall
        possess the technical and managerial expertise, perspectives and experience
        necessary to professionally manage the program.
Topic: Communication with Other Agencies
Several jurisdictions other than the City are actively engaged in community forestry
within Thousand Oaks. The Conejo Recreation and Park District, the Conejo Open
Space Conservation Agency, the Conejo Valley Unified School District, the Ventura
County Flood Control District and Fire Departments, Caltrans and Southern California
Edison all deal directly with trees in the City. Communication between these groups
and the City usually occurs as particular issues arise. Together, these jurisdictions
plant and maintain a tremendous amount of acreage in the City. When major planting
or maintenance efforts are undertaken by these groups, it is desirable for the City to
formally review and comment on the proposed work.
Caltrans maintains approximately 500 acres of freeway right-of-way in Thousand Oaks,
much of which is under-planted. The impression of the community from the freeways is
of major importance in forming the image of the City for both residents and visitors. The
substantial area adjacent to the freeways offers many planting opportunities both to
improve this impression and to help soften the impact of the freeway on the surrounding
landscape.
Policy:
F-41 Repealed.
Policy:
F-42 The City should foster regular communication with Caltrans to implement freeway
        planting and maintenance programs compatible with the City's community forest
        goals. The community forest program should establish close communication with
                                                                                          18
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                         Chapter 3
Community Forest Element                                                Issues and Policies
        the State to assure the appropriate development of this important forest
        resource, in accordance with the Forestry Master Plan and the Freeway Corridor
        Guidelines.
Topic: Coordination with SCE
Trees and overhead utilities can create conflicts that are often resolved at the expense
of the tree. Although maintenance of electrical power is of critical importance, pruning
can frequently be accomplished with less damage to the trees and for little or no
additional cost by applying timely and appropriate pruning practices.
Policies:
F-43 The City should request Southern California Edison to notify City staff prior to
        intended pruning so that the City can review the proposed pruning and provide
        appropriate feedback and/or supervision. SCE pruning on public streets should
        be done pursuant to the public-right-of-way landscape ordinance. Before issuing
        an approval, City staff should determine if any special conditions which may
        pertain to the particular trees, such as the class of pruning that should be used.
F-44 The City should encourage Southern California Edison crews to follow City and
        ISA pruning standards.
F-45 The City should plant tree species that will not interfere with existing overhead
        utilities, and also replace existing problem trees under lines. City staff should
        determine the distance necessary to protect the root zone and should prescribe
        any compensatory pruning or other work that may be needed to offset roots that
        are damaged.
G.      COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION AND EDUCATION
The private sector has been largely responsible for establishing Thousand Oaks'
community forest. Under City guidance, developers have planted street trees and
common areas. Businesses have landscaped their setbacks and parking lots.
Homeowners have improved their properties. Greater involvement of the private sector
in the ongoing care and enhancement of the resource they have helped create will
ensure a broad base of support for trees in the City.
F-46 Repealed.
Topic: Trees on Private Property
A large portion of the community forest is located on private property. In numbers of
trees, variety of design opportunities and availability of resources, the potential growth
                                                                                          19
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 3
Community Forest Element                                              Issues and Policies
of the community forest beyond the public right-of-way is immense.
Policies:
F-47 The City should assure ample off-street plantings in new developments and,
       where practical, in rehabilitations. Whenever the City issues a building permit for
       construction, it should require appropriate landscaping pursuant to its Guidelines
       for Landscape Planting and Irrigation Plans. City staff shall assure compatibility
       with adjacent right-of-way and public service easement plantings.
F-48 The City should ensure that homeowners' associations and others responsible
       for landscapes fronting public streets plant and maintain these areas in
       conformance with City standards. The City should require planting and
       maintenance in accordance with the Guidelines for Landscape Planting. In
       administering these guidelines, City staff should assure that planting is
       compatible with adjacent public and private plantings and that the required
       maintenance plan references City standards. City staff should take necessary
       steps to enforce these provisions, including protection of landscapes installed
       under the guidelines, while also undertaking public education efforts to
       encourage the proper maintenance of all trees within the City.
F-49 Repealed.
Topic: Role of Landscape Industry
There are few programs encouraging local businesses to be involved in the community
forest. The support of trees is an appealing way in which the private sector can express
community pride. Public/private partnerships can benefit the community forest.
Policies:
F-50 Repealed.
F-51 City staff should work with nurseries, landscape architects and contractors, and
       other local "green industries" in promoting the community forest program where
       appropriate.
Topic: Community Involvement
An on-going means of public participation in City policies relating to trees would
strengthen implementation of the policies. There are numerous aspects of the
community forestry program, such as tree removals and neighborhood plantings, where
broad-based citizen involvement would assist the City in implementing its policies.
Policies:
                                                                                        20
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 3
Community Forest Element                                               Issues and Policies
F-52 An ad-hoc tree advisory committees should be established as needed to help
        implement the Forestry Element and Forestry Master Plan. The purpose of the
        committees should be to review specific issues or programs of particular
        relevance to the forestry program.
F-53 Residents of all ages should be directly involved in planting their neighborhoods
        through a neighborhood planting program. The City should foster the
        implementation of a resident-based neighborhood planting program, providing
        City coordination, technical assistance and planting resources in planting existing
        neighborhoods where trees are needed. The City should publicize and promote
        the program and identify volunteer planting coordinators within each
        neighborhood to enlist the participation of their neighbors.
Topic: Public Education
Community forestry education can benefit trees, students and the community at large.
Reaching residents with information about the importance and practice of community
forestry provides an avenue for teaching a wide range of skills and attitudes.
Policies:
F-54 and F-55 Repealed
F-56 An active program of public education about the community forest should be
        pursued. The City should use all available means to reach as wide a public
        audience as possible with information about the value of the community forest
        and the forestry program. Easy access to forestry information should be
        provided.
Topic: Community Awareness
The City's community forestry program offers ongoing opportunities to build a sense of
civic pride and accomplishment. The community creativity engendered by working on
the community forest can be activated and celebrated on a continuing basis.
Policies:
F-57 The importance of trees should be emphasized through annual events and/or
        community plantings, such as the annual Arbor/Earth Day events.
F-58 The City should maintain its “Adopt an Oak” program, in order to allow
        opportunities to recognize individuals, and to raise funds for natural open space
        protection.
                                                                                         21

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                        Chapter 3
Community Forest Element                                 Issues and Policies
                      This page intentionally left blank
Thousand Oaks General Plan          Chapter 3
Community Forest Element   Issues and Policies
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 4
Community Forest Element                                Related Policies and Regulations
                                     CHAPTER 4
           RELATED POLICIES AND REGULATIONS
A.     COMMUNITY FOREST PROTECTION AND MAINTENANCE ORDINANCES
       AND STANDARDS
This section summarizes the City's ordinances and standards relating to trees as of
2016. The full text of each is available at the City's Public Works and Community
Development Departments.
1. Landscaping Provisions in Public Rights-of-Way
   Purpose and intent (Sec. 7-2.901): Establishes the public purpose served by trees
   and other landscaping within the City, including City beautification, enhancement of
   the visual character of streets, reduction of thermal increase by shading paved
   areas, increased contact with nature, amelioration of air pollution, provision of
   economic benefits, improvement of visual identity and environmental quality, and
   enhancement of scenic highways.
   General requirements: Landscape plans (Sec. 7-2.903): Requires developers to hire
   a landscape architect to prepare and oversee implementation of landscape plans for
   primary or secondary highways adjacent to a development. Plans are to be
   prepared in consultation with and approved by the Public Works and Community
   Development Departments.
   Medians: Types of landscaping required (Sec. 7-2.904): Specifies kinds of
   landscape treatment according to median widths and traffic sight distances.
   Trees in parkways, public service easements, and the like (Sec. 7-2.905): Requires
   developer to install street trees on fronting streets prior to occupancy of any
   structure. The type of tree for each street is to be approved by the Public Works and
   Community Development Departments. Provides for City Engineer to assist
   developers in designating street trees and for Council adoption of standard
   specifications for street tree planting.
   Trimming, removal, and replacement of parkway and other trees (Sec. 7-2.906):
   Requires developer to replace dead, dying or diseased trees within one year of final
   occupancy of a development. Thereafter, the City is to be responsible for all tree
   maintenance. Requires City approval to effect any parkway tree. Requires any
   removed parkway tree to be replaced with a City-approved species.
                                                                                       22
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                          Chapter 4
Community Forest Element                                 Related Policies and Regulations
    Repairs of street improvements within public rights-of-way where damages have
    been caused by street trees (Sec. 7-2.907): Provides for City to repair damages to
    street improvements caused by street tree roots, to remove trees causing damage,
    and to replace such trees with an approved species. A fronting property owner may
    retain an offending tree by assuming the responsibility to pay for any future damage
    that it may cause. Oaks and historic trees should not be removed.
    Scenic highways (Sec. 7-2.908): Requires specific design measures on highways
    designated in the Scenic Highways Element of the General Plan, including
    continuous medians and parkways developed with a dominant landscape theme.
    Installation and maintenance programs, costs, and operation for medians and
    parkways on secondary and primary highways, including scenic highways (Sec. 7-
    2.909): Requires improvement of medians and parkways on secondary and primary
    highways as condition of development approvals. Provides for Council
    establishment of landscape maintenance districts for specific areas to share
    installation and maintenance costs for medians and parkways. Provides for Council
    adoption of capital improvement programs to construct median and parkway
    improvements on primary and secondary-highways, with priority given to scenic
    highways in general and Moorpark Road and Thousand Oaks Boulevard in
    particular.
    Planting and erecting hedges, shrubs, and fences (Sec. 7-2.911): Requires a permit
    for hedges, shrubs and fences within or obstructing public right-of-way.
    Maintenance of hedges, shrubs, and fences (Sec. 7-2.912): Requires maintenance
    of hedges, shrubs and fences within the right-of-way, subject to their removal if not
    maintained.
    Street tree planting (Sec. 9-3.1006):
    Requires subdivision improvement agreements to provide for at least one street tree
    for every lot or two for corner lots. Street tree plans are to be prepared by a licensed
    landscape architect and approved by the City. Specific tree species will be reviewed
    and approved by the City in accordance with the Forestry Master Plan. Trees are to
    be installed prior to final City acceptance.
2. Standard Specifications for Subdivision Street Tree Planting: Specifies procedure for
   planting street trees, including plan preparation and approval, bonds, timing, species
   selection, plant and soil materials, soil analysis, planting locations, staking, inspection
   and maintenance. Provides official street tree list. References City standard tree
   planting and staking detail.
3. Guidelines for Landscape Planting and Irrigation Plans: (Res. No. 2007-116) General
   Requirements - Specifies required submittals, fees, plan inclusions, reviews,
                                                                                            23
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 4
Community Forest Element                                 Related Policies and Regulations
   inspections and approvals for private landscape improvements in connection with
   building permits. Requires landscape architect to prepare plans. Requires existing
   trees of certain species to be indicated on plans.
   Planting Plans - Specifies design elements and graphic standards to be included on
   plans. Requires planting for erosion control, fire clearance zones, screening, solar
   control, design continuity and aesthetic enhancement. Encourages drought-tolerant,
   low-fuel, climatically adapted plants. Requires preservation measures for existing
   trees and soil analysis.
   Irrigation Plans - Specifies design elements and graphic standards for irrigation plans.
   Requires automatic system designed for healthy growth with minimum water waste.
   Requires separate control valves for planting areas with different watering needs.
   Encourages low volume sprinkler heads.
4. General Installation Requirements of Parking Areas (Sec. 9-4.2404(e)):
   Requires that ten percent of parking lot area be landscaped, in addition to setbacks
   and perimeter landscaping of various widths. Specifies distribution of landscape
   areas, curbs, height of shrubs, irrigation and plan submittal and approval.
5. Preservation and Protection of Landmark and Historical Trees Ordinance (Thousand
   Oaks Municipal Code, Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 43): Recognizes "the unique and
   irreplaceable value of landmark trees" and declares the City's intention to preserve
   them. Defines "landmark trees" (see Ordinance for specific trunk size thresholds to
   determine landmark status) as California sycamores, all species of the Genus
   Quercus, California holly or toyon, black walnut, and California bay laurel, and
   specimens of other species deemed historically or culturally significant. Establishes
   minimum standards for the protection of such trees, including protective devices,
   grading and filling limitations, and prohibitions of chemical usage and attachment of
   signs or other fixtures. Provides for preservation of such trees where feasible within
   existing and proposed public rights-of-way. Requires identification of landmark trees
   on development plans and permit applications and review by Planning Commission.
6. Oak Tree Ordinance (Thousand Oaks Municipal Code, Title 9, Chapter 4, Article 42)
    and Oak Tree Preservation and Protection Guidelines (Res. No. 2010-14): Sets forth
    a policy to preserve healthy oak trees in the City and details its implementation
    including extensive guidelines and procedures. Obligates property owners to
    maintain oaks in good health and safe condition and requires a permit for any work
    affecting an oak. Establishes procedures and standards for issuing permits and
    conditions for removal of trees. Sets violation as a misdemeanor and provides for
    restitution to the City for loss or damaged trees, including replacement with two or
    more trees of like size and value.
                                                                                         24
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                   Chapter 4
Community Forest Element                              Related Policies and Regulations
B.     THE FORESTRY MASTER PLAN
Another product of the City's concern for the protection and enhancement of the
community forest is the Forestry Master Plan. The Forestry Master Plan is a guide for
planting and managing City-maintained landscaping, including, medians, parkways and
City-maintained street trees.
                                                                                     25

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                Chapter 5
Community Forest Element                                  Implementation Measures
                                  CHAPTER 5
                    IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES
 Policy Topic                  Implementation Program
 F-1    Forestry Program       Review development projects and ensure capital
        Implementation         improvement projects are consistent with the
                               Community Forest Element and Forestry Master Plan.
 F-2    Ordinances             Periodic review and update City ordinances to ensure
        reflective of Forestry consistency in implementing Forestry Master Plan.
        Master Plan
 F-3    Review of Forestry     Periodically review and update Forestry Master Plan
        Master Plan and        and Community Forest Element to ensure consistency
        Community Forest       in implementing forestry program.
        Element
 F-4    Planting and           Continue to implement planting and maintenance
        maintenance            standards set forth in the Forestry Master Plan.
        standards
 F-5    Training program for   Continue comprehensive training program for City tree
        tree workers           workers.
 F-6    Collaboration          Develop regular meetings between City staff involved
        between City staff     with the community forest for training, exchange of
                               ideas and problem solving.
 F-7    Development of tree    Implement a tree inventory program as the bases for
        inventory              managing the community forest.
 F-8    Maintenance            Continue allocating maintenance resources where they
        resources              will have long-term benefits.
 F-9    Minimize the use of    Limit the use of turf in new development projects.
        turf
                               Where possible, reduce the amount of turf areas in
                               publicly maintained parkways and medians in favor of
                               plantings that require less water and maintenance.
 F-10   Objective tree         Continue evaluating requests for the removal of street
        removal criteria and   trees based upon the objective removal criteria
        evaluation             established in the Municipal Code.
                                                                                  26
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                  Chapter 5
Community Forest Element                                 Implementation Measures
 Policy Topic                  Implementation Program
 F-11   Selecting              Continue replacing street trees that are removed with
        replacement trees      replacements that are not likely to cause the same
                               problems.
 F-12   Special design         Incorporate special design techniques into projects that
        solutions              will prevent or minimize potential pavement damage by
                               tree roots.
                               Consider the incorporation of special design
                               techniques to prevent future pavement damage when
                               repairing root-damaged pavement.
 F-13   Enforcement of oak     Continue to apply the City’s Oak and Landmark
        and landmark tree      Preservation and Protection Ordinances for any work
        ordinances             within the protected zone of an oak or landmark tree of
                               the appropriate sizes.
 F-14   Identification and     Identify and protect historic trees in the community as
        protection of historic appropriate.
        trees
 F-15   Regulating removal     Continue to require the identification of existing trees
        of trees               on development plans, and their preservation in place
                               where possible.
 F-16   Tree pruning on        Tree pruning on public land not performed by City
        public land            crews require approval by City staff and is required to
                               comply with International Society of Arboriculture and
                               City standards.
 F-17   Repealed
 F-18   Repealed
 F-19   Tree pests and         Monitor and prevent pest and disease problems.
        disease problems
 F-20   Disposal of tree       Continue the recycling of tree waste.
        waste
                               Special care should be employed when dealing with
                               trees that may harbor disease or pests.
 F-21   Required street trees  Require all new development to plant street trees in
                               accordance with applicable ordinances.
 F-22   Diversity of species   Monitor tree species and age composition to maintain
        and age                a diverse forest.
                                                                                     27

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                Chapter 5
Community Forest Element                                 Implementation Measures
 Policy Topic                 Implementation Program
 F-23   Selection of tree     Ensure the selection of plant species is well adapted to
        species               site conditions through project review.
 F-24   Site and growing      Ensure adequate space and site conditions for tree
        conditions            growth to full maturity through project review.
                              Consider expanding existing tree well sizes where
                              appropriate.
                              Incorporate parkway planters in new development
                              wherever possible.
 F-25   Replant existing      Develop program to replant existing neighborhoods
        neighborhoods         where street trees are missing.
 F-26   Tree canopy           Maximize canopy coverage of paved parking areas
        coverage of parking   through project review.
        areas
 F-27   Water management      Develop water management plan to reduce irrigation
        plan                  associated with public plantings.
                              Use drought tolerant plantings in public plantings and
                              water conserving irrigation systems to reduce water
                              consumption.
                              Use permeable paving material, where feasible, to
                              allow groundwater infiltration and reduce stormwater
                              runoff.
 F-28   Participation in Tree Apply yearly for Tree City, USA designation.
        City USA program
 F-29   Participation in      Monitor programs and participate where appropriate.
        reforestation
        programs with non-
        profits
                                                                                 28
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                               Chapter 5
Community Forest Element                                Implementation Measures
 Policy Topic                Implementation Program
 F-30   Planting of native   Incorporate the use of native species, including oak
        species where        trees, where appropriate and adequate growing
        appropriate          conditions can be provided.
                             Continue to require oak trees to be planted in visually
                             important areas and intersections.
                             Continue to apply the City’s Oak and Landmark Tree
                             Preservation and Protection Ordinances.
 F-31   Support oak          Participate with statewide efforts to protect and plant
        protection programs  oak trees.
 F-32   Extend and Improve   Continue to extend existing planting themes along
        streetscape themes   existing streets as new projects are developed.
                             Prioritize opportunities and budget resources to
                             enhance street plantings on existing streets throughout
                             the City.
 F-33   Special plantings at Require special plantings at major intersections and
        highly visible       other important visible locations through project review.
        locations and major
        intersections
 F-34   Develop character    Incorporate distinctive plantings and design
        through distinctive  approaches in new development projects.
        planting
 F-35   Repealed
 F-36   Strong complement    Continue to require a strong complement of trees
        of street trees      associated with new development, especially when
                             planted behind the sidewalk or otherwise not visibly
                             part of the public right-of-way.
 F-37   Alternative right of Consider alternative right-of-way designs for greater
        way standards for    tree coverage and ample growing space.
        greater canopy
        coverage
 F-38   Environmentally      Specific environmental factors associated with an area
        appropriate          need to be taken into account when planting decisions
        plantings            are made.
                             Review environmental conditions for selection of
                             appropriate plantings through project review.
                                                                                 29

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                Chapter 5
Community Forest Element                                Implementation Measures
 Policy Topic                Implementation Program
 F-39   Communication and    Continue close relationships between City
        coordination         Departments with regard to forestry programs,
        between              particularly the Public Works and Community
        departments          Development Departments.
                             Periodically provide news or articles in City employee
                             newsletters.
 F-40   Coordinated forestry Implement a coordinated community forestry program
        program              to meet policies outlined in the Forestry Element, the
                             Municipal Code and Forestry Master Plan.
 F-41   Repealed
 F-42   Communication with   Work with CalTrans to ensure adequate freeway
        CalTrans             planting in accordance with the Forestry Master Plan
                             and other City programs.
 F-43   Coordination with    Coordinate with SCE to develop system of notification
        Southern California  and channel for feedback on tree pruning projects
        Edison (SCE)         within the City.
 F-44   SCE pruning          Encourage SCE follow International Society of
        standards            Arboriculture pruning standards.
 F-45   Avoid planting trees Avoid planting trees that will interfere with overhead
        that interfere with  utility lines.
        utility lines
                             Continue to require the undergrounding of overhead
                             utility lines associated with development projects.
 F-46   Repealed
 F-47   Planting in new or   Through project review, apply City’s Ordinances and
        renovated projects   policy resolutions pertaining to landscaping to ensure
                             ample planting adjacent to buildings, within parking
                             areas and on slopes.
 F-48   Maintenance of       Require homeowner associations and others to
        landscape areas      maintain landscaping that is adjacent to public streets.
        adjacent to streets
 F-49   Repealed
 F-50   Repealed
 F-51   Involvement of       Develop opportunities for the involvement of landscape
        landscape industry   professionals and nurseries.
                                                                                 30

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                             Chapter 5
Community Forest Element                              Implementation Measures
 Policy Topic                Implementation Program
 F-52   Ad-hoc tree advisory Form ad-hoc tree advisory committees for forestry
        committees           issues or projects as appropriate.
 F-53   Resident             Develop and/or promote neighborhood planting
        involvement and      program.
        planting
 F-54   Repealed
 F-55   Repealed
 F-56   Public education     Provide the public with easy access to forestry
                             information.
 F-57   Annual events        Continue annual Arbor/Earth Day celebration.
 F-58   ”Adopt an Oak”       Continue to implement the “Adopt and Oak” program.
        Program
                                                                              31


              City of Thousand Oaks
                      City Council
             Mayor Claudia Bill-de la Peña
             Mayor Pro-Tem Andrew P. Fox
             Councilmember Jacqui V. Irwin
              Councilmember Joel R. Price
                Councilmember Al Adam
                 Planning Commission
                   Peter Turpel, Chair
              Daniel Roundtree, Vice-Chair
             Michael Farris, Commissioner
            Douglas Nickles, Commissioner
             Daryl Reynolds, Commissioner
             City of Thousand Oaks Staff
John C. Prescott, AICP, Community Development Director
   Mark A. Towne, AICP, Deputy Director/City Planner
            Richard Burgess, Senior Planner
                     October, 2013

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                                    Table of Contents
                                          Table of Contents
PREFACE ...................................................................................................................... iii
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER 2: PHYSIOGRAPHY ..................................................................................... 3
  A. Scenic Resources ................................................................................................... 3
  B. Landform Features .................................................................................................. 3
CHAPTER 3: HYDROLOGY ........................................................................................... 7
  A. Lakes and Lakeshores ........................................................................................... 7
  B. Streams and Creeks ............................................................................................... 8
  C. Floodplains .............................................................................................................. 9
  D. Stormwater Retention and Debris Basins ............................................................... 9
  E. Water Supply, Reclamation and Conservation ...................................................... 10
CHAPTER 4: BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES .................................................................. 13
  A. Native Plant Communities ..................................................................................... 13
  B. Wildlife Resources................................................................................................. 16
  C. Wildlife Movement Corridors ................................................................................. 19
  D. Oak and Landmark Trees ..................................................................................... 19
  E. Wetland and Riparian Areas ................................................................................. 22
  F. Rare, Threatened and Endangered Species ......................................................... 23
CHAPTER 5: CULTURAL RESOURCES..................................................................... 27
  A. Archaeological Resources ..................................................................................... 27
  B. Historical Resources ............................................................................................. 28
CHAPTER 6: PALEONTOLOGY .................................................................................. 35
CHAPTER 7: CLIMATE CHANGE ............................................................................... 37
CHAPTER 8: POLICIES ............................................................................................... 39
  A. Scenic Resources ................................................................................................. 39
  B. Landform Features ................................................................................................ 39
  C. Lakes and Lakeshores .......................................................................................... 40
  D. Streams and Creeks ............................................................................................. 41
  E. Floodplains ............................................................................................................ 42
  F. Stormwater Retention and Debris Basins .............................................................. 42
  G. Water Supply, Reclamation and Conservation...................................................... 43
  H. Native Plant and Wildlife Resources ..................................................................... 43
  I. Wildlife Movement Corridors ................................................................................... 45
  J. Oak and Landmark Trees ...................................................................................... 45
                                                                                                                                 i
                                                                               Thousand Oaks General Plan
Table of Contents                                                    Conservation Element 2013 Update
   K. Wetland and Riparian Areas ................................................................................. 46
   L. Rare, Threatened or Endangered Species ............................................................ 46
   M. Cultural Resources ............................................................................................... 47
   N. Paleontology ......................................................................................................... 47
   O. Climate Change .................................................................................................... 48
APPENDICES
A.   Flora of the Thousand Oaks Planning Area ............................................................ 49
B.   Fishes of the Thousand Oaks Planning Area ......................................................... 65
C.   Birds of the Thousand Oaks Planning Area ............................................................ 67
D.   Mammals of the Thousand Oaks Planning Area .................................................... 69
E.   Rare, Threatened and Endangered Plant Species in the Thousand Oaks
               Planning Area .......................................................................................... 75
F. Threatened, Endangered and Sensitive Animal Species in the Thousand Oaks
               Planning Area .......................................................................................... 77
G. Threatened, Endangered and Sensitive Animal Species in the Thousand Oaks
               Planning Area .......................................................................................... 81
BIBLIOGRAPHY ........................................................................................................... 85
FIGURES
Figure 1: Major Landforms, Drainages, and Floodplains ................................................. 5
Figure 2: Biological Resources ...................................................................................... 25
Figure 3: Historical Landmarks, Points of Historic Interest and Interpretive Centers ..... 33
PHOTOGRAPHS
Photo 1: Wildwood Mesa; Wildwood Park ....................................................................... 1
Photo 2: Lake Eleanor; Lake Eleanor Open Space ......................................................... 7
Photo 3: Arroyo Conejo Creek ........................................................................................ 8
Photo 4: Southern Oak Woodland, California Sage, and Grassland Communities;
               South Ranch Open Space ....................................................................... 13
Photo 5: Coyote (Canis latrans); Rancho Sierra Vista/Satwiwa, Santa Monica
               Mountains National Recreation Area ....................................................... 18
Photo 6: Coast live oaks (Quercus agrifolia); Los Padres Open Space ........................ 20
Photo 7: Lyon’s pentachaeta (Pentachaeta lyonii) ........................................................ 24
Photo 8: Chumash Interpretive Center; Oakbrook Regional Park ................................. 28
ii

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                       Preface
PREFACE
This Conservation Element is based upon the premise that the existing natural
environment possesses its own inherent values and qualities that should be protected.
Most importantly, within these ecosystems lay the blueprints for different patterns of life
that have evolved apart from the pervasive influences of man and modem technology.
In the context of local planning, conservation is a positive action to assure that as
buildout of the community continues to occur as envisioned by the General Plan, related
physiographic, hydrological, biological and cultural resources are not lost or
permanently altered to the detriment of the natural environment that we all share and
enjoy. While in principle, these practices imply a set of constraints with respect to
human activities that affect these resources both directly and indirectly, they also
recognize the capacity of the environment to tolerate or support urban land uses.
Correspondingly, the role of the Conservation Element is to help identify these
limitations and opportunities and define various policies and implementation measures
by which these natural resources can be conserved within the Planning Area.
State Planning Law requires the Conservation Element to address "the conservation,
development, and utilization of natural resources, including water and its hydraulic
force, forests, soils, rivers and other waters, harbors, fisheries, wildlife, minerals, and
other natural resources." Although no harbors, fisheries or significant mineral resources
exist within the Planning Area, this Element inventories and describes several other
equally important resources, including native plant and animal communities, natural
landform features, scenic viewsheds, and archaeological and historic sites that are
potentially affected by urban land uses and associated development.
The Conservation Element of the Thousand Oaks General Plan was adopted in 1972
and comprehensively amended and updated in 1996. This document is a further
comprehensive update of the Conservation Element.
                                                                                             iii
                                      Thousand Oaks General Plan
Preface                        Conservation Element 2013 Update
        This page intentionally left blank.
iv

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                         Chapter 1
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                Introduction
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
The Thousand Oaks Planning Area encompasses a topographically diverse landscape
of mountains, hills, valleys and canyons that supports a variety of natural vegetation
types, including many sensitive plant and animal species. In addition, the Conejo Valley
has a rich cultural heritage, including numerous archaeological and historic sites. In
combination, these resources not only enhance the community's sense of spaciousness
and semi-rural character, but significantly contribute to the overall quality of the
environment.
While many of these resources have already been permanently protected as a part of
the Planning Area's extensive natural open space system, others fall under the
jurisdiction of other public agencies, or exist within remaining vacant parcels of land that
are under private ownership. The purpose of this Element is to describe the general
characteristics of these natural resources and identify appropriate policies and
implementation measures that will be used to guide future development, as envisioned
by the Land Use Element of the General Plan, in a sensitive manner that will afford the
long term conservation and protection of these vital resources for future generations.
The Conservation Element includes figures that depict the local distribution of these
resources, and the appendices contain a comprehensive listing of plant and animal
species known to occur within the Planning Area.
                            Photo 1: Wildwood Mesa; Wildwood Park
                                                                                           1
Chatper 1                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Introduction                        Conservation Element 2013 Update
             This page intentionally left blank.
2

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                         Chapter 2
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                              Physiography
CHAPTER 2: PHYSIOGRAPHY
A. Scenic Resources
The scenic qualities of the Conejo Valley have been acknowledged by residents and
visitors for many years. Framed by steeply sloping hillside terrain and major ridgelines
of the Simi Hills, Conejo Peak and Santa Monica Mountains, the Valley is a distinctive
and picturesque landscape, characterized by broad open vistas of natural open space,
traversed by creeks, and dotted with prominent knolls and native oak woodlands.
Protection of these natural viewshed features has been formally embodied in the City's
General Plan, including its Open Space Element, Conservation Element, Scenic
Highways Element, and in ordinances and resolutions concerning the preservation and
enhancement of the Valley's unique scenic attributes.
Due to the community's regard for its natural setting, development in Thousand Oaks is
widely visible, but usually does not dominate the major natural landscape features. Its
general appearance is that of a community nestled within a ring of open space.
Thousand Oaks is distinguished by its oak trees, and the prominence of knolls, ridges
and hills in a largely natural state. There are relatively few visually prominent buildings.
The City's image is of a self-sufficient, planned suburban community with a consciously
maintained semi- rural character. This image is perpetuated by prudent land use
practices that result in the conservation of open space while combining residential,
commercial and industrial components within the fabric of the City's General Plan.
The City has been successful in protecting the scenic resources of the Conejo Valley in
several ways. For example, environmental documents prepared for all major
developments evaluate the project's visual impact from designated scenic highway
corridors and parklands. This is accomplished by utilizing composite photo-overlay
exhibits that depict how the finished project will appear from selected viewshed
perspectives. Most importantly, the City has adopted specific site planning guidelines
and development policies that effectively serve to minimize any potentially adverse
visual impacts and help retain the semi-rural appearance of the community. These
policies encourage the location of buildings on relatively flat land between knolls or on
moderate slopes, blending with the natural surroundings, while avoiding the placement
of structures on ridge lines, conspicuous hilltops or steep hillsides where silhouetting or
extensive grading would be necessary.
B. Landform Features
The Conejo Valley, which encompasses most of the Thousand Oaks Planning Area, is
flanked by two major east-west trending mountain ranges - the Santa Monica Mountains
to the south and west and the Simi Hills to the north and east. Situated above the
Oxnard Plain and separated by the Conejo grade, this upland area generally ranges in
elevation from 600-900’ above sea level, with Conejo Peak, Simi Peak and the
Mountclef Ridge rising another 1,000-1,600’ above the valley floor.
Other significant landform features include numerous prominent knolls, hills, rocky
outcroppings and lower intervening ridgelines, and a system of deeply entrenched
stream channels and barrancas. From a topographic standpoint, most notable among
                                                                                             3

Chatper 2                                                     Thousand Oaks General Plan
Physiography                                            Conservation Element 2013 Update
these features is the Conejo Canyons area through which the bulk of stormwater
generated within the watershed eventually flows. This area is characterized by very
steep, rugged, hillside and mountainous terrain that descends rapidly northward toward
the Santa Rosa Valley. Please refer to Figure 1.
An important goal of the City's General Plan is to "enhance and preserve the
spaciousness and attractiveness of the Conejo Valley in accommodating future
development." Because of this commitment, and with the strong support of the
community, the City Council enacted a comprehensive set of local ordinances that have
served to limit the height of manufactured cut and fill slopes, encourage the clustering of
development in areas with less steeply sloping hillside terrain, and minimize significant
modifications to prominent ridgelines and other related landform features. In addition,
the Council has adopted specific policies recommended in the Conejo Canyons Study
(1979), with respect to long term management and protection of the scenic qualities
associated with this unique landform feature.
In keeping with these adopted policies and regulations, the following natural landform
features have been classified in terms of their inherent suitability for development:
Flat Land: For the purpose of this Element, flat land is defined as land with a natural
slope less than 10 percent. Approximately 28% of the 60-square mile Planning Area is
classified as flat land. It is suited to many types of land uses ranging from the most
intensive urban uses to recreation and agriculture. Natural limitations on the suitability of
individual sites would be based upon soil characteristics such as shrink-swell
(expansion) potential, load-bearing ability, susceptibility to erosion and seismic hazard.
Such geologic problems potentially associated with construction on flat land can be
avoided or mitigated by proper geologic and soils investigation before development. A
more detailed examination of soils and geology in Thousand Oaks is included in the
Safety Element of the General Plan.
Moderately Sloping Hillsides: Moderately sloping hillsides are defined as land with
natural slope between 10% and 25 percent. They are suited to less intensive land
development patterns than those appropriate to flat land.
Steeply Sloping Hillsides: Land over 25% natural slope is classified as steeply sloping
for purposes of the General Plan. Approximately 42% of the Planning Area is so
classified. It is intrinsically suited to few urban uses, primarily for reasons of soil erosion
control and protection of the aesthetic quality of the landforms. Drainage is also more
rapid and the role of ground cover in retaining the soil and slowing runoff is more critical.
Landscaping is more difficult to maintain on steep slopes. Open space, certain
recreation facilities such as trail systems, and very low density residential development
are most appropriate for steep hillside terrain.
Ridgelines: The natural ridge lines within the Planning Area are perceived by residents
as important assets worthy of protection. This has been reaffirmed over time in
community attitude surveys, documented in the City's Ridgeline Study and embodied in
the Protected Ridgeline (PR) Overlay Zone ordinance.
4
Thousand Oaks General Plan          Chapter 2
Conservation Element 2013 Update Physiography
                                            5
Chatper 2                                             Thousand Oaks General Plan
Physiography                                     Conservation Element 2013 Update
             This page intentionally left blank.
6

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                            Chapter 3
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                     Hydrology
CHAPTER 3: HYDROLOGY
A. Lakes and Lakeshores
There are two man-made lakes in Thousand Oaks - Westlake Lake, which is privately
owned and Lake Eleanor, which is owned by the Conejo Open Space Conservation
Agency (COSCA). Lakes and their shores are suitable to a variety of uses, including
natural habitat, resource conservation, recreation, and appropriate residential,
commercial and institutional lakeshore development. The most important factors that
determine the suitability of a particular land use for a lakefront location are: (1) the
potential for water pollution and (2) the effect of the land use upon the scenic amenity of
the lake. Sufficient building setbacks not only conserve significant landscape features
and natural landforms associated with lakes, but also serve to minimize indirect impacts
to resident and migratory wildlife that utilize these habitats.
                        Photo 2: Lake Eleanor; Lake Eleanor Open Space
In terms of controlling pollution, bio-filtration is a concept that utilizes various types of
herbaceous vegetation planted in shallow earthen-bottomed basins to filter out
contaminants normally found in urban runoff such as oil, grease, soap, fertilizers and
pesticides. Once these chemical substances become trapped, they naturally break
down over time into harmless organic compounds that actually stimulate plant growth.
Since most of the pollution is carried by low flow nuisance water, biofiltration systems
would be beneficial if incorporated in the landscape and drainage design of
development projects that are tributary to both lakes.
                                                                                              7
Chatper 3                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Hydrology                                            Conservation Element 2013 Update
B. Streams and Creeks
The Conejo Valley encompasses a drainage area of approximately 60 square miles.
The major drainage course within the Planning Area is the Arroyo Conejo, including its
principal tributary, the South Branch, which drains about 45 square miles, bounded by
the ridgelines of the Santa Monica Mountains to the south, Mountclef Ridge to the north,
Conejo Mountain to the west and the Simi Hills to the east. The Arroyo Conejo flows to
the Santa Rosa Valley northwest of the Planning Area. From that point it continues
across the Oxnard Plain via Conejo and Calleguas Creeks, ultimately emptying into
Mugu Lagoon at the edge of the Pacific Ocean.
                                Photo 3: Arroyo Conejo Creek
Two other watercourses, Lindero and Potrero Creek, drain approximately 15 square
miles of watershed in the southeastern quadrant of the Conejo Valley. Please refer to
Figure 1. These creeks are tributary to Triunfo Creek and Malibu Creek, which empty
into the Pacific Ocean about nine miles south of the Planning Area.
As the Planning Area has urbanized, many tributary drainages are retaining running
water for longer periods of time, due to the additional nuisance water (e.g. irrigation)
runoff.
Most of the stream drainages that traverse highly urbanized portions of the community
have been extensively modified as a result of development. Although the City's General
8
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 3
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                 Hydrology
Plan has always encouraged their conservation, many of these stream drainages are
designated as "red-line" channels and come under the jurisdiction of the Ventura
County Watershed Protection District that determines the appropriate design of any
improvements needed to protect the public's health and safety. In the past, to
accommodate urban growth, such drainages were typically converted to concrete-lined
channels, and in other instances, large sections have been eliminated by diverting
runoff into underground storm drains. More recently, the application of State and
Federal regulations that afford protection to riparian and wetland vegetation commonly
found in natural stream drainages has resulted in more environmentally sensitive
development projects, including restoration and re-vegetation wherever feasible. Local
examples include the restoration of the seasonal creek immediately south of the public
equestrian center at Rancho Potrero (south side of Lynn Road opposite Via Andrea),
and the removal of the non-native and highly invasive giant cane (Arundo donax) and
fan palms (Washingtonia robusta) in Hill Canyon and along Wildwood Creek.
Besides accommodating storm water runoff and serving to recharge groundwater
aquifers, streams and creeks also provide important foraging, nesting and breeding
habitats for wildlife. Not only do animals depend on streams and creeks for water that is
critical to their survival, but they often use them as "movement corridors" between
adjacent open space areas since they afford excellent cover. Correspondingly, the
biological diversity of the plant and animal communities that inhabit, or in some way
utilize, the Arroyo Conejo and its major tributaries is quite extensive.
Because of a combination of factors, including biological sensitivity and susceptibility to
erosion and flooding, streams and creeks are considered intrinsically unsuitable for
urban development, particularly where they occur upstream of and within steep, narrow
barrancas.
C. Floodplains
Natural floodplains are generally not suitable for urban land uses. As a result,
development should be discouraged in these lowland areas that often contain significant
wetland and riparian habitats. Land uses that are not affected by flooding and do not
impede runoff are appropriate in floodplains. Such uses include passive use, parks,
playfields, golf courses, hiking and riding trails, and natural open space. Within the
Thousand Oaks Planning Area, the potential for flooding exists as the result of the
encroachment of urban development into natural floodplains. These flood prone areas
are graphically depicted in a series of flood hazard risk maps prepared by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), which are kept on file in the Public Works
Department. The only entirely natural floodplain remaining within the Planning Area is
located adjacent to the lower Arroyo Conejo in the Hill Canyon area. This area is
designated as natural open space. Please refer to Figure 1.
D. Stormwater Retention and Debris Basins
Stormwater retention and debris basins are often constructed in natural drainage
channels and floodplains to effectively control runoff, reduce erosion and prevent
                                                                                            9
Chatper 3                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Hydrology                                             Conservation Element 2013 Update
sedimentation further downstream, impacting the resources addressed in the two
immediately preceding sub-chapters.
In Thousand Oaks, several large basins already exist on the Arroyo Conejo, Conejo
Mountain, Lindero, Lang and Potrero Creek drainages. As urban development
continues to occur, additional basins will likely be needed within these same tributary
watersheds Since the Ventura County Watershed Protection District has jurisdiction
over the design and approval of such structures, it is important that the City work closely
with this agency to minimize any potentially adverse environmental impacts wherever
possible. In some cases, opportunities also exist for multi-use recreational activities
where sufficient land area is available and conflicts with wildlife can be avoided.
E. Water Supply, Reclamation and Conservation
Water Supply
Thousand Oaks is dependent upon imported water for most of its domestic, commercial
and industrial needs. Imported water is delivered to the City and other water purveyors
by the Calleguas Municipal Water District (CMWD) from the Metropolitan Water District
of Southern California (MWD). The three major water purveyors serving the Planning
Area are California-American Water Company, California Water Service Company, and
the City of Thousand Oaks Water Department.
Under normal water supply conditions, the MWD supplies water to the CMWD
according to demand. The MWD's future water system demand is based on a
population forecast provided by the Southern California Association of Governments
(SCAG) in its Growth Management Plan, which incorporates local projections. The
CMWD has a capital improvement program to enhance system reliability for existing
users and to accommodate new growth. Through its capital improvement program, the
CMWD is committed to constructing local storage and additional importation and
reclaimed water facilities in an effort to drought-proof its service area and enhance the
reliability of its service area's water supply.
In a joint venture, the CMWD and the MWD are working on a large-scale importation
and subsurface water storage project in Ventura County, known as the "Las Posas
Aquifer Storage and Recovery project which provides a measure of supply reliability for
the entire CMWD service area. This project involves construction of a second MWD
supply pipeline to the CMWD and storage of up to 300,000 acre feet of imported water
in the North Las Posas Groundwater Basin. When available, excess imported water
would be injected into the basin. Subsequently, if deliveries from the MWD are curtailed
or interrupted by drought or pipeline outages, the water could be recovered from the
groundwater basin. As a result, the Las Posas Aquifer Storage and Recovery project
would insulate the service area from future supply problems by reducing the District's
dependence upon imported state water.
10
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 3
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                 Hydrology
Water Reclamation
In addition, CMWD is pursuing the construction of reclaimed water projects on the
Oxnard Plain and in the Conejo and Simi Valleys. These ventures could ultimately yield
a substantial portion of the District's current annual deliveries. The recycled water will be
used primarily for irrigation purposes. As a result, an equivalent amount of potable water
will become available for domestic, commercial and industrial usage, reducing the need
to acquire additional imported potable water supplies.
One example of the use of reclaimed water is the Conejo Creek Diversion Project, a
cooperative effort among the City of Thousand Oaks, CMWD, Camrosa Water District,
and Pleasant Valley County Water District. It involves the diversion of reclaimed
wastewater from the City's Hill Canyon Wastewater Treatment Plant discharged into
Conejo Creek. The diverted water is transferred to Camrosa and Pleasant Valley
County Water District for irrigation of farmland and other acceptable uses.
Water Conservation
The City has prepared an Urban Water Management Plan, pursuant to State Legislation
(SB 7). The purpose of the plan, which is updated every five years, is to document
water conservation efforts by the City, as well as assess water supply and demand. As
a result, various water conservation measures have been implemented:
1. The City created a staff position to help manage water resources by developing
    water conservation programs.
2. The City has cooperated with CMWD and MWD, creating a unified effort to address
    water supply reliability in the County.
3. The City is a signatory to a Memorandum of Understanding regarding urban water
    conservation in California, and is a member of the California Urban Water
    Conservation Council.
4. Thousand Oaks Municipal Code (Title 10, Chapter 2, Article 11) includes mandatory
    water conservation provisions and is based on MWD’s “Model Water Conservation
    Ordinance”.
                                                                                           11

Chatper 3                               Thousand Oaks General Plan
Hydrology                        Conservation Element 2013 Update
          This page intentionally left blank.
12

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 4
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                     Biological Resources
CHAPTER 4: BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
A. Native Plant Communities
Thousand Oaks enjoys a Mediterranean climate. Southern California is one of only 5
regions on earth that experience such climates. This regime of warm dry summers and
cool, moist winters has resulted in the development of plants that have evolved to grow
in the winter and early spring when water is plentiful and withstand the long dry
summers by becoming dormant when water is unavailable.
Naturally occurring assemblages of plants, called native plant communities, tend to
grow together as a response to several environmental factors such as soil type, slope,
exposure and availability of sub-surface moisture, etc. While each individual plant
species has unique requirements that account for its presence or absence within a
general area, considerable overlap in plant distribution often occurs due to the variability
of environmental factors and other related habitat conditions. As a result, these
communities sometimes merge along relatively indiscreet borders to form mosaic
patterns of different vegetation types and varying species composition.
                       Photo 4: Southern Oak Woodland, California Sage,
                     and Grassland Communities; South Ranch Open Space
In a very general sense, the Thousand Oaks Planning Area contains six native plant
communities which are representative of the larger Santa Monica Mountains region.
Refer to Biological Resources Map, Figure 2. These communities are briefly discussed
below. A complete flora of the Thousand Oaks Planning Area is provided in Appendix
A.
                                                                                         13
Chatper 4                                                     Thousand Oaks General Plan
Biological Resources                                   Conservation Element 2013 Update
Grasslands: Grasslands are characterized by low annual herbs such as black mustard,
wild oats and brome grass. In less disturbed areas native grasses, such as purple needle
grass, and native bulbs, such as Catalina mariposa lily, may become quite common. This
plant community is located primarily in heavy clay soils on gently rolling hills and valleys
throughout the Planning Area. It should be noted that in many areas, grass species are
not as common as other herbaceous plants in this community, leading some botanists to
refer to it as California Prairie; however, we will continue to refer to these areas as
“Grasslands” in the Conservation Element due to familiarity of use.
Grasslands have been subject to many man-made constraints and pressures including
competition from introduced non-native species, agricultural conversion, increased
frequency of wild-fires and urbanization. In areas where the grasslands have remained,
this has resulted in the replacement of the native flora with introduced non-native plants.
On the urban/wildland interface, many native grasslands have become completely
dominated by weedy annual species such as ripgut brome (Bromus diandrus) and
tocalote (Centaurea melitensis). This community in its natural form is becoming
increasingly scarce in Southern California and this trend is likely to continue as a result
of fluctuating weather patterns associated with climate change and an increase in the
incidence of wild fires.
Chaparral: This is probably the most characteristic vegetation type of Southern
California, and is typical of Mediterranean climates throughout the world. It is found
mostly on steep slopes with shallow soils. This plant community consists of a variety of
stiff, woody shrubs and usually occurs at higher elevation than the California sage scrub
zone. Common chaparral plants include chamise, scrub oak, several species of
ceanothus, laurel sumac and mountain mahogany. It is located in the foothills south of
the Ventura Freeway and on north- facing slopes along the Mount Clef Ridge, Conejo
Canyons, and Simi Hills. Although many plant species within the chaparral community
have adapted to withstand periodic wild fires typical of Southern California, too frequent
fires can result in the replacement of the chaparral shrubs by weedy annual grasslands.
Chaparral shrubs provide cover for large animals, serve as a major component in the
diet of the mule deer, and produce seeds for birds and small mammals.
California Sage Scrub: Along with chaparral, this is the most widespread plant
community within undeveloped areas of the Planning Area. It is comprised of small
semi-woody shrubs and is sometimes called "soft chaparral" due to the flexibility of the
leaves and stems. Typical California sage scrub plants include California sagebrush,
California sunflower, California buckwheat and purple sage. The California sage scrub
community is usually found below 1000’, where it is present as a band surrounding
higher mountains below and often inter-grading with chaparral. Two forms of this plant
community occur within the Conejo Valley - "inland," and "maritime." The inland form is
by far the most abundant within the Planning Area and is often called inland sage scrub.
The maritime form is present along the Conejo Grade and on south- facing slopes of the
Broome Ranch where the penetration of fog provides additional moisture. Like
chaparral, coastal sage scrub plants have adapted to periodic fires.
14

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                         Chapter 4
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                       Biological Resources
The cumulative loss of California sage scrub habitat throughout the state has been the
focus of considerable concern among biologists. Many of Thousand Oaks' rarest
endemic plants and animals are found within this plant community.
Southern Oak Woodland/Oak Savannah: Southern oak woodlands and savannahs
primarily occur in gently rolling foothills and valleys. Valley oaks usually form a
savannah comprised of large widely-spaced trees separated by extensive grasslands.
This plant community is present within the Planning Area but in its undisturbed form is
limited to small geographic areas. While the City's Oak Tree Ordinance has enabled
many of the individual historic oaks to be protected as development took place, the only
remaining examples of southern oak woodlands and savannahs with their associated
plants are within public open space. Southern oak woodlands and savannahs support a
wide variety of bird and animal species wherever they occur.
Riparian/Coast Live Oak Woodland: This plant community is restricted for the most
part to perennial streams or springs where there is moisture at or near the surface much
of the year. In valleys and canyons where riparian vegetation naturally occurs, this plant
community provides important habitat for wildlife, yet it is diminishing throughout the
Santa Monica Mountains region and comprises less than 3% of the Planning Area's
remaining natural open space. In Southern California, the majority of remaining riparian
woodlands are largely confined to remote inaccessible areas. Urban development and
associated flood control projects have been the principal causes for its loss both locally
and regionally. Within the Planning Area, riparian plant communities occur in two
general forms: riparian woodland and herbaceous riparian. Riparian woodland consists
of an overstory of large deciduous trees such as arroyo and red willow, coast live oak,
California sycamore and Fremont cottonwood with an understory of shrubs such as
California wild rose and mule fat. Herbaceous riparian comprises a dense growth of low
perennial plants such as cattails, rushes, sedges and California loosestrife.
Freshwater Marsh: The most restricted plant community in the Planning Area, freshwater
marsh comprises an accumulation of herbaceous perennial plants generally found
wherever water ponds. The best example of freshwater marsh is found along the margins
of Lake Eleanor, but it also occurs along slowly moving portions of streams and in the
vicinity of livestock ponds. Common plants include cattails, tules and water plantain. Adding
to their overall importance, freshwater marshes are utilized as breeding and foraging areas
by waterfowl such as cinnamon teal and wading birds such as great blue heron. Locally, a
wetland was successfully restored adjacent to the Hill Canyon Wastewater Treatment Plant
that provides habitat for a variety of plant and wildlife species.
Biological Crusts: Hikers in the open space may notice in certain areas that the bare
soil is covered with a low, plant-like growth. This is a biological crust. Not technically a
plant community, biological crusts are a unique assemblage of organisms comprised of
cyanobacteria, mosses, lichens and liverworts. They occur in most plant communities in
the Planning Area, but are best represented in chaparral and California sage scrub.
Research indicates that these biotic communities perform a number of critical functions in
ecosystems. Belying their rather humble appearance, they provide soil stability by
cementing soil particles together, thereby providing resistance to wind and water erosion.
They also increase water infiltration by retarding run-off and suppressing weed
                                                                                             15
Chatper 4                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Biological Resources                                  Conservation Element 2013 Update
germination by forming a “crust” on the soil which weed seeds cannot penetrate. In areas
where the crust has been removed by trampling, or movement of heavy equipment,
weedy, introduced plants soon colonize the soil, crowding out native species.
B. Wildlife Resources
A variety of resident and migratory wildlife species that are representative of the Santa
Monica Mountains region can be found within natural open space areas that have been
permanently preserved, as well as remaining undeveloped areas. Not only are key
habitat resources such as food, cover, and water plentiful throughout these areas on a
year-round basis, but rocky outcrops, high peaks, steep hillside and canyon areas
combine to provide important undisturbed nesting and breeding opportunities for
wildlife. Along with an extensive network of movement corridors that serves to prevent
habitat isolation and maintain unrestricted access to these resources, both the diversity
and quality of this ecosystem are relatively high.
Examples of the range of wildlife found within the Thousand Oaks area are discussed
below. A complete list of wildlife species known to inhabit, or otherwise make use of
available habitats located within the Planning Area is included in Appendices B through E.
Native Pollinators
The City’s open space system as well as urban landscaping supports a great diversity
of invertebrates. The importance of invertebrates as pollinators and essential building
blocks of ecosystems cannot be overstated. For example, it makes no sense to
conserve an endangered plant unless its pollinator is also conserved. In addition, many
species of reptiles, amphibians, birds, bats and small mammals rely on insects as a
principal or critical food source. Invertebrates, particularly insects, also serve as
indicators of environmental health. The recent colony collapse disorder among honey
bees, is an example of an environmental issue that may have ramifications throughout
the ecosystem. The City can promote a healthy invertebrate fauna by the use of
landscape plants which provide a nectar source, limiting use of insecticide and
protecting intact ecosystems which provide nesting sites and foraging areas.
Fish
The Planning Area has several water bodies and drainages which support fish species.
Under natural conditions, streams within the City were generally seasonal, meaning that
they tended to dry up or experience very low flow during periodic droughts. As the City
developed, these water courses began to conduct irrigation water and other urban water
which ran into storm drains, resulting in an increase in stream water. Streams such as
the Arroyo Conejo are therefore now considered perennial. The Hill Canyon Treatment
plant also discharges tertiary treated water into the Arroyo Conejo, which has also
increased stream flow. Today, these drainages and artificial water bodies such as Lake
Eleanor provide suitable habitat for fish.
All of the fish which occur today in the Planning Area are introduced. Some of these are
game fish such as largemouth bass, while others are aquarium fish such as goldfish
which have been released by well-meaning people into these waterbodies. Introduced
16

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                          Chapter 4
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                       Biological Resources
fish such as bass can have a significant adverse effect on aquatic ecosystems because
the introduced fish eat native animals such as amphibians and even young birds.
Species such as goldfish and carp create sedimentation by churning up the substrate.
However, it should be noted that the presence of fish does provide food for bird species
such as kingfishers and herons, and mammals such as raccoons.
The only sensitive fish species found recently in the Planning Area is the arroyo chub.
The arroyo chub is considered a “special animal” by the California Department of Fish
and Wildlife (CDFW). This small (3-4”) minnow is native to rivers of the Los Angeles
Basin, Malibu and San Juan Creek and the Santa Margarita River drainage and it has
been introduced in the Santa Clara and Cuyama Rivers in Ventura County. According
to the CDFW, arroyo chub are adapted to survive in habitats with warm, fluctuating
water and conditions ranging from high velocity, high sediment flows in winter months to
clear, intermittent, warm water creeks during summer and fall.
The arroyo chub was found in the Arroyo Conejo by biologists conducting surveys for
the southwest pond turtle in 2002. The species has not been documented since that
time and is believed to be extirpated from the area.
A list of fish species found within the Planning Area is included in Appendix B.
Additional species may be found due to continuing unauthorized introductions.
Reptiles and Amphibians
Reptiles occur throughout natural open space areas and commonly include side-
blotched lizards, southern alligator lizards and western fence lizards. A variety of snakes
are also present, including gopher snakes, striped racers, Southern Pacific rattlesnakes,
common king snakes, ringneck snakes, and western aquatic garter snakes. The
southwestern pond turtle is a State "species of special concern" and can be found in the
Arroyo Conejo and its major tributary drainages. See Appendix C for a list of the reptiles
and amphibians of the Thousand Oaks Planning Area.
Several species of amphibians are present in the cool, moist habitats afforded by
woodlands and riparian communities. Amphibians expected to occur include slender
salamanders, ensatina salamanders, western toads, and Pacific tree frogs. Toads and tree
frogs utilize temporary pond and stream habitats for breeding, and do not require much
water for the rest of the year. Fully aquatic forms such as the introduced bullfrog are
present along perennial streams and ponds. Another State-listed "species of special
concern," the red-legged frog, also listed as threatened by the Federal Government may
also be present in riparian areas, but has not been found within the City in recent surveys.
Birds
The great diversity of bird species found within Thousand Oaks reflects the variety of
habitat types available to resident and migratory populations. Local survey records have
identified a total of 166 bird species here. These species include breeding birds that
nest here but migrate to warmer climates during the winter months, resident species
that are present year-round, and migrants that are here only during the fall and winter.
Among the most commonly encountered birds within urbanized portions of the City are
                                                                                           17

Chatper 4                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Biological Resources                                  Conservation Element 2013 Update
house sparrows, house finches and Brewer's blackbirds, while several species of
warblers, California and spotted towhees, plain titmice, acorn woodpeckers, California
quail and red-tailed hawks are more typical of natural open space areas.
Particularly noteworthy are the 13 species of raptors, or "birds of prey" which can be
found here. The following species are known to nest and breed locally: Cooper's hawk,
American kestrel, prairie falcon, red-tailed hawk, red-shouldered hawk, great homed
owl, bam owl and white-tailed kite. Other raptors that range through the area or become
more numerous in the winter months include the turkey vulture, northern harrier, sharp-
shinned hawk, merlin, and screech owl. As a whole, raptor population densities within
the Santa Monica Mountains region, which includes the Conejo Valley, are considered
to be some of the highest in the country. See Appendix D for a list of birds of the
Thousand Oaks Planning Area.
Mammals
Mammals that have either been observed or are expected to occur locally include
species ranging from small ground dwelling rodents to large carnivores. Resident
populations of small to medium-sized mammals such as deer mouse, Pacific kangaroo
rat, Audubon cottontail, long-tailed weasel, striped skunk and raccoon are encountered
in and around urban areas, as well as open space. Larger mammals including coyote,
grey fox, badger, bobcat, and mule deer tend to be more restricted in their distribution
and primarily occupy larger natural undisturbed habitats. Although locally uncommon,
mountain lions are occasionally seen by hikers or residents bordering the open space
system. These large predators have extensive territories that include the Santa Monica
Mountains, Simi Hills and the Santa Susana Mountains. See Appendix E for a list of
mammals of the Thousand Oaks Planning Area.
                 Photo 5: Coyote (Canis latrans); Rancho Sierra Vista/Satwiwa,
                      Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area
18
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 4
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                     Biological Resources
C. Wildlife Movement Corridors
It is essential that natural open space not only be protected, but that these areas are
linked together in a way that maintains biodiversity and prevents the loss of sensitive
animal species. Commonly called wildlife "movement corridors," such linkages are
generally described as routes or paths that can be utilized by animals to gain access to
critical foraging, nesting and breeding habitats that are necessary to maintain healthy
populations. As urbanization within the Conejo Valley and nearby communities
continues to cause the isolation and fragmentation of habitat, both on a regional and
local scale, the need to plan for, and accommodate, a viable network of movement
corridors becomes increasingly important.
From a regional standpoint, the most important corridors are those linking the Santa
Monica Mountains, Simi Hills and Santa Susana Mountains.
Approximately 15,000 acres (39%) of the Thousand Oaks Planning Area is natural open
space. Except for a few remaining key parcels of land, most of the urbanized area is
surrounded by an extensive inter-connected ring of natural open space that
accommodates the unrestricted movements of wildlife. Please refer to Biological
Resources Map, Figure 2.
According to a recent report entitled “South Coast Missing Likages Project: A Linkage
Design for the Santa Monica- Sierra Madre Connection” (Penrod, et al, 2006), the U.S.
101 and State Route 23 Freeways are the major barriers to regional wildlife movements
between the Santa Susana Mountains, Simi Hills and the Santa Monica Mountains.
Caltrans and other organizations are working to ensure that there is adequate access
across both freeways by way of undercrossings in the form of large culverts.
D. Oak and Landmark Trees
Trees provide many benefits to our community. Not only do they provide abundant
shade, lower temperatures, produce oxygen and filter the air we breathe, but they
significantly enhance and beautify the urban landscape. In an open space setting they
also provide valuable arboreal habitat for numerous bird species including hawks and
owls, all of which increase both the diversity and quality of the natural environment.
Although early explorers noted that one could look across miles of oak studded inland
coastal valleys that seemed to have been planted by some master gardener,
urbanization of these desirable, easily developable, lowlands and foothills has resulted
in major impacts to oak trees. As an example, the majestic Valley Oak, which once
commonly existed as very large specimen trees throughout the rolling grasslands of
Southern California, is now considered to be threatened within this portion of its range
due to lack of regeneration. While a considerable effort has been made to protect
Valley Oak Trees within the City, the lack of suitable Valley Oak habitat is the most
significant reason for this lack of regeneration.
                                                                                         19

Chatper 4                                                       Thousand Oaks General Plan
Biological Resources                                     Conservation Element 2013 Update
Oak trees have long been recognized for their historic and cultural significance to the
Conejo Valley, and literally thousands of oak trees have been successfully planted locally
since the City's incorporation in 1964. In addition, a comprehensive ordinance regulating
the removal and development around oaks was also enacted by the City Council early on,
in order to ensure protection of these valuable natural resources as the City developed.
In addition to the City’s Oak Tree Ordinance, the City Council has also enacted a
Landmark Tree Ordinance which protects designated landmark trees including California
sycamore, Southern California black walnut, California bay and toyon.
               Photo 6: Coast live oaks (Quercus agrifolia); Los Padres Open Space
Oak Trees
The following species of oak trees are native to Thousand Oaks:
Valley Oak (Quercus lobata): The valley oak is considered the monarch of California
oaks. It is the largest and usually lives longest, attaining heights of over one hundred
feet and living 400-600 years. The valley oak is characterized by the deeply-lobed,
large, gray- green leaves, with the distinctive shape usually associated with oaks. This
oak is winter deciduous, which means it sheds its leaves in the fall and produces a new
crop of bright green leaves in the spring. The trunk is dark and coarse. The valley oak,
as its name implies, grows naturally in valleys where the soil is deep and rich, shading
the undergrowth and creating the oak savannah.
Coast Live Oak (Quercus agrifolia): Coast live oaks are the most prevalent oak along
the California coast and in coastal valleys, from Mendocino to Baja. These trees, with
their dense evergreen canopy, grow in almost all conditions, from moist streamside to
20

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 4
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                     Biological Resources
dry hillside. The leaves are spiny and dark green, and the trunk is smooth and gray.
Although they generally do not live as long as valley oaks, they commonly exceed 250
years in age and range from 40-60’ in height. Due to its adaptability and hardiness, the
coast live oak is grown by nurseries for use in the landscape and is a major factor in
reforestation, especially in Thousand Oaks.
Scrub Oak (Quercus berberidifolia): Despite its name, the scrub oak is an attractive
many-trunked large shrub or small tree growing primarily in the chaparral plant
community. The leaves of the scrub oak are small, green and have spiny lobes. Trees
grow 6-15’ in height and as wide as they are tall. Characterized by a shrub-like
appearance, the dense growth habit of this plant make it excellent for erosion control
and wildlife habitat. Although protected by law, scrub oaks are often removed for fire
clearance. Fire Protection District regulations allow for selective removal of chaparral
plants between oaks resulting in protection of most of the scrub oaks.
Palmer’s Oak (Quercus palmeri): In 2002, a new species of oak was found by City
Staff in the Sunset Hills Open Space in the northeastern portion of the City. Palmer’s
oak is found in arid chaparral and has a discontinuous distribution from San Luis Obispo
County to San Diego County. Palmer’s oak usually takes the form of a large shrub or
small tree. The population in our open space consists of about 6 trees approximately
20’ in height. It has extremely spiny leaves and rigid spreading twigs. The acorn cup is
unique in having a spreading fringe around the top.
Landmark Trees
In addition to the various species of oak trees for which the Planning Area is noted,
several other types of native trees are valued as symbolic of the City's heritage, beauty,
and image. These other trees include:
California sycamore (Platanus racemosa): California Sycamore is a large, strikingly
beautiful tree which predominantly occurs in small groupings in open areas and
canyons adjacent to stream channels. Because of this association, they often intergrade
with other riparian trees such as willow, cottonwood and white alder. Sycamores
typically range from 40-100’ in height with short thick trunks and equally large irregular
spreading branches. The deeply cleft leaves resemble maple leaves and are 5-11
inches long and light-yellow green in color. Flowers develop into 2-7 round, bristly fruit
heads that are brown in color and are shed along with the leaves in late fall.
California bay (Umbellularia californica): California bay is an evergreen tree which
locally occurs in moist shady canyons and barrancas of the Arroyo Conejo Creek and its
tributary drainages. Often found in association with other riparian trees, bay laurels
generally vary from 35-60’ in height and are characterized by straight narrow trunks with
wide, rounded, densely foliated canopies. Leaves are shiny, smooth, deep yellow-
green, approximately 3-6 inches long. As a rule, the leaves persist on the branches for
two seasons or more, after which they are shed allowing for new growth. The leaves
are strongly aromatic and, although stronger, can be used in the same way as culinary
                                                                                          21

Chatper 4                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Biological Resources                                  Conservation Element 2013 Update
bay. The leaves produce fumes which were put to use by early entomologists in insect
killing jars.
Southern California black walnut (Juglans californica): The Southern California black
walnut is a small multi-trunked tree which occurs sporadically in California sage scrub,
riparian woodland and southern oak woodland. The tree has long leaves which are
divided into leaflets and smooth ashy white bark which becomes blackish brown and
deeply furrowed with age. Black walnut trees are considered to be short-lived and
generally do not exceed 150 years in age and range from 12-30’ in height. The small,
hard-shelled nuts are an important food source for wildlife and were utilized as food and
gaming pieces by the Chumash people. Walnut trees brighten up the Conejo Valley
when their leaves turn a beautiful golden yellow before they drop in the autumn.
Toyon (California holly) (Heteromeles arbutifolia): Actually a large evergreen shrub,
toyon is famous for its bright red berries. Its supposed similarity to English holly has
earned it the common name of California holly and its prevalence in the area gave the
town Hollywood its name. It grows throughout California in chaparral and southern oak
woodland. Although usually about 15’ in height, exceptional specimens will reach 25’ in
height. Toyon is available in the horticultural trade and is valuable as a screen, bank
planting or for erosion control.
E. Wetland and Riparian Areas
The word "riparian" means streamside and refers to the vegetation that grows along the
edges of freshwater bodies such as streams, ponds and lakes. Riparian zones are
typically characterized by moisture-dependent vegetation such as willows, cottonwoods
and mule fat. Typically, riparian woodland is comprised of an overstory of large trees
and an understory of shrubs and herbaceous perennials. Other types of riparian
habitats may consist entirely of herbaceous perennials such as sedges and rushes and
lack trees and shrubs.
In Thousand Oaks, larger perennial streams such as the Arroyo Conejo support good
examples of Riparian Woodland. Smaller tributaries within these watersheds normally
contain running water only part of the year and consequently are called intermittent
streams. However, even these intermittent streams often retain significant soil moisture
and may support riparian vegetation.
Wetland is a more inclusive term than riparian and refers to a vegetated zone that is
seasonally or continuously submerged or has more saturated soil conditions. In
Thousand Oaks, wetlands may have both riparian and aquatic components and
principally occur along larger streams such as the Arroyo Conejo and bodies of water
such as Lake Eleanor.
Wetlands and riparian areas constitute an extremely valuable natural resource. They
represent essential breeding and foraging habitat for many of the migratory and resident
wildlife species found within the Planning Area. Although wetland areas account for only
six percent of California's land area, they provide habitat for more than one- third of the
22

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                           Chapter 4
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                       Biological Resources
State's endangered species. Wetlands and riparian areas support unique plant
associations, several of which have been designated as declining throughout the State
by the Natural Diversity Data Base. Beyond providing floodwater retention, groundwater
recharge, erosion control and water purification, they also provide attractive areas for
passive recreation such as hiking, photography and nature study.
F. Rare, Threatened and Endangered Species
These are plant and animal species that are considered by State, Federal, or private
agencies to exhibit unique biological significance, limited distribution, restricted habitat
requirements, particular susceptibility to human disturbance, or a combination of these
factors. Both State and Federal government agencies have developed a rating system
to designate the status of sensitive species. These designations, in increasing order of
sensitivity, are: "rare"; "threatened"; and "endangered." Official designation of a species
in one of these categories affords these species an additional level of protection.
The California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW) has also developed a listing of
"species of special concern." Although this designation does not provide additional legal
protection, it does indicate concern for the status of species that are experiencing a
statewide decline. The known distribution of sensitive plant and animal species is
recorded by the CDFW in the Natural Diversity Data Base. In addition to this key
information, the CDFW has developed a similar system called the Wildlife Habitat
Relationship Data Base to determine the potential for species occurrence based on
habitat types.
In addition, the California Native Plant Society (CNPS) maintains an inventory of rare
and endangered plants based on information provided by amateur and professional
botanists throughout the state. This is the most comprehensive list in existence and it is
considered to be authoritative by State and Federal Agencies. In 2010, CDFW changed
the name of “CNPS List” or “CNPS Ranks” to “California Rare Plant Rank” (CRPR).
The name was changed to reduce confusion over the origination of the list. CNPS and
CDFW jointly manage the Rare Plant Status Review group. Nothing about the process
of rare plant review or rank assignment has changed and the same committee of
experts from many organizations in addition to CDFW and CNPS still review each
change and ultimately assign the ranks.
The plants included in CRPR List 1B are rare and endangered throughout their range,
are restricted to California and are eligible for State listing. CRPR List 2 includes plants
that are rare, threatened, or endangered in California, but more common elsewhere.
CRPR List 3 is a review list of plants about which we need more information. CRPR
List 4 is a watch list of plants of limited distribution which, although not rare at present,
are uncommon enough that they should be monitored regularly.
                                                                                             23

Chatper 4                                                     Thousand Oaks General Plan
Biological Resources                                   Conservation Element 2013 Update
                         Photo 7: Lyon’s pentachaeta (Pentachaeta lyonii)
Rare, Threatened and Endangered Plants
Thousand Oaks provides habitat for a number of Rare, Endangered or Sensitive plant
species. Many of these are endemic to this area and found nowhere else on earth. One
of the principal reasons for this proliferation of unique plants is the unusual geologic
conditions in this area. In particular, Conejo Volcanic bedrock found in the Santa Monica
Mountains and Mount Clef Ridge and the sandstone bedrock typical of the Simi Hills
weather to produce unusual soils which are exploited by several sensitive species. Loss
of habitat remains the single greatest threat to sensitive plant species. Luckily, the
majority of this habitat is permanently protected in the City’s Open Space system. A list
of rare, threatened and endangered plant species is provided in Appendix F.
Threatened, Endangered and Sensitive Animal Species
Several State or Federally listed Rare, Endangered or Threatened animal species are
found in the Conejo Valley. Undisturbed, native vegetation within the Open Space
system provides essential habitat for these species, and will hopefully aid in their
recovery. In addition, sensitive animal species are also known to occur within the
Planning Area. These are listed as "species of special concern" by the California
Department of Fish and Wildlife or are candidates for Federal listing. It should be noted
that all migratory birds occurring in the United States, including all eagles, hawks and
owls are protected by Federal laws. These species are discussed in Appendix G.
24

Thousand Oaks General Plan                   Chapter 4
Conservation Element 2013 Update Biological Resources
                                                   25
Chatper 4                                                     Thousand Oaks General Plan
Biological Resources                                     Conservation Element 2013 Update
                     This page intentionally left blank.
26

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                           Chapter 5
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                          Cultural Resources
CHAPTER 5: CULTURAL RESOURCES
A. Archaeological Resources
Archaeological, historical and cultural resources are important, and their protection is
appropriately addressed in the Conservation Element. These resources represent the
history of Thousand Oaks and the Conejo Valley. Ensuring their proper management
and protection will contribute to the City's aesthetics, its civic pride and will provide a
valuable link between the past and future.
The Conejo Corridor, which includes significant portions of the Planning Area, holds a
bountiful legacy of archaeological resources. For over 1,000 years prior to European
occupation, the Conejo Corridor was an integral part of a much larger Chumash territory
that extended well inland from the coast and channel islands to include all of Santa
Barbara, most of Ventura and parts of San Luis Obispo, Kern and Los Angeles
counties. Locally, sites related to Late Prehistoric period occupation dating from
approximately AD. 500 to historic contact yield abundant evidence about the ecological
equilibrium which characterized the lifeways of these indigenous native people before
the arrival of foreign explorers.
The earliest known inhabitants of this general area of Southern California were transient
hunters that arrived sometime around 12,000 B.C. Eventually, they would become the
cultural ancestors of the modem Chumash who imprinted the Conejo Corridor with signs
of continuous habitation for the past 7,000 years. In particular, the Millingstone (5,500
B.C.-1,500 B.C.) and Intermediate (1,500 B.C.-A.D. 500) periods witnessed year-round,
multi- purpose use by a stable resident population estimated to be somewhere in the
range of 400-600 people. During these ancient times a number of site types evolved,
including permanent villages, semi-permanent seasonal stations, hunting camps and
gathering localities focused on plant resources. Typically, people lived in largely open
sites along watercourses and also in caves and rock shelters, some of which contained
paintings and were used for ceremonial purposes.
As permanent Chumash villages gradually increased in size within the Conejo Corridor,
extensive trade networks were established with areas located much further inland and
with major coastal villages, especially Mugu and Malibu. This type of interaction not only
augmented existing food supplies but provided access to locally unavailable stone and
shell materials necessary for the production of durable tools and other implements.
Many of these Conejo sites have been systematically investigated over the years and
the well preserved artifacts recovered during these excavations have been analyzed by
archaeologists in order to reconstruct many details of daily life, as well as the evolution
of long term social patterns. Unusually noteworthy discoveries in recent years include
bear bone whistles, flutes made of California condor bones and small stone bowls
stained with traces of red pigment.
                                                                                            27
Chatper 5                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Cultural Resources                                    Conservation Element 2013 Update
                 Photo 8: Chumash Interpretive Center; Oakbrook Regional Park
The City has always taken a pro-active role in the conservation and management of
local archaeological resources. Working in cooperation with representatives of the local
Native American Indian Council, as well as professional archaeological consultants and
University staff, a significant number of previously recorded habitation and specialized
activity sites have been permanently set aside within the Open Space System. Where
protection has not been possible due to development, or increased susceptibility to
vandalism, systematic testing and data recovery procedures have been implemented
with the assistance of Native American monitors. Although the majority of cultural
resources recovered during the earliest excavations continue to be kept in storage at
UCLA, at the request of the local Native American Indian Council, several of the more
recent artifact collections have been returned to the Conejo Valley for curation and
display at the Stagecoach Inn Museum.
B. Historical Resources
The first Europeans to visit the Conejo Valley were Gaspar de Portola and his
expedition in 1769. The Conejo Valley's colorful history of ranching and farming began
in 1803, when most of the Valley was included in the Spanish land grant "Rancho el
Conejo", after which the Conejo Valley received its name. Ranching included both cattle
and sheep, and lasted until well into the 1900's. Farming began on a large scale in the
Valley about 1872, when Rancho el Conejo was sold and smaller parcels were rented
out for farming. Principal crops included wheat, hay, and barley, with occasional fruit
and nut orchards. By 1875, the Conejo Valley was also an important stagecoach stop
on the route between Los Angeles and Santa Barbara, with travelers stopping for lunch
or overnight stays.
28
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 5
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                        Cultural Resources
The history of Thousand Oaks is revealed in historical landmarks and interpretive sites.
In the past, historical landmark designations were made by the Ventura County Cultural
Heritage Board and approved by the City Council. Historic landmark designations are
now approved by the City Council. Landmarks and interpretive centers located within
the City's Planning Area boundaries are depicted on Figure 3 and include:
1. Stagecoach Inn and Interpretive Center: The original structure was built in 1876,
    and was a Monterey style structure of northern California redwood with a wrap-
    around porch and balcony. It served as a stagecoach stop, school, and post office.
    The Inn was destroyed by fire in the early 1970's. The building was reconstructed
    and moved to its present location at 51 South Ventu Park Road. The original site
    was closer to the Ventura Freeway, and is located by a historical marker. The Inn
    was placed on the National Register of Historic Places and designated as a State
    Historial Landmark (State Landmark #659) in December of 1975. In May 1976 it was
    designated as County Historical Landmark #30. It is owned by the Conejo
    Recreation and Park District and managed by the Conejo Valley Historical Society.
    Through living history and exhibits, this Center describes life in the Conejo Valley in
    the late 1800's. Permanent exhibits also describe Chumash culture. The
    Stagecoach Inn was designated as Local Historical Landmark #1 in November 1997.
2. Sycamore Tree: This large sycamore tree is estimated to be over 150 years old and
    one of the largest sycamores in the Conejo Valley. It was designated as County
    Landmark #44 in June 1978. It is located just north of the Stagecoach Inn, at 51
    South Ventu Park Road. It is on land owned by the Conejo Recreation and Park
    District. The Sycamore Tree was designated as Local Historical Landmark #2 in
    November 1997.
3. Pederson House and Water Tower: This is a typical turn-of-the- century farm
    house and water tower that were built in 1913-14 for Lars and Karn Pederson,
    members of the Norwegian Colony that settled the northern end of the Conejo Valley
    in 1890. In 1967 the Pederson’s son Richard gave the land to California Lutheran
    University and the buildings were restored. It was designated as County Landmark
    #45 in June 1978. It is located on Faculty Street at California Lutheran University,
    and shown by appointment. The Pederson House and Water Tower were
    designated as Local Historical Landmark #3 in November 1997.
4. Hunt OliveTree: This is the only surviving tree from an orchard planted by R.O.
    Hunt on the Salto Ranch, which he established in 1876. The tree was moved to its
    present location in 1993. It was designated as County Landmark #64 in January
    1982, and located at the southwest corner of Hillcrest Drive and Lynn Road. The
    Hunt Olive Tree was designated as Local Historical Landmark #4 in November 1997.
5. Oakbrook Regional Park Archaeological Area and Chumash Interpretive
    Center: This 428-acre park contains areas of significance to the Chumash culture. It
    is on land owned by the Conejo Recreation and Park District, and managed by the
    Oakbrook Park Chumash Indian Corporation. It was designated as County
    Landmark #90 in February 1983. The interpretive center includes exhibits, special
                                                                                          29

Chatper 5                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Cultural Resources                                    Conservation Element 2013 Update
    events, and an interpretive trail that describe Chumash life. The Regional Park and
    Interpretive Center are owned by the Conejo Recreation and Park District. They are
    located on the south side of Lang Ranch Parkway, opposite Oak Valley Lane. The
    Oakbrook Regional Park Archaeological Area was designated as Local Historical
    Landmark #5 in November 1997.
6. Dos Vientos Ranch Barn: The Dos Vientos Ranch barn, was built in 1930. The
    original site was near the intersection of Borchard Road and Via Las Brisas, and was
    previously part of the 30,593-acre Rancho Guadalasca. The barn and associated
    buildings were designated as County Landmark #99 in May 1986. The structures
    were disassembled in 1996 and stored at Rancho Potrero. The Dos Vientos Ranch
    Barn was designated as Local Historical Landmark #6 in November 1997.
7. Crowley House: This house was built in 1910 for Frank and Mae Casey Crowley
    and served as a real estate office for the first housing development in the Conejo
    Valley. It was later owned by Louis and Kathleen Goebel. The two-story, five-
    bedroom house still has its hardwood floors, mahogany beams and volcanic rock
    fireplace. The property is located at 2224 Pleasant Way (next to Parque de la Paz),
    and is owned by the Conejo Recreation and Park District. Designated as County
    Landmark #109 in May 1986 and Local Historical Landmark #7 in November 1997.
    Shown by appointment.
8. Janss House: This house was built for Peter Janss as a weekend retreat in 1931.
    Peter Janss moved to Los Angeles in 1893. In Los Angeles, he became a land
    developer and was joined in his business by his sons Harold and Edwin. The Janss
    Corporation planned and developed in Monterey Park, the San Fernando Valley and
    Westwood Village, donating the land on which UCLA is built. In 1943 the house
    became the principal home of Janss’ younger son, Edwin Janss. Designated as
    County Landmark #112 in July 1987 and Local Historical Landmark #8 in November
    1997. Located at 482 Greenmeadow Drive.
9. Lake Eleanor Dam: This dam, also known as Banning Dam, was built in 1889 and
    is considered one of the earliest concrete arch dams in California. Its 8-acre lake
    and adjacent 529 acres of natural open space provide habitat for wildlife. Designated
    as County Landmark #120 in May 1988.The property is owned by the Conejo Open
    Space Conservaction Agency and located on the west side of Westlake Boulevard,
    about ½ mile south of East Potrero Road. The Lake Eleanor Dam was designated
    as Local Historical Landmark #9 in November 1997.
10. 401 West Hillcrest Drive Civic Center: The civic center was constructed in 1973
    and was the site of the first permanent City Hall in Thousand Oaks. The building was
    designated as Local Historic Landmark #10 in May, 1997. The historical designation
    applies to the exterior walls (facades and architectural style) of the Civic Center
    buildings. Located at 401 West Hillcrest Drive.
11. Joel McCrea Ranch and McCrea Ranch Visitor Center: This former cattle ranch
    of approximately 220 acres is located at the bottom of the Norwegian Grade and at
30

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 5
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                        Cultural Resources
    the eastern end of the Santa Rosa Valley. Film actor and Western movie actor Joel
    McCrea, and his wife Frances Dee, also a movie star, raised their sons here. The
    McCreas donated their ranch and family home to the Conejo Recreation and Park
    District in 1995. The ranch home and outbuildings were listed on the National
    Register of Historic Places on April 18, 1997. The McCrea Ranch Visitors Center
    was completed in 2011 and provides a variety of interpretive, educational and
    cultural programs for the community, while preserving the unique history of this
    property. Public access to the visitor center is scheduled through the Conejo
    Recreation and Park District. The Joel McCrea Ranch was designated as Local
    Historical Landmark #11 in November 1997. Located at 4500 North Moorpark Road.
12. Timber School: The Timber School House was constructed in 1924, and the Timber
    School Auditorium was built in 1948. Timber School is the oldest original school in
    the Conejo Valley, and was attended by the children of early Conejo Valley
    ranchers, including the Borchard, Haigh, Hays, Kelley, Janss, and Olsen families.
    The structures were designated as a Local Historic Landmark #12 in July 2004. The
    property is located at 1872 Newbury Road and owned by the Conejo Valley Unified
    School District.
13. Goebel’s Lion Farm Site (aka Jungleland): Louis Goebel established an exotic
    animal farm at this location in 1927 so that he could import, raise, and maintain
    exotic animals for rental to movie studios. His animals included the MGM lion. The
    popular tourist attraction “Jungeland” developed from the animal farm. The original
    buildings and animal compound were built in the 1920's and later demolished in the
    mid 1970's. This site is now occupied by the Thousand Oaks Civic Arts Plaza.
    Designated as County Landmark #63 in March 1981. Located at 2100 East
    Thousand Boulevard, it was designated as Local Point of Historical Interest #1 in
    November 1997.
14. Original Site of Dos Vientos Ranch Buildings: The Dos Vientos Ranch buildings
    were constructed in 1930. The original site was near the intersection of Borchard
    Road and Via Las Brisas, and was previously part of the 30,593-acre Rancho
    Guadalasca. The barn and associated buildings were designated as County
    Landmark #99 in May 1986. The structures were disassembled in 1996 and stored
    at Rancho Potrero. The site of the Dos Vientos Ranch Buildings was designated as
    Local Point of Historical Interest #2 in November 1997.
15. Rancho Sierra Vista and Satwiwa Native American Indian Culture Center: This
    site includes special events and exhibits that describe Native American culture and
    ranching activities in the local area. The site is operated by the National Park
    Service and is part of the Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area. The
    entrance is located on the south side of Lynn Road, just east of Via Andrea.
16. Hill Ranch Brick Cistern: This large brick cistern is located near a natural spring on
    what was once Hill Ranch. It is believed to have been constructed in 1880 and
    probably held water for livestock. The cistern was designated as Ventura County
    Historical Landmark #43 in June 1978, however, its exact location was unknown.
                                                                                        31

Chatper 5                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Cultural Resources                                   Conservation Element 2013 Update
    Staff recently determined the location of the cistern in the northerly part of Wildwood
    Park, near the Santa Rosa Valley.
17. Case Study House #28: Case Study Houses were built as part of an experimental
    housing program between 1945 and 1966 in southern California. Built in 1966,
    Case Study House #28 was designed by architects Conrad Buff and Donald
    Hensman and was the program’s last single family home and the only one in
    Ventura County. Because of its significance as an important example of modern
    architecture, this house was been placed on the National Register of Historic Places
    in July 2013. It is located in a gated community on Inverness Road, near the
    southern terminus of Moorpark Road.
32

Thousand Oaks General Plan                 Chapter 5
Conservation Element 2013 Update Cultural Resources
                                                 33
Chatper 5                                        Thousand Oaks General Plan
Cultural Resources                        Conservation Element 2013 Update
                   This page intentionally left blank.
34

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 6
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                              Paleontology
CHAPTER 6: PALEONTOLOGY
Paleontology is the study of prehistoric life as shown by fossil remains. Fossils are
mineralized or petrified impressions of plants and animals from past geologic ages. In
order to understand the distribution of fossils within the City, we must know about the
geology of the City, because not all geologic formations are fossil-bearing.
The City of Thousand Oaks lies in the Transverse Range Geologic Province of
Southern California. Geologic conditions within the City generally consist of a mantle of
soil over bedrock. Bedrock within much of the southern and western parts of the City
consists of Miocene Age Conejo Volcanics. These igneous rocks are hard and resistant
to weathering and are evident in such prominent City landmarks as Mount Clef Ridge
which forms the backdrop to Wildwood Park and California Lutheran University. In
general, igneous rocks do not contain fossils, although fossil wood has been found in
some outcrops of Conejo Volcanics.
Virtually all the fossils within the City are contained in sedimentary rocks due to the
depositional nature of their origin. These rocks consist of shales, sandstones, siltstones
and conglomerate, and date from ancient times when the area was submerged under
shallow seas or when swampy terrestrial environments were more frequent. In these
kinds of environments hard parts of once living organisms can fall into the substrate and
become covered by sediment, gradually becoming mineralized and eventually forming a
fossil. The principal sedimentary bedrocks in the City include the Miocene age Topanga
and Monterey formations in the eastern and southern areas of the City and the Sespe,
Llajas, Santa Susana and Chatsworth formations of Oligocene to Cretaceous age found
near the northeast part of the City.
The types of fossils, whether marine or terrestrial, can be correlated with the
depositional history of the rocks in which they are found, however the following
generalizations can be drawn.
During the Pliocene Epoch (12-2 million years ago) much of what is now the Conejo
Valley was covered by shallow seas. Evidence of this period is found in fossils of
marine life such as brachiopods, bivalve molluscs and fish, most of which are found in
Miocene age rocks. Other marine organisms found later in the Miocene include dolphin,
ancestral sea lions, whales and sea cows. Later, during the Pleistocene Epoch (1.8
million to 10,000 years ago), as seas dried up exposing more terrestrial habitats, large
mammals migrated into Southern California, attracted by the newly available resources
and fleeing the ice sheet encroaching from the north. This group included large
herbivores like North American native horses, camels, and mastodon plus Eurasian
immigrants like mammoth and bison. They were joined by immigrants from South
America including ground sloths and llama. The herbivores were pursued by predators
such as the short-faced bear, dire wolf, saber-toothed cat and American lion. Most of
these large animals became extinct at the end of the Ice Age. Evidence of their
existence can be found in fossil-bearing sedimentary formations.
                                                                                        35
Chatper 6                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Paleontology                        Conservation Element 2013 Update
             This page intentionally left blank.
36

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                          Chapter 7
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                            Climate Change
CHAPTER 7: CLIMATE CHANGE
Climate change refers to significant and long-term changes in weather patterns, which
may result in a change in average conditions, i.e. average temperatures, or affect
variation from typical conditions, such as extreme heat events.
Assembly Bill 32 (AB 32), the California Global Warming Solutions Act, was signed into
law by Governor Schwarzenegger in 2006. This legislation seeks to address global
climate change from the perspective of greenhouse gas reduction. Greenhouse gases
(GHGs) are those that trap heat in the atmosphere that would otherwise radiate into
space. Some GHGs occur naturally in the atmosphere, while others result from or are
concentrated by activities including the burning of fossil fuels such as oil, natural gas,
and coal. Since the industrial revolution, there has been a steady increase in the
quantity of GHGs being discharged into the air, accompanied by a gradual increase in
average world temperature. Carbon dioxide and water vapor are the primary GHG
components, and carbon dioxide is the primary target for reducing GHGs and
addressing global climate change as this is more effectively regulated than some of the
other GHGs.
The State of California has coordinated the preparation of three assessments of climate
change in the State, the most recent entitled “Our Changing Climate 2012: Vulnerability
and Adaptation to the Increasing Risks from Climate Change in California”. This study
predicts two key trends:
   A significant rise in temperatures in California during this century: 2.7 oF above 2000
    averages by 2050, and up to 4.1oF-8.6oF by 2100, depending on emission levels.
   Drying trend due to reduced precipitation by the mid-to-late 21st century.
These trends are likely to result in a variety of impacts. Effects most relevant to Thousand
Oaks include:
   Increases in extreme precipitation and runoff from periodic storms. These
    fluctuations in normal winter rainfall are caused by warmer storms and narrow bands
    of clouds over the Pacific Ocean that carry large amounts of moisture called
    “atmospheric rivers”.
   Decreased water supplies statewide. Climate change effects on water supplies and
    stream flows are expected to increase competition between urban and agricultural
    water users and environmental needs.
   Increased energy demand. Increases in average temperature and higher frequency
    of extreme heat events combined with additional residential development across the
    state will drive up the demand for air-conditioning in the summertime.
   Critical importance of wildlife corridors. Migration corridors may allow wildlife to
    reach more suitable habitat as climatic conditions change.
                                                                                           37

Chatper 7                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Climate Change                                       Conservation Element 2013 Update
   Increased likelihood and extent of wildfires. Wildfire risk will increase as a result of
    climate change which can lead to conversion of native plant communities to weedy,
    more flammable vegetation.
Developing an effective response to the challenge of climate change will require new
strategies. One of the ways in which the City has begun this process is through the
Energy Action Plan (EAP) for City facilities, which was adopted in 2012.
The EAP was initiated by the City’s participation in Southern California Edison’s 2010 –
2012 Energy Leadership Partnership program. The program identifies levels of
achievement through the implementation of energy-saving measures and outreach
activities. The objective of the EAP is to develop energy efficiency, renewable energy,
and carbon emission reductions at City facilities. The overall goal of the EAP is to
reduce carbon emissions by two percent annually over the next five years and the plan
includes specific objectives to accomplish this through reducing energy usage. City
departments and facilities will employ a range of strategies to reduce energy demand,
improve efficiency, and transition to renewable energy sources.
With respect to climate change and its effect on natural resources, the most important
strategy that can be implemented is to maintane the health and viability of our local
ecosystems. The Nature Conservancy has commissioned research on climate change
and its effects on wildlife. More than a decade of research has determined that wildlife
diversity is directly related to diverse landscapes and plant communities. Healthy
ecosystems provide a refuge for an array of plants and animals. Although we do not
know how species and habitats will respond to climate change, the city’s extensive open
space system, which provides more than 15,000 acres of natural habitat, provides the
best opportunity for species affected by climate change.
38


Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 8
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                   Policies
CHAPTER 8: POLICIES
This chapter identifies the City’s policies and implementation measures for the
conservation of natural and cultural resources. A policy is a specific statement that
guides decision-making. It indicates a clear commitment of the City Council.
Implementation measures are fundamental rules and specific actions related to and
guided by the policies. These measures are based on community values, generally-
accepted planning practice, and current technology.
A. Scenic Resources
Policy
CO-1       Future development and redevelopment of the existing built environment
           within Thousand Oaks should reflect sensitivity to its physical setting and
           natural scenic resources.
Implementation Measures
  Ensure that development occurring within the view corridors of the Route 101 and 23
   Freeways conform to the Freeway Corridor Design Guidelines (Res. 91-172).
  Ensure that development adjacent to designated scenic highways is consistent with
   the Scenic Highways Element of the General Plan.
  Ensure that development proposed within defined gateway areas (Res. 93-152),
   conforms with the City's planning policies and guidelines for City Gateways.
  Work toward the installation of landscaping within the Route 101 and Route 23
   Freeway medians and parkways.
  Utilize the City's Protected Ridgeline Overlay zone, Open Space zone, Hillside
   Planned Development zone and Grading Ordinance to protect hillsides and
   ridgelines.
  Continue to implement the City's Architectural Design Review Guidelines to ensure
   that the special scenic resources and identity of Thousand Oaks are retained and
   enhanced.
B. Landform Features
Policies
CO-2       General Plan policies, zoning, development guidelines, architectural review
           standards and other regulations are appropriate for controlling development
           on flat land.
                                                                                         39

Chatper 8                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Policies                                              Conservation Element 2013 Update
CO-3      The steeper the slope, the greater the proportion of the land that should
          remain in an undisturbed, undeveloped state, as provided by the City's
          Hillside Planned Development (HPD) Ordinance.
CO-4      The most suitable forms of development for steeply sloping terrain are
          passive recreation areas, open space and very low density residential which
          can be developed in natural pockets of land less than 25% slope.
CO-5      Hillside development criteria should promote high standards and encourage
          site design, grading and architecture appropriate to hillside terrain.
CO-6      There should be no grading in slopes over 25% natural grade and the vertical
          height of manufactured slopes should be no higher than 25 feet.
Implementation Measures
  The City's Grading Ordinance provides standards for the height of manufactured
   slopes and limitations on grading in areas of 25% natural grade. Waivers may only
   be granted by the Planning Commission or City Council.
  The City has reviewed most properties located in areas greater than 10% slope for
   HPD zoning, as required by the HPD Ordinance. Further review involving remnant
   isolated parcels should be conducted as time permits.
C. Lakes and Lakeshores
Policies
CO-7      Regulate development activities in the watershed areas of Westlake Lake and
          Lake Eleanor within the Thousand Oaks Planning Area, in order to avoid or
          minimize pollution of the lakes, and provide comments on all development
          proposals ouside of the City’s Planning Area that may affect these lakes.
CO-8      Continue to maintain access to Lake Eleanor and its shoreline for migratory
          or resident wildlife.
CO-9       Conserve identified sensitive plant and animal communities, archaeological
          sites and natural/scenic features of Lake Eleanor, its shoreline and
          surrounding environment.
Implementation Measures
  Low flow, biofiltration basins, or other mitigation measures that are consistent with
   the City's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) standards for
   new development and redevelopment, should be integrated in the design of all
   industrial, commercial and residential projects that contribute runoff to either
   Westlake Lake or Lake Eleanor.
40

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                             Chapter 8
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                         Policies
  Future use of Lake Eleanor and its surrounding environment should be primarily oriented
   toward passive recreational use, such as hiking, picnicking, and nature study.
  To retard siltation and extend the life of Lake Eleanor, desiltation basins should be
   considered as part of any new development located upstream from the lake.
  In the event that any modifications to State Highway 23 (Westlake Boulevard) south of
   Potrero Road, are proposed, the City should work with CalTrans to avoid any significant
   impacts to Lake Eleanor.
D. Streams and Creeks
Policies
CO-10      Streams and creeks should be protected as open space and maintained in as
           natural a state as possible, and appropriate measures taken to manage urban
           runoff, in order to protect the City's and other downstream communities' water
           quality, wildlife diversity, native vegetation, and aesthetic value. This will
           contribute to the regional effort to improve the quality of Calleguas Creek,
           Malibu Creek and Mugu Lagoon.
CO-11      Degraded sections of streams and creeks should be restored or enhanced as
           opportunities arise and financial resources become available.
CO-12      Major barrancas should be protected in a natural state. Appropriate land uses
           for these natural features include recreation trails and open space.
CO-13      Use of concrete for flood control improvements in natural drainage courses
           should occur only when no reasonable alternatives can be found that would
           maintain natural hydrological and ecological functions.
Implementation Measures
   All development projects should be reviewed to ensure protection of streams and
   creeks onsite, as long as there is no threat to public safety.
  All new developments and redevelopment of built areas shall comply with standards
   adopted by the City for minimizing storm water pollution, excess runoff, and siltation.
  Erosion and pollution from construction sites will be reduced as the City implements
   NPDES standards for construction sites.
  Continue monitoring and enforcement of pollution standards for existing commercial
   and industrial uses, pursuant to the countywide NPDES permit, to reduce storm
   water pollution.
                                                                                               41

Chatper 8                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Policies                                              Conservation Element 2013 Update
  Continue public outreach and education programs to help reduce stormwater
   pollution.
  Any development proposed over, under, adjacent, or within the boundaries of a
   Ventura County Watershed Protection District jurisdictional red line channel shall
   obtain a permit from the District prior to any site disturbance.
E. Floodplains
Policies
CO-14      Protect remaining floodplains in order to help retain stormwater runoff from
           tributary watersheds and reduce the potential for erosion and periodic
           flooding within downstream reaches of the Arroyo Conejo and Calleguas
           Creek.
Implementation Measure
  Natural floodplains have been acquired and conserved as open space with limited
   recreational uses that are compatible with public safety considerations. Any
   remaining undeveloped areas within a 100-year flood plain should also be
   considered for open space or recreational use.
  Existing developed floodplains located immediately adjacent to floodplains in the
   unincorporated areas of Ventura County should be coordinated with the Ventura
   County Floodplain Manager to ensure no adverse or cumulative impacts within the
   unincorporated area.
F. Stormwater Retention and Debris Basins
Policies
CO-15      Every effort shall be made to design and construct stormwater retention and
           debris basins to minimize any potentially adverse impacts to significant
           landform features, aquatic resources, and associated native plant and animal
           communities.
CO-16      Wherever appropriate, consideration shall also be given to allowing trailhead
           access and other passive and active recreational uses, including playfields.
Implementation Measures
  Contour grading and landscaping with native plant species shall be utilized in
   stormwater retention design.
  Biologically significant plant and animal habitats should be protected wherever
   feasible.
42

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 8
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                   Policies
  Where avoidance of mature specimen trees is not feasible, such trees should be
   considered candidates for transplanting or replacement.
  Whenever such basins are located adjacent to or near natural open space, access
   by wildlife should be incorporated in the project design, wherever possible.
  All proposed storm water retention and debris basin projects shall continue to be
   reviewed by the City, the Conejo Recreation and Park District and the Conejo Open
   Space Conservation Agency in order to determine the potential for passive or active
   recreational uses that could be incorporated in the overall design.
G. Water Supply, Reclamation and Conservation
Policies
CO-17     Continue to ensure the provision of water in quantities sufficient to satisfy
          current and projected demand.
CO-18     Continue to encourage water conservation measures in new and existing
          developments.
CO-19     Encourage the use of reclaimed water for irrigation purposes.
CO-20     Continue to develop and utilize groundwater resources to reduce the Planning
          Area's dependence upon imported water.
Implementation Measures
  Continue to implement and periodically update the City's Urban Water Management
   Plan that contains measures to reduce water use under normal and short term
   deficiency conditions.
  Continue to implement the City's Landscape Review Criteria, which require the use
   of low-maintenance, drought-tolerant landscaping in all public and private
   developments.
  Apply standard water conservation conditions of approval to new developments.
  Encourage the use of pervious materials wherever paving is proposed, to promote
   and facilitate groundwater recharge.
H. Native Plant and Wildlife Resources
Policies
CO-21     The City shall encourage the proper management, conservation and
          protection of native plant communities throughout the City's Planning Area,
          including developed areas and undeveloped open space lands.
                                                                                         43

Chatper 8                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Policies                                              Conservation Element 2013 Update
CO-22      Consumptive practices such as off-road vehicle use, hunting, and trapping
           are incompatible with the long-term survival and viability of resident and
           migratory wildlife populations shall be prohibited.
CO-23      Critical wildlife habitat resources such as movement corridors, surface water
           impoundments, streams and springs should be given special consideration for
           protection, restoration or enhancement, in order to maintain biodiversity,
           biological productivity and ecological integrity of natural open space areas.
CO-24      In order to reduce the potential for devastating wildfires and the resulting
           damage they cause to both natural ecosystems and urban environments,
           appropriate, science-based fuel management programs should be conducted
           on a selective basis, and include the periodic monitoring of any potentially
           adverse effects on animal habitats and air quality.
CO-25      The City should foster an holistic approach to conservation of wildlife
           resources including consideration of biological crusts and pollinator species in
           recognition of the many important functions they perform in a healthy
           ecosystem.
Implementation Measures
  The City should support local and regional conservation projects that will have
   beneficial effects on vegetation and wildlife including the restoration and
   enhancement of critical habitat resources that have either been degraded or
   disturbed.
  As part of the environmental review process, continue to review the impact of
   proposed developments, both within the Planning Area and regionally, on vegetation
   and wildlife.
  The City and COSCA should work cooperatively with the Ventura County Fire
   Protection District to develop innovative, science-based fuel management programs
   that conserve wildlife habitat to the greatest degree possible while protecting public
   safety.
  The City should promote a healthy pollinator fauna through the use of native,
   pollinator-friendly plants in City projects and in proposed private development
   proposals.
  The City should protect habitats which support biological crusts and which provide
   nesting sites and foraging areas for native pollinators.
44

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                         Chapter 8
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                     Policies
I. Wildlife Movement Corridors
Policies
CO-26        Isolation and fragmentation of natural open space areas should be prevented
            wherever possible.
CO-27       Since natural stream drainages often serve as important movement corridors
            for wildlife, they should be preserved wherever it is feasible to do so.
CO-28       Urban land uses adjoining natural open space areas should be designed in a
            manner that is sensitive to the needs of wildlife and avoids or minimizes any
            potentially adverse impacts to movement corridors.
Implementation Measures
   Acquire additional land identified by the Open Space Element of the General Plan, in
    order to complete vital habitat linkages and provide access by wildlife to these
    resources.
   Continue to cooperate with and assist other public agencies, the Nature
    Conservancy, and other interested parties to help solve the regional problem of
    habitat isolation and fragmentation caused by the U.S. 101 and State Route 23
    Freeways.
   Where urban land uses are proposed adjacent to natural open space areas,
    appropriate shielding shall be implemented to avoid light spillage which can disrupt
    wildlife movement.
J. Oak and Landmark Trees
Policy
CO-29       Continue to protect oak and landmark trees and their habitat in recognition of
            their historic, aesthetic and environmental value to the citizens of Thousand
            Oaks, in particular Valley Oak habitat.
Implementation Measures
   To ensure protection of oak trees, continue to implement the City's Oak Tree
    Ordinance (Section 5-14.01 et. seq. of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code) and Oak
    Tree Preservation and Protection Guidelines (Res. 2010-014).
   Continue to implement the City's Landmark Tree Ordinance (Section 5-24.01 et. seq.
    of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code).
   Where certain species of declining oaks are scheduled for removal, every effort
    should be made to replace with like trees when possible. In order to offset the
                                                                                           45

Chatper 8                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Policies                                             Conservation Element 2013 Update
   continuing decline of Valley Oaks within southern California, the City shall increase
   the planting ratio of these trees wherever it is determined to be feasible.
K. Wetland and Riparian Areas
Policies
CO-30     Preserve wetlands and associated wetland buffers as open space and
          maintain these areas in a natural state to protect the community's water
          quality, biodiversity and aesthetic value.
CO-31     Encourage the restoration and enhancement of degraded wetland and
          riparian habitats in order to conserve and protect native plant and animal
          species, increase biological diversity and productivity, and maintain
          permanent access for wildlife to surrounding open space.
Implementation Measures
  Coordinate with appropriate local, State and Federal agencies that protect and
   enhance wetland resources when designing and reviewing developments that may
   impact a wetland.
  Educate the public about the importance of keeping pollutants and toxic chemicals
   out of storm drains that ultimately end up in wetlands.
L. Rare, Threatened or Endangered Species
Policies
CO-32     The City shall encourage and promote the conservation and protection of all
          rare, threatened, endangered or sensitive species listed by State and Federal
          agencies (United States Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department
          of Fish and Wildlife), the California Native Plant Society (CNPS), the County
          of Ventura and the City of Thousand Oaks.
Implementation Measures
  As urban development occurs, ensure the protection of populations of rare and
   endangered species through avoidance as a first priority, utilizing other forms of
   mitigation only as a last resort.
  Wherever possible, complete ecosystems should be conserved as natural open
   space in order to avoid the loss of sensitive plant and animal species.
  The Conservation Element includes the official City list of species listed as rare,
   threatened, endangered or sensitive by State and Federal Agencies, the California
46

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                         Chapter 8
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                     Policies
   Native Plant Society (CNPS) or other knowledgeable experts. This list should be
   updated periodically.
M. Cultural Resources
Policies
CO-33      All information or maps on file with the City pertaining to the location of
           previously recorded archaeological sites within the Thousand Oaks Planning
           Area shall remain confidential unless specifically authorized to be released to
           the public by local Native American organizations.
CO-34      Management of cultural resources such as archaeological sites, historic
           structures or places shall emphasize resource protection and preservation.
CO-35      The preferred method for protecting any previously recorded archeological
           site shall be by deed restriction as permanent "open space", in order to
           prevent any future development or use that might otherwise adversely impact
           these resources.
CO-36      Decisions pertaining to the disposition of archaeological, historical and
           cultural resources shall be made in concert with recognized public agencies,
           groups or individuals having jurisdiction, expertise or interest in these matters,
           including but not limited to the State Office of Historic Preservation, Thousand
           Oaks Cultural Heritage Board and local Native American organizations,
           including other designated representatives and affected property owners.
Implementation Measures
  Continue to conduct archaeological field surveys as deemed to be necessary, while
   utilizing comprehensive resource management procedures to test, salvage, stabilize
   and store locally excavated artifacts.
  Support the efforts of local citizens, appointed committees or other designated public
   agencies and private institutions that are working to conserve archaeological and
   historic resources. Full public discussion is encouraged prior to any action being
   taken.
N. Paleontology
Policies
CO-37      Management of paleontological resources such as significant fossil beds, or
           fossils of regional significance shall emphasize resource protection and
           conservation unless excavation and salvage is deemed appropriate by
           scientific authorities.
                                                                                           47

Chatper 8                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Policies                                              Conservation Element 2013 Update
CO-38     Decisions pertaining to the disposition of paleontological resources shall be
          made in concert with recognized public agencies, groups or individuals having
          jurisdiction, expertise or interest in these matters, including but not limited to
          the Stagecoach Inn Museum, local natural history museums, colleges and
          universities.
Implementation Measures
  In areas considered to have a high likelihood of harboring paleontological resources,
   the City shall require the preparation of a Paleontological Resource survey as part of
   the environmental review process for proposed development projects.
  Support the efforts of local citizens, appointed committees or other public agencies
   and private institutions that are working to conserve and curate paleontological
   resources. Full public discussion shall be encouraged prior to any action being
   taken.
O. Climate Change
Policies
CO-39     Support efforts to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, consistent with the intent of
          the State of California’s California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006
          (Assembly Bill 32).
Implementation Measures
  Prepare Greenhouse Gas Analyses for development projects which require the
   preparation of Environmental Impact Reports or Mitigated Negative Declarations.
  Reduce energy use and utilize sustainable energy sources at City facilities where
   feasible, in accordance with City-adopted Energy Action Plan.
48


Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                    Appendix A
          APPENDIX A: FLORA OF THE THOUSAND OAKS PLANNING AREA
The following list incorporates nomenclature changes from The Jepson Manual, Second Edition,
and utilizes these status codes:
   State and Federal Status Codes
   CE – State-listed, endangered
   CR – State-listed, rare
   SP – State-listed, special plant
   FE – Federally-listed, endangered
   FT – Federally-listed, threatened
   California Rare Plant Ranks
   List 1B – Plants Rare, Threatened, or Endangered in California and Elsewhere
   List 2 – Plants Rare, Threatened, or Endangered in California, But More Common
               Elsewhere
   List 3 – Plants about Which We Need More Information – A Review List
   List 4 – Plants of Limited Distribution – A Watch List
   Threat Code Extensions:
        .1      Seriously endangered in California
        .2      Fairly endangered in California
        .3      Not very endangered in California
   Local Status
   LS – Locally sensitive: Plants considered by the City of Thousand Oaks or the County of
                Ventura to be uncommon or rare.
Cryptogams - Ferns and Fern Allies
        Dryopteridaceae - Wood Fern Family
                Dryopteris arguta / wood fern
        Equisetaceae -Horsetail Family
                Equisetum laevigatum / smooth scouring rush
        Polypodiaceae - Polypody Family
                Polypodium californicum / California polypody
        Pteridaceae - Brake Family
                Adiantum capillus-veneris / southern maidenhair
                Adiantum jordanii / California maidenhair
                Aspidotis californica / California lace fern
                Cheilanthes newberryi / Newberry’s lip fern LS
                Notholaena californica / California cloak fern
                Pellaea andromedifolia / coffee fern
                Pellaea mucronata var. mucronata / bird’s foot fern
                Pentagramma triangularis ssp. triangularis [Pityrogramma t.] / goldback fern
        Selaginellaceae - Spike-Moss Family
                Selaginella bigelovii / Bigelow’s spike-moss
                                                                                             49

                                                             Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendix A                                              Conservation Element 2013 Update
Class Dicotyledones (Dicots)
       Aidoxaceae – Muskroot Family
              Sambucus nigra (mexicana) ssp. caerulea / blue elderberry
       Aizoaceae – Fig-Marigold Family
              Aptenia cordifolia / baby sun rose
              Carpobrotus edulis / Hottentot fig
              Tetragonia tetragonioides / New Zealand spinach
       Amaranthaceae – Amaranth Family
              Amaranthus albus / tumbleweed
              Amaranthus blitoides / prostrate pigweed
              Amaranthus deflexus / low amaranth
              Amaranthus hybridus / hybrid amaranth
              Amaranthus retroflexus / redroot pigweed
       Anacardiaceae – Sumac Family
              Malosma laurina / laurel sumac
              Rhus aromatica (trilobata) / basket bush
               Rhus integrifolia / lemonadeberry
               Rhus lancea / African sumac
              Rhus ovata / sugar bush
              Schinus molle / Peruvian pepper tree
              Toxicodendron diversilobum / western poison oak
       Apiaceae – Carrot Family
              Ammi majus / Bishop’s weed
              Anthriscus caucalis / bur-chervil
              Apiastrum angustifolium / wild celery
              Apium graveolens / celery
              Berula erecta / water parsnip
              Bowlesia incana / bowlesia
              Conium maculatum / poison hemlock
              Daucus pusillus / rattlesnake weed
              Foeniculum vulgare / fennel
              Lomatium dasycarpum / woolly lomatium
              Lomatium lucidum / shiny lomatium
              Lomatium utriculatum / hog fennel
              Sanicula arguta / snake root
              Sanicula crassicaulis / Pacific sanicle
              Sanicula tuberosa / turkey pea
              Tauschia arguta / southern tauschia
              Yabea microcarpa / California hedge-parsley
       Apocynaceae (includes Asclepiadaceae) – Dogbane Family
              Asclepias californica / California milkweed
              Asclepias eriocarpa / Indian milkweed
              Asclepias fascicularis / narrow-leaf milkweed
              Nerium oleander / common oleander
              Vinca major / greater periwinkle
       Araliaceae – Ginseng Family
              Hedera helix / English ivy
              Hydrocotyle umbellata / many-flowered marsh pennywort
       Asclepiadaceae – See Apocynaceae
50

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                       Appendix A
     Asteraceae – Sunflower Family
            Achillea millefolium / white yarrow
            Achyrachaena mollis / blow-wives
            Acourtia microcephala / sacapellote
            Acroptilon repens / Russian knapweed
            Agoseris grandiflora / mountain dandylion
            Ambrosia artemisiifolia / common ragweed
            Ambrosia psilostachya / western ragweed
            Ancistrocarphus filagineus [Stylocline f.] / woolly fishhooks
            Anthemis cotula / mayweed
            Artemisia californica / California sagebrush
            Artemisia douglasiana / mugwort
            Artemisia dracunculus / tarragon
            Baccharis malibuensis / Malibu baccharis SP; 1B.1
            Baccharis pilularis / coyote brush
            Baccharis salicifolia ssp. salicifolia [B. glutinosa] / mule fat
            Baccharis sarothroides / broom baccharis
            Bahiopsis laciniata [Viguiera laciniata] / San Diego viguiera
            Bellis perennis / English daisy
            Bidens laevis / bur marigold
            Bidens pilosa var. pilosa / common beggar-ticks
            Brickellia californica / California brickellbush
            Brickellia nevinii / Nevin’s brickellbush LS
            Carduus pycnocephalus ssp pycnocephalus / Italian thistle
            Centaurea (Cnicus) benedicta / blessed thistle
            Centaurea calcitrapa / purple star thistle
            Centaurea melitensis / tocalote
            Centaurea solstitialis / yellow star thistle
            Centromadia [Hemizonia] parryi ssp. australis / southern tarplant SP; 1B.1; LS
            Chaenactis artemisiifolia / white pincushion
            Chaenactis glabriuscula var. glabriuscula / yellow pincushion
            Cichorium intybus / chicory
            Cirsium occidentale var. californicum / California thistle
            Cirsium occidentale var. occidentale / cobweb thistle
            Cirsium vulgare / bull thistle
            Corethrogyne (Lessingia) filaginifolia (var. filaginifolia) / California-aster
            Cotula australis / southern cotula
            Cotula coronopifolia / brass-buttons
            Cynara cardunculus / cardoon
            Deinandra (Hemizonia) fasciculata / fascicled tarplant
            Deinandra (Hemizonia) minthornii / Santa Susana tarplant SR; 1B.2
            Dimorphotheca sinuata / African daisy
            Encelia californica / California sunflower
            Encelia farinosa / brittle bush
            Ericameria ericoides [Haplopappus e. ssp. blakei] / mock heather
            Ericameria linearifolia [Haplopappus l.] / interior goldenbush
            Ericameria (Chrysothamnus) nauseosa var. mohavensis / rabbitbrush
            Ericameria palmeri var. pachylepis / Palmer’s goldenbush LS
            Ericameria pinifolia / pine-bush
            Erigeron (Conyza) bonariensis / flax-leaved horseweed
            Erigeron (Conyza) canadensis / horseweed
                                                                                               51

                                                               Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendix A                                             Conservation Element 2013 Update
           Erigeron foliosus var. foliosus / fleabane aster
           Eriophyllum confertiflorum var. confertiflorum / golden-yarrow
           Euthamia occidentalis / western goldenrod
           Gnaphalium palustre / lowland cudweed
           Grindelia camporum (var. bracteosum) / gumplant
           Grindelia hirsutula / hirsute gumplant
           Hazardia squarrosa [Haplopappus s.] var. grindelioides / saw-toothed goldenbush
           Hazardia squarrosa [Haplopappus s.] var. obtusa / saw-toothed goldenbush
           Hedypnois cretica / Cretian hedypnois
           Helenium puberulum / sneezeweed
           Helianthus annuus / annual sunflower
           Helianthus gracilentus / slender sunflower
           Helminthotheca echioides (Picris echioides) / bristly ox-tongue
           Hesperevax sparsiflora var. sparsiflora / hesperevax LS
           Heterotheca grandiflora / telegraph weed
           Heterotheca sessiliflora ssp. fastigiata / hairy golden aster
           Hypochaeris glabra / smooth cat’s ear
           Hypochaeris radicata / rough cat’s ear
           Isocoma menziesii var. menziesii / coast goldenbush
           Isocoma menziesii var. vernonioides / coast goldenbush
           Iva hayesiana / San Diego marsh elder
           Lactuca saligna / willow lettuce
           Lactuca serriola / prickly lettuce
           Lagophylla ramosissima ssp. ramosissima / hareleaf
           Lasthenia coronaria / crowned goldfields LS
           Lasthenia gracilis (californica) / common goldfields
           Layia platyglossa / tidy-tips
           Lepidospartum squamatum / scale-broom
           Leptosyne (Coreopsis) bigelovii / annual coreopsis LS
           Leptosyne (Coreopsis) gigantea / giant coreopsis
           Logfia depressa (Filago depressa) / hierba limpia
           Logfia filaginoides (Filago californica) / California cottonrose
           Logfia gallica (Filago gallica) / daggerleaf cottonrose
           Madia elegans (ssp. densifolia) / common madia
           Madia exigua / small tarweed
           Madia gracilis / sticky madia
           Madia sativa / coast tarweed LS
           Malacothrix saxatilis / cliff-aster
           Matricaria discoidea (Chamomilla suaveolens [Matricaria matricarioides]) /
           pineapple weed
           Micropus californicus var. californicus / slender cottonweed
           Microseris douglasii ssp. douglasii / Douglas’ microseris
           Microseris douglasii ssp. platycarpha / small-flowered microseris SP; 4.2
           Microseris douglasii ssp tenella / Douglas’ microseris
           Pentachaeta lyonii / Lyon’s pentachaeta FE; SE; SP; 1B.1
           Pseudognaphalium beneolens (Gnaphalium canescens ssp. beneolens) /
           fragrant everlasting
           Pseudognaphalium biolettii (Gnaphalium bicolor) / two-tone everlasting
           Pseudognaphalium californicum (Gnaphalium californicum) / California
           everlasting
52

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                    Appendix A
            Pseudognaphalium microcephalum (Gnaphalium canescens ssp.
            microcephalum) / white everlasting
            Psilocarphus tenellus Nutt. var. tenellus / woolly heads
            Rafinesquia californica / California chicory
            Senecio aphanactis / rayless ragwort SP; 2.2
            Senecio flaccidus var. douglasii [S. douglasii var. d.] / Douglas butterbush
            Senecio vulgaris / common groundsel
            Silybum marianum / milk thistle
            Solidago velutina ssp. californica (Solidago californica) / California goldenrod
            Sonchus asper / prickly sow thistle
            Sonchus oleraceus / common sow thistle
            Stebbinsoseris heterocarpa / grassland silverpuffs
            Stephanomeria exigua / wraith flower
            Stephanomeria virgata ssp. pleurocarpa / wand stephanomeria
            Stylocline gnaphalioides / everlasting bedstraw
            Symphyotrichum (Aster) subulatum (subulatus var. ligulatus [A. exilis]) /annual
            saltmarsh aster
            Taraxacum officinale / dandelion
            Tetradymia comosa / cotton-thorn LS
            Tragopogon porrifolius / oyster plant
            Uropappus lindleyi [Microseris linearifolia] / silver puffs
            Venegasia carpesioides / canyon sunflower
            Xanthium spinosum / spiny clotbur
            Xanthium strumarium / cocklebur
     Betulaceae – Birch Family
            Alnus rhombifolia / white alder
     Boraginaceae – Borage Family
            Amsinckia (menziesii var). intermedia [A. i.] / common fiddleneck
            Amsinckia menziesii (var. menziesii) / small-flowered fiddleneck
            Cryptantha clevelandii / Cleveland cryptantha
            Cryptantha intermedia var. intermedia / large-flowered popcornflower
            Cryptantha micromeres / minute-flowered popcornflower
            Cryptantha microstachys / Tejon cryptantha
            Cryptantha muricata / prickly popcornflower
             Emmenanthe penduliflora var. penduliflora / whispering bells
            Eriodictyon crassifolium var. nigrescens / yerba santa
            Eucrypta chrysanthemifolia var. chrysanthemifolia / eucrypta
            Heliotropium curassavicum var. oculatum / wild heliotrope
            Nemophila menziesii var. integrifolia / baby blue-eyes
            Pectocarya linearis ssp. ferocula / slender pectocarya
            Pectocarya penicillata / winged pectocarya
            Phacelia cicutaria / caterpiillar phacelia
            Phacelia distans / fern-leaf phacelia
            Phacelia grandiflora / giant phacelia
            Phacelia parryi / Parry’s phacelia
            Phacelia ramosissima var. ramosissima / branching phacelia
            Phacelia viscida var. viscida / sticky phacelia
            Pholistoma auritum var auritum / fiesta flower
            Plagiobothrys acanthocarpus / adobe popcornflower
            Plagiobothrys canescens var. canescens / valley popcornflower
            Plagiobothrys collinus var. fulvescens / popcornflower
                                                                                             53

                                                               Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendix A                                              Conservation Element 2013 Update
            Plagiobothrys collinus var. gracilis / popcornflower
            Plagiobothrys nothofulvus / popcornflower
     Brassicaceae – Mustard Family
            Athysanus pusillus / dwarf athysanus
            Brassica nigra / black mustard
            Brassica rapa / field mustard
            Capsella bursa-pastoris / shepherd’s purse
            Cardamine californica / milk maids
            Caulanthus lasiophyllus (Thelypodium lasiophyllum) / California mustard
            Desurainia pinnata ssp. menziesii / tansy mustard
            Draba cuneifolia / draba LS
            Erysimum capitatum var. capitatum / western wallflower
            Hirschfeldia incana [Brassica geniculata] / Mediterranean mustard
            Lepidium didymum (Coronopus didymus) / lesser swine cress
            Lepidium latifolium / peppergrass
            Lepidium nitidum var. nitidum / shiny peppergrass
            Lepidium oblongum var. oblongum / peppergrass
            Lepidium virginicum ssp. menziesii (var. robinsonii) / peppergrass
            Lobularia maritima / sweet alyssum
            Nasturtium officinale (Rorippa nasturtium-aquaticum) / water cress
            Raphanus sativus / wild radish
            Sinapis arvensis / charlock
            Sisymbrium officinale / hedge mustard
            Thysanocarpus curvipes / lacepod
            Thysanocarpus laciniatus / fringepod
            Turitis (Arabis) glabra / tower mustard
     Cactaceae – Cactus Family
            Cylindropuntia (Opuntia) prolifera / coast cholla
            Opuntia basilaris var. basilaris / beavertail cactus LS
            Opuntia littoralis / coastal prickly-pear
            Opuntia oricola / prickly pear
     Campanulaceae – Bellflower Family
            Githopsis diffusa ssp. diffusa / Southern bluecup LS
            Nemacladus ramosissimus / thread stem LS
            Triodanis biflora / Venus’ looking glass LS
     Caprifoliaceae – Honeysuckle Family
            Lonicera subspicata var. denudata [L. s. var. johnstonii] / chaparral honeysuckle
            Symphoricarpos mollis / snowberry
     Caryophyllaceae – Pink Family
            Cardionema ramosissimum / sand mat
            Cerastium glomeratum / mouse-ear chickweed
            Herniaria hirsuta ssp. cinerea / herniaria
            Herniaria hirsuta ssp. hirsute / herniaria
            Minuartia douglasii [Arenaria d.] / Douglas sandwort
            Petrorhagia dubia / petrorhagia
            Polycarpon depressum / California polycarp
            Polycarpon tetraphyllum var. tetraphyllum / four-leaved allseed
            Silene coniflora (multinervia) / many-nerved catchfly
            Silene gallica / windmill pink
            Silene laciniata ssp. laciniata (major) / Indian pink
            Silene verecunda ssp. platyota / Dolores campion
54

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                             Appendix A
            Spergularia bocconii / sand spurrey
            Spergularia marina / annual sand spurrey
            Stellaria media / common chickweed
            Stellaria nitens / shining chickweed
            Stellaria pallida / lesser chickweed
     Chenopodiaceae – Goosefoot Family
            Atriplex lentiformis / quail bush
            Atriplex lindleyi / saltbush
            Atriplex nummularia / saltbush
            Atriplex semibaccata / Australian saltbush
            Chenopodium album / lamb’s quarters
            Chenopodium berlandieri / Berlander’s goosefoot
            Chenopodium californicum / California goosefoot
            Chenopodium murale / nettle-leaf goosefoot
            Chenopodium strictum / goosefoot
            Dysphania (Chenopodium) ambrosioides/ Mexican tea
            Kochia scoparia ssp. scoparia / Kochia
            Salsola tragus [Salsola iberica] / Russian thistle
     Cistaceae – Rock-rose Family
            Cistus purpureus / orchid rock rose
            Helianthemum scoparium / peak rush-rose
     Cleomaceae – Spiderflower Family
            Peritoma arborea var. arborea (Isomeris arborea) / bladderpod
     Convolvulaceae – Morning-glory Family
            Calystegia macrostegia ssp. intermedia / chaparral morning-glory
            Calystegia purpurata ssp. purpurata / western morning-glory
            Convolvulus arvensis / bindweed
            Convolvulus simulans / small-flowered morning-glory SP; 4.2
            Cressa truxillensis / alkali weed
            Cuscuta californica var. californica / chaparral dodder
            Cuscuta subinclusa / dodder
     Cornaceae – Dogwood Family
            Cornus glabrata / brown dogwood LS
     Crassulaceae – Stonecrop Family
            Crassula connata [Tillaea erecta] / pygmy-weed
            Dudleya blochmaniae ssp. blochmaniae / Blochman’s dudleya SP; 1B.1
            Dudleya cymosa ssp. agourensis / Santa Monica Mountains dudleya FT; SP;
            1B.2
            Dudleya lanceolata / lance-leaf dudleya
            Dudleya parva / Conejo dudleya FT; SP; 1B.2
            Dudleya pulverulenta ssp. pulverulenta / chalk dudleya
     Cucurbitaceae – Gourd Family
            Cucurbita foetidissima / calabazilla
            Marah fabacea / California manroot
            Marah macrocarpa / manroot
     Datiscaceae – Datisca Family
            Datisca glomerata / Durango root
     Ericaceae – Heath Family
            Arctostaphylos glandulosa ssp. mollis / Eastwood manzanita
            Arctostaphylos glauca / bigberry manzanita
     Euphorbiaceae – Spurge Family
                                                                                     55

                                                              Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendix A                                              Conservation Element 2013 Update
           Chamaesyce albomarginata [Euphorbia a.] / rattlesnake weed
           Chamaesyce melanadenia / squaw spurge
           Chamaesyce polycarpa var. hirtella / golondrinia
           Croton californicus / California croton
           Croton (Eremocarpus) setigerus / dove weed
           Euphorbia crenulata / Chinese caps
           Euphorbia peplus / petty spurge
           Euphorbia spathulata / wart spurge
           Ricinus communis/ castor bean
     Fabaceae – Legume Family
           Acmispon americanus var. americanus (Lotus purshianus) / Spanish clover
           Acmispon (Lotus) argophyllus var. argophyllus / silver lotus
           Acmispon glaber var. glaber (Lotus scoparius) / deer weed
           Acmispon maritimus var. maritimus (Lotus salsuginosus var. salsuginosus) /
           coastal lotus
           Acmispon micranthus (Lotus hamatus) / San Diego lotus
           Acmispon (Lotus) strigosus / strigose lotus
           Acmispon (Lotus) wrangelianus / Chilean lotus
           Amorpha californica var. californica / false indigo
           Astragalus brauntonii / Braunton’s milkvetch FE; SP; 1B.1
           Astragalus gambelianus / Gambel’s milkvetch
           Astragalus trichopodus var. phoxus / Santa Barbara milkvetch
           Glycyrrhiza lepidota / wild licorice LS
           Hoita macrostachya [Psoralea m.] / leather root
           Lathyrus latifolius / perennial sweet pea
           Lathyrus vestitus var vestitus / chaparral sweet pea
           Lotus corniculatus / birdfoot trefoil
           Lupinus bicolor / miniature lupine
           Lupinus concinnus / bajada lupine
           Lupinus hirsutissimus / stinging lupine
           Lupinus longifolius / bush lupine
           Lupinus sparsiflorus / Coulter’s lupine
           Lupinus succulentus / arroyo lupine
           Lupinus truncatus / collar lupine
           Medicago polymorpha / California burclover
           Melilotus albus / white sweetclover
           Melilotus indicus / yellow sweetclover
           Spartium junceum / Spanish broom
           Trifolium ciliolatum / tree clover
           Trifolium depauperatum var. amplectens / bladder clover
           Trifolium depauperatum var. truncatum / bladder clover
           Trifolium gracilentum / pinpoint clover
           Trifolium microcephalum / small-headed clover
           Trifolium obtusifloflorum / creek clover
           Trifolium willdenovii [T. tridentatum] / tomcat clover
           Vicia sativa ssp. sativa / common vetch
           Vicia sativa ssp. nigra / narrow-leaved vetch
           Vicia villosa ssp. varia / winter vetch
           Vicia villosa ssp. villosa / hairy winter vetch
     Fagaceae – Oak Family
           Quercus agrifolia var.agrifolia / coast live oak
56

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                   Appendix A
            Quercus berberidifolia / scrub oak
            Quercus douglasii / blue oak
            Quercus lobata / valley oak
            Quercus palmeri / Palmer’s oak LS
     Gentianaceae – Gentian Family
            Zeltnera exaltata / desert centaury LS
            Zeltnera venusta (Centaurium venustum) / canchalagua
     Geraniaceae – Geranium Family
            California [Erodium macrophyllum] macropylla / California macrophylla SP; 1B.1
            Erodium botrys / long-beaked filaree
            Erodium cicutarium / red-stemmed filaree
            Erodium moschatum / greenstem filaree
            Geranium carolinianum / Carolina geranium
            Geranium molle / dove’s foot geranium
     Grossulariaceae – Gooseberry Family
            Ribes indecorum / white flowering currant
            Ribes malvaceum / chaparral currant
            Ribes speciosum / fuchsia-flowered gooseberry
     Hydrophyllaceae – Waterleaf Family See Boraginaceae
     Juglandaceae – Walnut Family
            Juglans californica (var. californica) / Southern California black walnut SP; 4.2
     Lamiaceae – Mint Family
            Lamium amplexicaule / henbit
            Marrubium vulgare / horehound
            Mentha spicata / spearmint
            Salvia apiana / white sage
            Salvia columbariae / chia sage
            Salvia leucophylla / purple sage
            Salvia mellifera / black sage
            Salvia spathacea / hummingbird sage
            Scutellaria tuberosa / scullcap
            Stachys albens / white hedge nettle
            Stachys bullata / hedge nettle
            Trichostema lanatum / woolly bluecurls
            Trichostema lanceolatum / vinegar weed
     Lauraceae – Laurel Family
            Umbellularia californica / California bay
     Linaceae – Flax Family
            Hesperolinon micranthum / dwarf flax LS
            Linum grandiflorum / red-flowered flax
     Loasaceae – Loasa Family
            Mentzelia micrantha / blazing star
     Lythraceae – Loosestrife Family
            Lythrum californicum / California loosestrife
            Lythrum hyssopifolia / hyssop loosestrife
     Malvaceae – Mallow Family
            Malacothamnus fasciculatus var. fasciculatus / chaparral mallow
            Malva nicaeensis / bull mallow
            Malva parviflora / cheeseweed
            Malva sylvestris / high mallow
            Sidalcea (malvaeflora ssp.) sparsifolia / Southern checkerbloom
                                                                                              57

                                                                 Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendix A                                               Conservation Element 2013 Update
     Montiaceae – Miner’s Lettuce Family
            Calandrinia breweri / Brewer’s red maids SP; 4.2
            Calandrinia ciliata / red maids
            Calyptridium monandrum / sand cress
            Claytonia parviflora ssp. parviflora / claytonia
            Claytonia perfoliata ssp. perfoliata / miner’s lettuce
            Lewisia rediviva var. rediviva / bitterroot LS
     Myrsinaceae – Myrsine Family
            Anagallis arvensis / scarlet pimpernell
     Myrtaceae – Myrtle Family
            Eucalyptus camaldulensis / red gum
            Eucalyptus globulus / blue gum
     Nyctaginaceae – Four O’clock Family
            Mirabilis (californica) laevis var. crassifolia / wishbone bush
     Oleaceae – Olive Family
            Fraxinus velutina / Arizona ash
            Olea europaea / olive
     Onagraceae – Evening Primrose Family
            Camissoniopsis (Camissonia) bistorta / California sun-cup
            Camissoniopsis (Camissonia) hirtella / evening primrose
            Camissoniopsis (Camissonia) intermedia / evening primrose
            Camissoniopsis (Camissonia) micrantha / small evening primrose
            Clarkia bottae / punch-bowl godetia
            Clarkia cylindrica ssp. cylindrica / speckled clarkia
            Clarkia epilobioides / willow-herb clarkia
            Clarkia purpurea ssp. quadrivulnera / purple clarkia
            Clarkia unguiculata / elegant clarkia
            Epilobium canum ssp. canum [Zauschneria californica] / California fuchsia
            Epilobium ciliatum ssp. ciliatum [E. adenocaulon] / willow-herb
            Eulobus californicus (Camissonia californica) / mustard primrose
            Ludwigia peploides ssp. peploides / yellow water-weed
            Oenothera californica ssp. californica / California evening primrose LS
            Oenothera elata ssp. hirsutissima / Hooker’s evening primrose
            Oenothera sinuosa (Gaura sinuata) / wavy-leaved gaura
            Oenothera suffrutescens (Gaura coccinea) / wild honeysuckle
            Oenothera xenogaura (Gaura drummondii) / scented gaura
     Orobanchaceae – Broom-rape Family
            Castilleja affinis ssp. affinis / coast paintbrush
            Castilleja applegatei ssp. martini / Indian paintbrush
            Castilleja exserta ssp. exserta / purple owl’s clover
            Castilleja foliolosa / woolly Indian paintbrush
            Cordylanthus rigidus ssp. setigerus / bird’s beak
            Orobanche bulbosa / chaparral broomrape
            Orobanche fasciculata / clustered broomrape
            Pedicularis densiflora / Indian warrior LS
     Oxalidaceae – Oxalis Family
            Oxalis (albicans ssp. p) pilosa / oxalis
            Oxalis pes-caprae / Bermuda buttercup
     Paeoniaceae – Peony Family
            Paeonia californica / California peony
58

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                Appendix A
     Papaveraceae – Poppy Family
            Argemone munita / prickly poppy
            Dendromecon rigida / bush poppy
            Ehrendorferia (Dicentra) ochroleuca / crème-flowered ear-drops
            Eschscholzia californica / California poppy
            Papaver californicum / fire poppy LS
            Papaver heterophyllum (Stylomecon heterophyllum) / wind poppy
     Phrymaceae – Lopseed Family
            Mimulus aurantiacus var. aurantiacus / sticky monkeyflower
            Mimulus aurantiacus var. pubescens / pubescent sticky monkeyflower
            Mimulus brevipes / yellow monkeyflower
            Mimulus cardinalis / scarlet monkeyflower
            Mimulus floribundus / slimy monkeyflower
            Mimulus guttatus / common monkeyflower
            Mimulus longiflorus var. rutilus / red-flowered monkeyflower LS
     Plantaginaceae – Plantain Family
            Antirrhinum coulterianum / white snapdragon
            Antirrhinum kelloggii / climbing snapdragon
            Antirrhinum multiflorum / chaparral snapdragon
            Antirrhinum nuttallianum ssp. subsessile / violet snapdragon
            Collinsia heterophylla / Chinese houses
            Keckiella cordifolia / heartleaf penstemon
            Nuttallanthus texanus (Linaria canadensis) / blue toadflax LS
            Penstemon centranthifolius / scarlet bugler
            Penstemon heterophyllus var. australis / foothill penstemon
            Penstemon spectabilis var. subviscosis / showy penstemon
            Plantago erecta / California plantain
            Plantago lanceolata / English plantain
            Plantago major / common plantain
            Plantago ovata / ovate plantain
            Veronica anagallis-aquatica / water speedwell
            Veronica peregrina ssp. xalapensis / purslane speedwell
     Platanaceae – Sycamore Family
            Platanus racemosa / western sycamore
     Polemoniaceae – Phlox Family
            Allophyllum glutinosum / stinky gilia
            Eriastrum sapphirinum / sapphire wool-star
            Gilia achilleifolia ssp. achilleifolia / globe gilia
            Gilia achilleifolia ssp. multicaulis / globe gilia
            Gilia angelensis / angel’s gilia
            Gilia capitata ssp. abrontanifolia / bluehead gilia
            Gilia clivorum / purplespot gilia
            Leptosiphon (Linanthus) liniflorus / flax-flowered linanthus
            Leptosiphon (Linanthus) parviflorus [L. androsaceus] / linanthus
            Linanthus californicus (Leptodactylon californicum) / prickly phlox
            Linanthus dianthiflorus / ground pink
            Microsteris (Phlox) gracilis / slender phlox
            Navarretia atractyloides / holly leaved navarretia
            Navarretia hamata ssp. hamata / hooked navarretia
            Navarretia hamata ssp. leptantha / hooked navarretia
            Navarretia ojaiensis / Ojai navarretia SP; 1B.1
                                                                                        59

                                                              Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendix A                                              Conservation Element 2013 Update
            Navarretia pubescens / downy navarretia
            Saltugilia (Gilia) splendens ssp. splendens / elegant gilia
     Polygonaceae – Buckwheat Family
            Chorizanthe staticoides / Turkish rugging
            Chorizanthe xanti var. xanti / Xantu’s spine-flower
            Eriogonum cinereum / ashyleaf buckwheat
            Eriogonum crocatum / Conejo buckwheat SR; SP; 1B.2; LS
            Eriogonum elongatum var. elongatum / wand eriogonum
            Eriogonum fasciculatum var. foliolosum / California buckwheat
            Eriogonum giganteum var. giganteum / Santa Catalina Island buckwheat
            Eriogonum gracile var. gracile / slender woolly wild buckwheat
            Eriogonum wrightii var. membranaceum / Wright’s buckwheat LS
            Persicaria lapathifolia (Polygonum lapathifolium) / willow smartweed
            Persicaria punctata (Polygonum punctatum / water smartweed
            Polygonum argyrocoleon / Persian knotweed
            Polygonum aviculare (arenastrum) ssp. depressum / common knotweed
            Pterostegia drymarioides / fairy mist
            Rumex conglomerata / dock
            Rumex crispus / curly dock
            Rumex fueginus (maritimus) / golden dock
            Rumex salicifolius / willow dock
     Portulacaceae – Purslane Family
            Portulaca oleracea/ common purslane
     Primulaceae – Primrose Family
            Dodecatheon clevelandii ssp. sanctarum / shooting star
     Ranunculaceae – Buttercup Family
            Clematis lasiantha / pipestems
            Clematis ligusticifolia / western virgin’s bower
            Delphinium cardinalis / scarlet larkspur
            Delphinium parryi ssp. maritimum / maritime larkspur
            Delphinium parryi ssp. parryi / Parry’s larkspur
            Delphinium patens / spreading larkspur
            Ranunculus californicus var. californicus / California buttercup
            Ranunculus hebecarpus / hairy fruited buttercup
            Thalictrum fendleri var. polycarpum [T. polycarpum] / meadow-rue
     Rhamnaceae – Buckthorn Family
            Ceanothus crassifolius var. crassifolius / hoaryleaf ceanothus
            Ceanothus megacarpus var. megacarpus / bigpod ceanothus
            Ceanothus oliganthus / hairy-leaved ceanothus
            Ceanothus spinosus / greenbark ceanothus
            Frangula (Rhamnus) californica ssp. californica / California coffeeberry
            Rhamnus crocea / spiny redberry
            Rhamnus ilicifolia / holly-leaf redberry
     Rosaceae – Rose Family
            Adenostoma fasciculatum var. fasciculatum / chamise
            Adenostoma sparsifolium / red shank
            Aphanes occidentalis / lady’s mantle
            Cercocarpus betuloides var. betuloides / birch-leaf mountain mahogany
            Cercocarpus betuloides var. blancheae / island mountain mahogany SP; 4.3
            Drymocallis (Potentilla) glandulosa ssp. glandulosa / cinquefoil
            Heteromeles arbutifolia / toyon
60

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                  Appendix A
            Holodiscus discolor var. discolor / oceanspray
            Prunus ilicifolia ssp. ilicifolia / holly-leafed cherry
            Rosa californica / California rose
            Rubus ursinus / California blackberry
     Rubiaceae – Madder Family
            Galium andrewsii ssp. andrewsii / phlox-leaved bedstraw
            Galium angustifolium ssp. angustifolium / narrow-leaved bedstraw
            Galium aparine / goose grass
            Galium nutallii ssp. nutallii / San Diego bedstraw
            Galium parisiense / wall bedstraw
            Galium porrigens var. porrigens / climbing bedstraw
            Sherardia arvensis / field madder
     Salicaceae – Willow Family
            Populus fremontii ssp. fremontii / Fremont cottonwood
            Populus (balsamifera) trichocarpa / black cottonwood
            Salix exigua var. hindsiana / narrow-leaved willow
            Salix laevigata / red willow
            Salix lasiandra var. lasiandra / Pacific willow
            Salix lasiolepis / arroyo willow
     Saururaceae – Lizard’s-Tail Family
            Anemopsis californica / yerba mansa
     Saxifragaceae - Saxifrage Family
            Lithophragma cymbalaria / woodland star
            Micranthes (Saxifraga) californica / California saxifrage
     Scrophulariaceae – Figwort Family
            Myoporum laetum / myoporum
            Scrophularia californica ssp. floribunda / California figwort
            Verbascum blattaria / moth mullein
     Solanaceae – Nightshade Family
            Datura wrightii [D. meteloides] / Jimson weed
            Lycopersicon esculentum / tomato
            Nicotiana clevelandii / Indian tobacco
            Nicotiana glauca / tree tobacco
            Nicotiana quadrivalvis / large-flowered Indian tobacco
            Solanum americanum [S. nodiflorum] / little white nightshade
            Solanum douglasii / Douglas nightshade
            Solanum elaeagnifolium / white horse-nettle
            Solanum xanti / chaparral nightshade
     Tamaricaceae – Tamarix Family
            Tamarix ramosissima / Mediterranean tamarix
     Tropaeolaceae – Nasturtium Family
            Tropaeolum majus / garden nasturtium
     Urticaceae – Nettle Family
            Hesperocnide tenella / western nettle
            Parietaria hespera var. californica / California pellitory
            Parietaria hespera var. hespera [P. floridana] / pellitory
            Urtica dioica ssp. holosericea [U. holosericea] / stinging nettle
            Urtica urens / dwarf nettle
     Verbenaceae – Verbena Family
            Phyla lanceolata [Lippia l.] / frog fruit
            Phyla nodiflora var. nodiflora [Lippia n. var. rosea] / garden lippia
                                                                                          61

                                                                 Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendix A                                                Conservation Element 2013 Update
              Verbena lasiostachys / Western verbena
       Violaceae – Violet Family
              Viola pedunculata / johnny-jump-up
       Viscaceae – Mistletoe Family
              Phoradendron serotinum ssp. macrophyllum / sycamore mistletoe
              Phoradendron serotinum ssp. tomentosum / oak mistletoe
       Vitaceae – Grape Family
              Parthenocissus inserta / Virginia creeper
       Zygophyllaceae – Caltrop Family
              Tribulus terestris / puncture vine
Class Monocotyledones (Monocots)
       Agavaceae – Century Plant Family
              Chlorogalum pomeridianum / soap plant
              Hesperoyucca whipplei / chaparral yucca
       Alismataceae – Water-Plantain Family
              Alisma triviale (plantago-aquatica) / water plantain LS
              Echinodorus berteroi / burhead
       Alliaceae – Onion Family
              Allium haematochiton / red-skinned onion
              Allium peninsulare var. peninsulare / peninsular onion
       Araceae – Arum Family
              Lemna minuscule / duckweed
       Arecaceae – Palm Family
              Washingonia robusta / Mexican fan palm
       Asparagaceae – Asparagus Family
              Asparagus asparagoides / asparagus vine
       Asphodelaceae – Asphodel Family
              Asphodelus fistulosus / asphodel
       Cyperaceae – Sedge Family
              Bolboschoenus (Scirpus) maritimus / prairie bulrush
              Carex barbarae / Santa Barbara sedge
              Carex praegracilis / sedge
              Carex senta / rough sedge
              Cyperus eragrostis / umbrella sedge
              Cyperus erythrorhizos / umbrella-sedge
              Cyperus involucratus [C. alternifolius] / umbrella-sedge
              Cyperus odoratus / umbrella sedge
              Eleocharis acicularis var. acicularis / spike rush
              Eleocharis macrostachya / common spike rush
              Eleocharis montevidensis / spike rush
              Schoenoplectus (Scirpus acutus) var. occidentalis / tule
              Schoenoplectus (Scirpus) americanus [S. olneyi] / three square
              Schoenoplectus (Scirpus) californicus / California bulrush
       Hydrocharitaceae – Waterweed Family
              Najas marina / holly-leaved water-nymph
       Iridaceae – Iris Family
              Sisyrinchium bellum / blue-eyed grass
       Juncaceae – Rush Family
              Juncus balticus / wire rush
62

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                Appendix A
             Juncus bufonius var. bufonius / toad rush
             Juncus macrophyllus / long-leaved rush
             Juncus mexicanus / Mexican rush
             Juncus phaeocephalus var. paniculatus / paniculate brown-headed rush
             Juncus phaeocephalus var. phaeocephalus / brown-headed rush
             Juncus textilis / basket rush
             Juncus xiphioides / iris-leaved rush
     Liliaceae – Lily Family
             Calochortus albus / fairy lantern
             Calochortus catalinae / Catalina mariposa lily SP; 4.2
             Calochortus clavatus var. pallidus / yellow mariposa lily
             Calochortus plummerae / Plummer’s mariposa lily SP; 4.2; LS
             Calochortus venustus / butterfly mariposa lily
             Fritillaria biflora var. biflora / chocolate lily
     Melanthiaceae – False-Hellebore Family
             Toxicoscordion (Zigadenus) fremontii / chaparral star lily
     Poaceae – Grass Family
             Agrostis exarata / spike bent grass
             Agrostis stolonifera / creeping bent
             Aristida adscensionis / six weeks three-awn
             Arundo donax / giant reed
             Avena barbata / slender wild oat
             Avena fatua / wild oat
             Bouteloua gracilis / blue grama
             Briza minor / little quaking grass
             Bromus berteroanus / Chilean brome
             Bromus carinatus / California brome
             Bromus catharticus / rescue grass
             Bromus diandrus / ripgut brome
             Bromus hordaceus [B. mollis] / soft chess
             Bromus madritensis ssp. rubens / red brome
             Bromus pseudolaevipes / brome grass
             Cortaderia selloana / pampas grass
             Crypsis schoenoides / swamp grass
             Cynodon dactylon / Bermuda grass
             Dactylis glomerata / orchard grass
             Dactyloctenium aegyptium / crowfoot grass
             Digitaria sanguinalis / hairy crab grass
             Distichlis spicata / salt grass
             Echinochloa colona / small barnyard grass
             Ehrharta calycina / Veldt grass
             Elymus (Leymus) condensatus I giant wild rye
             Elymus glaucus / blue wildrye
             Elymus trachycaulus ssp. trachycaulus (subsecundus) / slender wheat grass
             Eragrostis barrelieri / lovegrass
             Eragrostis pectinacea var. pectinacea / lovegrass
             Eragrostis pectinacea var. miserrima / lovegrass
             Festuca (Vulpia) bromoides / brome fescue
             Festuca (Vulpia) microstachys (var. pauciflora) / Nuttall’s fescue
             Festuca (Vulpia) myuros (var. hirsuta) / hirsute rattail fescue
             Festuca perennis (Lolium multiflorum, L. perennis) / rye grass
                                                                                        63

                                                            Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendix A                                            Conservation Element 2013 Update
           Gastridium phleoides (ventricosum) / nit grass
           Hordeum intercedens / little barley SP; 3.2
           Hordeum marinum ssp. gussoneanum / Mediterraneum barley
           Hordeum murinum ssp. leporinum [H. leporinum] / Mediterranean barley
           Koelera macrantha / june grass
           Lamarckia aurea / goldentop
           Leptochloa fusca ssp. uninervia / Mexican sprangletop
           Melica californica / California melic
           Melica imperfecta / coast range melic
           Muhlenbergia microsperma / small-flowered muhly
           Muhlenbergia rigens / deergrass
           Panicum capillare / witch grass
           Pennisetum clandestinum / Kikuyu grass
           Pennisetum setaceum / fountain grass
           Pennisetum villosum / feather top
           Phalaris aquatica / Harding grass
           Phalaris minor / Mediterranean canary grass
           Phalaris paradoxa / hood canarygrass
           Poa annua / annual bluegrass
           Poa secunda ssp. secunda / one-sided bluegrass
           Polypogon interruptus / ditch beard grass
           Polypogon monspeliensis / rabbitsfoot grass
           Polypogon (Agrostis) viridis / water beard grass
           Schismus arabicus / Arabian grass
           Schismus barbatus / Mediterranean grass
           Setaria pumila ssp. pumila / yellow bristle grass
           Stenotaphrum secundatum / Saint Augustine grass
           Stipa (Nasella) cernua / nodding needlegrass
           Stipa (Achnatherum) coronatum / giant needlegrass
           Stipa (Nasella) lepida / foothill needlegrass
           Stipa (Piptatherum) miliacea [Oryzopsis m.] / smilo grass
           Stipa (Nassella) pulchra / purple needlegrass
     Ruscaceae – Butcher’s-broom Family
           Nolina cismontana / chaparral beargrass SP; 1B.2
     Themidaceae – Brodiaea Family
           Bloomeria crocea / golden stars
           Brodiaea terrestris ssp. kernensis / harvest brodiaea LS
           Dichelostemma capitatum ssp. capitatum [D. pulchella] / blue dicks
           Muilla maritima / common muilla
     Typhaceae – Cattail Family
           Typha domingensis / Southern cattail
           Typha latifolia / broad-leaved cattail
     Zannichelliaceae – Horned pondweed Family
           Zannichellia palustris / grass-wrack
64

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                   Appendix B
          APPENDIX B: FISHES OF THE THOUSAND OAKS PLANNING AREA
The following list uses this State Status Code:
        SSC:     Species of Special Concern – Species whose declining population levels, limited
                 ranges, and/or continuing threats have made them vulnerable to extinction.
Family Salmonidae
                Rainbow trout / Oncorhynchus mykiss
        Cyprinidae
                Goldfish / Carassium auratus
                Carp / Cyprinus carpo
                Arroyo chub / Gila orcuttii SSC
        Ictaluridae
                Black bullhead / Ameiurus melas
        Poeciliidae
                Mosquitofish / Gambusia affinis
        Centrarchidae
                Green sunfish / Lepomis cyanellus
                Bluegill / Lepomis macrochirus
                Largemouth bass / Micropterus salmoides
                                                                                               65

                                         Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendix B                        Conservation Element 2013 Update
           This page intentionally left blank.
66
Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                        Appendix C
                         APPENDIX C: REPTILES AND AMPHIBIANS
                        OF THE THOUSAND OAKS PLANNING AREA
The following list uses these State and Federal Status Codes:
        FT:     Federally – listed threatened
        SSC: Species of Special Concern – Species whose declining population levels, limited
                ranges, and/or continuing threats have made them vulnerable to extinction
Amphibians
Family Plethodontidae – Lungless Salamanders
                arboreal salamander / Aneides lugubris
                black-bellied slender salamander / Batrachoseps nigriventris
                Monterey ensatina / Ensatina eschscholtzii ssp. eschscholtzii
        Salamandridae – Newts
                California newt / Taricha torosa SSC
        Bufonidae – True Toads
                California toad / Anaxyrus [Bufo] boreus ssp. halophilus
                Arroyo toad / Anaxyrus [Bufo] californicus SSC
        Hylidae – Treefrogs
                California treefrog / Pseudacris [Hyla] cadaverina
                Pacific treefrog / Pseudacris hypochondriaca [Hyla regilla]
        Ranidae – True Frogs
                American bullfrog / Lithobates catesbeianus [Rana catesbeiana]
                California red-legged frog / Rana draytonii FT, SSC
Reptiles
Family Emydidae – Water and Box Turtles
                Pacific pond turtle / Actinemys [Clemmys] marmorata SSC
                Red-eared slider / Trachemys [Pseudemys] scripta ssp. elegans
        Anguidae – Alligator Lizards and Allies
                San Diego alligator lizard / Elgaria multicarinata [Gerrhonotus multicarinatus]
        Anniellidae – North American Legless Lizards
                California legless lizard / Anniella pulchra SSC
        Phrynosomatidae – Spiny, Side-blotched and Horned Lizards
                Blainville’s horned lizard / Phrynosoma blainvillii [coronatum] SSC
                Great Basin fence lizard / Sceloporus occidentalis ssp. longipes
                Western side-blotched lizard / Uta stansburiana ssp. elegans
        Scincidae – Skinks
                Skilton’s skink / Plestiodon [Eumeces] skiltonianus ssp. skiltonianus
        Teiidae – Whiptails and Racers
                Coastal whiptail / Aspidoscelis [Cnemidophorus] tigris ssp. stejnegeri SSC
        Colubridae – Colubrid Snakes
                Western yellow-bellied racer / Coluber constrictor ssp. mormon
                Red racer / Coluber [Masticophus] flagellum ssp. piceus
                California striped racer / Coluber [Masticophus] lateralis ssp. lateralis
                San Bernardino ring-necked snake / Diadophis punctatus ssp. modestus
                San Diego night snake / Hysiglena ochrorhyncha [torquata] ssp. klauberi
                                                                                                67

                                                            Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendix C                                           Conservation Element 2013 Update
            California kingsnake / Lampropeltis getula ssp. californiae
            California mountain kingsnake / Lampropeltis zonata ssp. pulchra SSC
            San Diego gopher snake / Pituophis catenifer [melanoluecus] ssp. annectens
            Coast patch-nosed snake / Salvadora hexalepis ssp. virgultea SSC
            Western black-headed snake / Tantilla planiceps
            Two-striped gartersnake / Thamnophis hammondii SSC
            Baja California lyresnake / Trimorphodon bicuscatus ssp. lyrophanes
     Viperidae – Vipers
            Southern Pacific rattlesnake / Crotalus oreganus ssp. helleri
68

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                     Appendix D
         APPENDIX D: BIRDS OF THE THOUSAND OAKS PLANNING AREA
The following list uses these State and Federal Status Codes:
   FE – Listed as Endangered by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
   FT – Listed as Threatened by the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service
   CE – Listed as Endangered by the California Department of Fish and Wildlife
   ST – Listed at Threatened by the California Deparetment of Fish and Wildlife
   WL – Watch List: Species considered by the California Department of Fish and Wildlife
   (CDFW) to be declining but are not yet on the Species of Special Concern list.
   FP – California Fully Protected: Enacted on a species-by-species basis by the state
   legislature prior to the adoption of the California Endangered Species Act of 1984.
   SSC – California Species of Special Concern: Animals whose breeding populations in
   California are considered by the California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW) to have
   declined to the point that they may face extirpation without proper management and
   recognition in planning.
   BCC – Birds of Conservation Concern: Birds considered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
   Service to be in need of conservation action, particularly in regard to protection of the
   habitats and ecological communities upon which these species depend.
Family Anatidae – Ducks, Geese, and Swans
               Canada goose (Branta canadensis)
               Wood duck (Aix sponsa)
               Gadwall (Anas strepera)
                American widgeon (Anas americana)
                Mallard (Anas platyrhynchos)
                Blue-winged teal (Anas discors)
                Cinnamon teal (Anas cyanoptera)
                Northern shoveler (Anas clypeata)
                Northern pintail (Anas acuta)
                Green-winged teal (Anas crecca)
                Canvasback (Aythya valisineria)
                Redhead (Aythya americana) SSC
                Ring-necked duck (Aythya collaris)
                Lesser scaup (Aythya affinis)
                Bufflehead (Bucephala albeola)
                Ruddy duck (Oxyura jaimaicensis)
        Odontophoridae – New World Quail
               California quail (Callipepla californica)
        Podicipedidae – Grebes
               Pied-billed grebe (Podilymbus podiceps)
               Eared-grebe (Podiceps nigricollis)
        Phalacrocoracidae – Cormorants
               Double-crested cormorant (Phalacrocorax auritus)
                                                                                             69

                                                              Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendix D                                           Conservation Element 2013 Update
     Ardeidae – Herons, Bitterns and Allies
             American bittern (Botaurus lentiginosus)
             Great blue heron (Ardea herodias)
             Great egret (Ardea alba)
             Snowy egret (Egretta thula)
             Green heron (Butorides virescens)
             Black-crowned night heron (Nycticorax nycticorax)
     Cathartidae – New World Vultures
             Turkey vulture (Cathartes aura)
     Pandionidae – Ospreys
             Osprey – (Pandion haliaetus) WL
     Accipitridae – Hawks, Kites, Eagles, and Allies
             White-tailed kite (Elanus leucurus) FP
             Northern harrier (Circus cyaneus)
             Sharp-shinned hawk (Accipiter striatus)
             Cooper’s hawk (Accipiter cooperii) WL
             Red-shouldered hawk (Buteo lineatus)
             Red-tailed hawk (Buteo jamaicensis)
     Falconidae – Falcons
             American kestrel (Falco sparverius)
             Merlin (Falco columbarius) WL
             Peregrine falcon (Falco peregrinus)
             Prairie falcon (Falco mexicanus) WL; BCC
     Rallidae – Rails, Gallinules, and Coots
             Virginia rail (Rallus limicola)
             Sora (Porzana carolina)
             Common gallinule (Gallinula galeata)
             American coot (Fulica americana)
     Charadriidae – Lapwings and Plovers
             Killdeer (Charadrius vociferous)
     Scolopacidae – Sandpipers, Phalaropes, and Allies
             Spotted sandpiper (Actitis macularius)
             Greater yellowlegs (Tringa melanoleuca)
             Long-billed dowitcher (Limnodromus scolopaceus)
             Wilson’s snipe (Gallinago delicata)
     Laridae – Gulls, Terns, and Skimmers
             Ring-billed gull (Larus delewarensis)
             Western gull (Larus occidentalis)
             California gull (Larus californicus)
     Columbidae – Pigeons, Doves
             Rock pigeon (Columba livia)
             Band-tailed pigeon (Patagioenas fasciata)
             Eurasian collared dove (Streptopelia orientalis)
             Spotted dove (Streptopelia chinensis)
             Mourning dove (Zenaida macroura)
             Common ground dove (Columbina passerina)
     Cuculidae – Cuckoos, Roadrunners, and Anis
             Greater roadrunner (Geococcyx californianus)
     Tytonidae – Barn Owls
             Barn owl (Tyto alba)
70

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                   Appendix D
     Strigidae – Typical Owls
             Western screech owl (Megscops kennicottii)
             Great-horned owl (Bubo virginianus)
             Burrowing owl (Athene cunicularia) SSC; BCC
     Caprimulgidae – Goatsuckers
             Common poorwill (Phalaenoptilus nuttallii)
     Apodidae – Swifts
             Vaux’s swift (Chaetura vauxi)
             White-throated swift (Aeronautes saxatalis) SSC ; BCC
     Trochilidae – Hummingbirds
             Black-chinned hummingbird (Archilochus alexandri)
             Anna’s hummingbird (Calypte anna)
             Costa’s hummingbird (Calypte costae)
             Rufous hummingbird (Selasphorus rufus
             Allen’s hummingbird (Selasphorus sasin) BCC
     Alcedinidae – Kingfishers
             Belted kingfisher – (Ceryle alcyon)
     Picidae – Woodpeckers and Allies
             Lewis’s woodpecker (Melanerpes lewis)
             Acorn woodpecker (Melanerpes formicivorus)
             Red-breasted sapsucker (Sphyrapicus ruber)
             Nuttall’s woodpecker (Picoides nuttallii) BCC
             Downy woodpecker (Picoides pubescens)
             Hairy woodpecker (Picoides villosus)
             Northern flicker (Colaptes auratus)
     Tyrannidae – Tyrant Flycatchers
             Western wood pewee (Contopus sordidulus)
             Willow flycatcher (Empidonax traillii) FE, BCC
             Pacific-slope flycatcher (Empidonax difficilis)
     ‘       black phoebe (Sayornis nigricans)
             Say’s phoebe (Sayornis saya)
             Ash-throated flycatcher (Myiarchus cinerascens)
             Cassin’s kingbird (Tyrannus vociferans)
             Western kingbird (Tyrannus verticalis)
     Laniidae – Shrikes
             Loggerhead shrike (Lanius ludovicianus) SSC; BCC
     Vireonidae – Vireos
             Bell’s vireo (Vireo bellii) FE, CE
             Cassin’s vireo (Vireo cassinii)
             Hutton’s vireo (Vireo huttoni)
             Warbling vireo (Vireo gilvus)
     Corvidae – Crows and Jays
             Western scrub jay (Aphelocoma californica)
             American crow (Corvus brachyrhynchos)
             Common raven (Corvus corax)
     Alaudidae – Larks
             Horned lark (Eremophila alpestris) WL
     Hirundinidae – Swallows
             Tree swallow (Tachycineta thalassina)
             Violet-green swallow (Tachycineta thalassina)
                                                                           71

                                                               Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendix D                                              Conservation Element 2013 Update
             Northern rough-winged swallow (Stelgidopteryx serripennis)
             Cliff swallow (Petrochelidon pyrrhonota)
             Barn swallow (Hirundo rustica)
     Paridae – Chickadees and Titmice
             Oak titmouse (Baeolophus inornatus) BCC
     Aegithalidae – Bushtits
             Bushtit (Psaltriparus minimus)
     Sittidae – Nuthatches
             White-breasted nuthatch (Sitta carolinensis)
     Certhiidae – creepers
             Brown creeper (Certhia americana)
     Troglodytidae – Wrens
             Cactus wren (Campylorhynchus brunneicapillus)
             Rock wren (Salpinctes obsoletus)
             Canyon wren (Catherpes mexicanus)
             Bewick’s wren (Thryomanes bewickii)
             House wren (Troglodytes aedon)
             Pacific wren (Troglodytes pacificus)
             Marsh wren (Cistothorus palustris)
     Polioptilidae – Gnatcatchers
             Blue-gray gnatcatcher (Polioptila caerulea)
             California gnatcatcher (Polioptila californica) FT; SSC
     Regulidae – Kinglets
             Golden-crowned kinglet (Regulus satrapa)
             Ruby-crowned kinglet (Regulus calendula)
     Sylviidae – Sylviid Warblers
             Wrentit (Chamaea fasciata)
     Turdidae – Thrushes
             Western bluebird (Sialia mexicana)
             Hermit thrush (Catharus guttatus)
             American robin (Turdus migratorius)
     Mimidae – Mockingbirds and Thrashers
             Northern mockingbird (Mimus polyglottos)
             California thrasher (Toxostoma redivivum)
     Sturnidae – Starlings
             European starling (Sturnus vulgaris)
     Motacillidae – Wagtails and Pipits
             American pipit (Anthus rubescens)
     Bombycillidae – Waxwings
             Cedar waxwing (Bombycilla cedrorum)
     Ptilogonatidae – Silky-flycatchers
             Phainopepla (Phainopepla nitens)
     Parulidae – Wood-warblers
             Orange-crowned warbler (Oreothlypis celata)
             Nashville warbler (Oreothlypis ruficapilla)
             MacGillivray’s warbler (Geothlypis tolmiei)
             Common yellowthroat (Geothlypis trichas)
             Yellow warbler (Setophaga petechia) BCC; SSC
             Yellow-rumped warbler (Setophaga coronata)
             Black-throated gray warbler (Setophaga nigrescens)
72

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                Appendix D
              Townsend’s warbler (Setophaga townsendi)
              Wilson’s warbler (Cardellina pusilla)
              Yellow-breasted chat (Icteria virens) SSC
     Emberizidae – Sparrows
              Spotted towhee (Pipilo maculatus)
              Rufous-crowned sparrow (Aimophila ruficeps) WL
              California towhee (Melozone crissalis)
              Chipping sparrow (Spizella passerina)
              Lark sparrow (Chondestes grammmacus)
              Sage sparrow (Amphispiza belli) BCC; WL
              Savannah sparrow (Passerculus sandwichensis)
              Grasshopper sparrow (Ammodramus savannarum) SSC
              Fox sparrow (Passerella iliaca)
              Song sparrow (Melospiza melodia)
              Lincoln’s sparrow (Melospiza lincolnii)
              White-crowned sparrow (Zonotrichia albicollis)
              Golden-crowned sparrow (Zonotrichia atricapilla)
              Dark-eyed junco (Junco hyemalis)
     Cardinalidae – Grosbeaks and Allies
              Western tanager (Piranga ludoviciana)
              Black-headed grosbeak (Pheucticus melanocephalus)
              Blue grosbeak (Passerina caerulea)
              Lazuli bunting (Passerina amoena)
     Icteridae – Blackbirds
              Red-winged blackbird (Agelaius phoeniceus)
              Western meadowlark (Sturnella neglecta)
              Brewer’s blackbird (Euphagus cyanocephalus)
              Brown-headed cowbird (Molothrus ater)
              Hooded oriole (Icterus cucullatus)
              Bullock’s oriole (Icterus bullockii)
     Fringillidae – Finches
              Purple finch (Carpodacus purpureus)
              House finch (Carpodacus mexicanus)
              Pine siskin (Spinus pinus)
              Lesser goldfinch (Spinus psaltria)
              Lawrence’s goldfinch (Spinus lawrencei)
              American goldfinch (Spinus tristis)
     Passeridae – Old World Sparrows
              House sparrow (Passer domesticus)
                                                                        73

                                         Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendix D                        Conservation Element 2013 Update
           This page intentionally left blank.
74
Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                   Appendix E
       APPENDIX E: MAMMALS OF THE THOUSAND OAKS PLANNING AREA
The following list uses this State Status Code:
        SSC – Species of Special Concern – Species whose declining population levels,limited
                  ranges, and/or continuing threats have made them vulnerable to extinction.
Order Marsupialia
        Family Didelphidae: Opossums
                Virginia opossum (Didelphis [marsupialis] virginiana)
Order Insectivora
        Soricidae: Shrews
                ornate shrew (Sorex ornatus)
        Talpidae: Moles
                broad-handed mole (Scapanus latimanus)
Order Chiroptera
        Vespertilionidae: Evening bats
                fringed myotis (Myotis thysanodes)
                California myotis (Myotis californicus)
                Yuma myotis (Myotis yumanensis)
                western pipistrelle (Pipistrellus hesperus)
                western red bat (Lasiurus blossevillii) SSC
                hoary bat (Lasiurus cinereus)
                big brown bat (Eptesicus fuscus)
                Townsend’s big-eared bat (Corynorhinus townsendii) SSC
                pallid bat (Antrozous pallidus) SSC
        Molossidae: Free-tailed bats
                Brazilian free-tailed bat (Tadarida brasiliensis)
                Western mastiff bar (Eumops perotis) SSC
Order Lagomorpha
        Leporidae: Rabbits
                Desert cottontail (Sylvilagus auduboni)
                Brush rabbit (Sylvilagus bachmani)
Order Rodentia
        Sciuridae: Squirrels
                California ground squirrel (Spermophilus beecheyi)
                Western gray squirrel (Sciurus griseus)
                Fox squirrel (Sciurus niger)
        Geomyidae: Gophers
                Botta’s pocket gopher (Thomomys bottae)
        Heteromyidae: Pocket mice
                California pocket mouse (Chaetodipus californicus)
                Pacific kangaroo rat (Dipodomys agilis)
        Cricetidae: Mice
                Western harvest mouse (Reithrodontomys megalotis)
                Deer mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus)
                Dusky-footed woodrat (Neotoma fuscipes ssp. macrotis)
                San Diego Desert woodrat (Neotoma lepida ssp. intermedia)
                California meadow mouse (Microtus californicus)
                                                                                             75

                                                         Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendix E                                         Conservation Element 2013 Update
       Muridae: Rats
              Norway rat (Rattus norvegicus)
              Black rat (Rattus rattus)
              House mouse (Mus musculus)
Order Carnivora
       Canidae: Dogs and relatives
              Coyote (Canis latrans)
              Gray fox (Urocyon cinereoargenteus)
       Procyonidae: Raccoons and relatives
              Ringtail (Bassariscus astutus)
              Raccoon (Procyon lotor)
       Mustelidae: Weasels and relatives
              Long-tailed weasel (Mustela frenata)
              Striped skunk (Mephitis mephitis)
              American Badger (Taxidea taxus) SSC
       Felidae: Cats
              Mountain lion (Felis concolor)
              Bobcat (Lynx rufus)
Order Artiodactyla
       Cervidae: Deer
              Mule deer (Odocoileus hemionus ssp. hemionus)
76
Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                          Appendix F
           APPENDIX F: RARE, THREATENED, AND ENDANGERED PLANTS
                         IN THE THOUSAND OAKS PLANNING AREA
The following list utilizes these status codes:
    State and Federal Status Codes
    CE – State-listed, endangered
    CR – State-listed, rare
    SP – State-listed, special plant
    FE – Federally-listed, endangered
    FT – Federally-listed, threatened
    California Rare Plant Ranks
    List 1B – Plants Rare, Threatened, or Endangered in California and Elsewhere
    List 2 – Plants Rare, Threatened, or Endangered in California, But More Common
                Elsewhere
    List 3 – Plants about Which We Need More Information – A Review List.
    List 4 – Plants of Limited Distribution – A Watch List.
    Threat Code Extensions:
        .1       Seriously endangered in California
        .2       Fairly endangered in California
        .3       Not very endangered in California
    Local Status
    LS – Locally sensitive: Plants considered by the City of Thousand Oaks or the County of
                 Ventura to be uncommon or rare.
Braunton's milk-vetch (Astragalus brauntonii) is a short-lived perennial shrub with lilac flowers.
In Thousand Oaks, it is associated with sedimentary soils in the North Ranch Open Space, in
the vicinity of the Simi Hills. This plant exists as a seed bank in the soil until a wildfire or some
other disturbance causes it to germinate. It is listed as endangered by the Federal Government,
and has a Rare Plant Rank of 1B.1.
Malibu baccharis (Baccharis malibuensis) is a rounded shrub in the sunflower family. Recently
described, it was thought to occur only in the Malibu area until a small population was
discovered by a local botanist in the Simi Hills above Oakbrook Regional Park. Due to its
extreme rarity, it has a Rare Plant Rank of 1B.1
California macrophylla (California (Erodium macrophyllum) macrophylla). A native form of the
common garden weed, filaree, this plant is found in vernally moist grassland. One population,
of the three known in Ventura County, is found on an approved residential project on the south
side of Olsen Road just west of California Lutheran University. As mitigation, seed from these
plants were collected and deposited at the Center for Plant Conservation at the Santa Barbara
Botanic Garden. This species has a Rare Plan Rank of 1B.1.
                                                                                                    77

                                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendix F                                                   Conservation Element 2013 Update
Catalina mariposa lily (Calochortus catalinae) it has been given a Rare Plant Rank of 4.2. This
plant is restricted to heavy soils in grassland throughout the Conejo Valley. Although it is
arguably the most common mariposa lily in the Santa Monica Mountains, it is threatened by
habitat loss due to urbanization.
Plummer's mariposa lily (Calochortus plummerae) is an attractive pink and yellow lily that
grows in inland sage scrub and chaparral. In Thousand Oaks, it occurs in the Los Robles Open
Space, the North Ranch Open Space and other similar habitats in other areas of the City.
Plummer's mariposa lily has been given a Rare Plant Rank of 4.2.
Southern tarplant (Centromadia (Hemizonia) parryi ssp. australis) is a spiny, annual member
of the sunflower family which is found in vernally moist saline wetlands. There is one population
of this plant in the City in a vacant field adjacent to the U.S. 101, northwest of the intersection of
Borchard Road and Michael Drive in Newbury Park. This plant has been given a Rare Plant
Rank of 1B.1.
Island mountain mahogany (Cercocarpus betuloides var. blancheae) has larger leaves than the
typical mainland form of this shrub. It is found sparingly in open space south of the Ventura Freeway
in the vicinity of the Lake Eleanor Open Space and has been given a Rare Plant Rank of 4.3.
Small-flowered morning-glory (Convolvulus simulans) has small, white flowers and does not
look like a typical morning glory. It is found on vernally moist clay exposures in grassland and has
been found at Wildwood Park and the Sunset Hills Open Space. It has a Rare Plant Rank of 4.2.
Conejo dudleya (Dudleya parva) is a small yellow-flowered succulent which is restricted to
north-facing volcanic slopes within the Conejo Valley. It is most cornmon in the vicinity of Mount
Clef Ridge. It is a Ventura County endemic and is found nowhere else on earth. Conejo
dudleya is listed as threatened by the Federal Government and has a Rare Plant Rank of 1B.2.
Blochman's dudleya (Dudleya blochmaniae ssp. blochmaniae) is a small white-flowered succulent
which grows on rocky slopes with sparse vegetation. Although its overall distribution is greater than
the previous species, it is more restricted in the Conejo Valley and is limited to open space on the
western side of the Planning Area. Blochman's dudleya has a Rare Plant Rank of 1B.1.
Santa Monica Mountains dudleya (Dudleya cymosa ssp. ovatifolia) is a small succulent with
bright yellow flowers which grows on north facing volcanic cliffs. It is closely related to a similar
species that grows in the vicinity of Agoura Hills. Within the Conejo Valley it is restricted to the
Lake Eleanor Open Space. Santa Monica Mountains dudleya is listed as threatened by the
Federal Government and has a Rare Plant Rank of 1B.2.
Conejo buckwheat (Eriogonum crocatum) is a distinctive yellow flowered shrub with white
woolly leaves. It is found on steep north- facing volcanic slopes throughout the Conejo Valley
and the western side of Conejo Mountain, but nowhere else on earth. By virtue of its restricted
distribution, the City Council has designated it as the official City flower. This species is listed as
rare by the State Government and has a Rare Plant Rank of 1B.2.
Santa Susana tarplant (Deinandra (Hemizonia) minthornii) is a yellow flowered shrub which grows
on sandstone bluffs and rocks in the Simi Hills and Santa Susana Mountains. Its occurrence in
Thousand Oaks is limited to several small populations in the North Ranch Open Space. Santa
Susana tarplant is listed as rare by the State Government and has a Rare Plant Rank of 1B.2.
78
Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                         Appendix F
Southern California black walnut (Juglans californica var. californica) is found scattered
throughout the Conejo Valley in inland sage scrub and oak woodlands. Although relatively
cornmon locally, with outstanding examples in the North Ranch Open Space, this small tree has
a Rare Plant Rank of 4.2 because of its rapid disappearance due to urbanization further south.
Lyon's Pentachaeta (Pentachaeta lyonii) is a small yellow-flowered member of the sunflower
family which is limited to several populations in and around the City of Thousand Oaks. It usually
inhabits sparsely vegetated grasslands in association with Conejo volcanic soils, but is absent
from large areas of seemingly suitable habitat. Large populations of this plant are protected within
Wildwood Park and the Lake Eleanor Open Space. Lyon's Pentachaeta is listed as endangerd by
the State endangered by the Federal Government and has a Rare Plant Rank of 1B.1.
Chaparral beargrass (Nolina cismontana). The Conejo Valley distribution of this yucca-like
plant is limited to the Simi Hills area where it is found in colonial populations in the North Ranch
Open Space, often in association with Braunton’s milkvetch. It has a Rare Plant Rank of 1B.2.
Rayless ragwort (Senecio aphanactis). This diminutive yellow sunflower is found in vernally
moist, sparsely vegetated grasslands in associateion with Conejo Volcanic soil. It occurs
sparingly in the Conejo Canyons Open Space and Wildwood Park in the northwestern portion of
the City. It has a Rare Plant Rank of 2.2.
                                                                                                   79

                                         Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendix F                        Conservation Element 2013 Update
           This page intentionally left blank.
80
Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                         Appendix G
  APPENDIX G: THREATENED, ENDANGERED AND SENSITIVE ANIMAL SPECIES
                          IN THE THOUSAND OAKS PLANNING AREA
The following list utilizes these status codes:
     FE – Listed as Endangered by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
     FT – Listed as Threatened by the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service
     SE – Listed as Endangered by the California Department of Fish and Wildlife
     ST – Listed at Threatened by the California Deparetment of Fish and Wildlife
     WL – Watch List: Species considered by the California Department of Fish and Wildlife
     (CDFW) to be declining but are not yet on the Species of Special Concern list.
     FP – California Fully Protected: Enacted on a species-by-species basis by the state
     legislature prior to the adoption of the California Endangered Species Act of 1984.
     SSC – California Species of Special Concern: Animals whose breeding populations in
     California are considered by the California Department of Fish and Wildlife (CDFW) to have
     declined to the point that they may face extirpation without proper management and
     recognition in planning.
     BCC – Birds of Conservation Concern: Birds considered by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife
     Service to be in need of conservation action, particularly in regard to protection of the
     habitats and ecological communities upon which these species depend.
California Newt (Taricha torosa) SSC: The California newt lives in mesic chaparral, California
sage scrub and riparian woodland generally in close proximity to aquatic habitats. Adults spend
the summer in gopher holes, under bark or in other protected locations coming to breed in quiet
ponds after the winter rains. Larvae are aquatic, as are the adults during breeding season. It is
considered a “species of special concern” by the CDFW because it has suffered declines due
to urbanization, stream alteration and flood control activities
California red-legged frog (Rana draytonii) FT; SSC: The red-legged frog occurs in lowlands
and foothills in or near permanent sources of deep water with dense, shrubby or emergent
riparian vegetation. Although the species had not been recently observed within the Planning
Area, suitable habitat exists along the Arroyo Conejo and its perennial tributaries. The red-legged
frog has undergone significant declines due to urbanization and predation by the introduced bull
frog; consequently, it is considered threatened by the Federal government and is a California
“species of special concern”.
Southwestern pond turtle (Actinemys [Clemmys] marmorata ssp. pallida) SSC: The
southwestern pond turtle is found in the Arroyo Conejo and its perennial tributaries. This
thoroughly aquatic turtle requires dense aquatic vegetation and may be seen basking on logs and
mud banks. Populations of this species have undergone significant declines due to urbanization
and flood control activities and, consequently, it is a California “species of special concern”.
Blainville’s horned lizard (Phrynosoma blainvillii [coronatum] ssp.frontale) SSC: This species
is relatively common in the Open Space System wherever its habitat requirements of loose,
                                                                                                 81

                                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendix G                                                  Conservation Element 2013 Update
sandy soil, open areas for sunning and a good supply of its favorite food, harvester ants, are to
be found. Within the Planning Area, it is encountered principally in coastal sage scrub and
chaparral. It is considered a "species of special concern" by CDFW because it has been
reduced in numbers due to destruction of habitat and displacement of native harvester ants by
introduced Argentine ants.
Silvery legless lizard (Anniella pulchra pulchra) SSC: The silvery legless lizard is found in
coastal sage scrub, oak woodlands and chaparral. In general, the species requires moist alluvial
soils with plenty of surface litter and does not occur in heavy clay soil. It is considered a State
"species of special concern" because it has been reduced in numbers due to habitat destruction.
(Coastal) Western whiptail (Aspidoscelis [Cnemidophorus] tigris ssp. stejnegeri) SSC: Within
Thousand Oaks, this species is infrequently encountered in chaparral and coastal sage scrub.
The coastal race of the western whiptail is considered uncommon over most of its range and
consequently it is a State “species of special concern”
Coast patchnose snake (Salvadora hexalepis ssp. virgultea) SSC: The patchnose snake is
widely distributed, but uncommon, throughout California in predominately arid habitats. It has
not been confirmed within the Planning Area but there is suitable habitat in chaparral and
canyon bottoms. It has been designated a State “species of Special Concern”.
California mountain kingsnake (Lampropeltis zonata ssp. pulchra) SSC: This beautiful striped
snake is most common in the vicinity of rocks and boulders near streams or lake shores. It is
expected in mesic chaparral, riparian and oak woodland. It is a State “species of special
concern” due to habitat destruction and capture for the pet trade.
Two-striped gartersnake (Thamnophis hammondii) SSC: Sometimes called the aquatic
gartersnake, this species is associated with permanent or semi-permanent bodies of water
where it consumes tadpoles and other aquatic life. It is found along perennial portions of the
Arroyo Conejo. It is considered a “species of special concern” due to the destruction of its
aquatic habitat.
Cooper's hawk (Accipiter cooperi) WL: The Cooper's hawk is an uncommon year-round
resident and fairly common fall transient. It has nested in the Los Robles Open Space and is
most often encountered in riparian and oak woodland. Reductions of breeding populations over
the last several decades have resulted in its being placed on the State Watch List.
White-tailed kite (Elanus leucurus) FP: The white-tailed kite is an uncommon year round
resident which frequents open grasslands with scattered trees for perching. This species has
undergone major population fluctuations with very low population levels in the earlier part of this
century to a peak in the early and mid 1970's. At this point, populations seem to be declining
somewhat. This graceful raptor is a California fully protected species.
Prairie falcon (Falco mexicanus) BCC; WL: This powerful raptor of open country is a rare
winter and casual summer visitor to the Thousand Oaks area. Nesting has been recorded on
rocky cliffs in the nearby Santa Monica Mountains and there is suitable potential nesting habitat
within the open space system. Recent population declines on the coastal slope have resulted in
the prairie falcon being designated a Federal “bird of conservation concern” and being placed
on the State watch list.
82

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                                      Appendix G
Merlin (Falco columbarius) WL: This small falcon is an uncommon fall transient and rare winter
visitor which frequents open woodlands and riparian areas. In the Conejo Valley, merlins are
seen occasionally in the winter or as transients in migration. Because of its uncommon status,
the merlin has been placed on the State watch list.
Burrowing owl (Athene cunicularia) BCC; SSC: The burrowing owl is a rare resident in
grassland and coastal sage scrub where it utilizes ground squirrel burrows. Although there are
several recent records within the open space system, these birds were probably in migration
and it is doubtful that they breed in the Planning Area. Because of their scarce and decreasing
status in coastal areas of California, the burrowing owl has been designated a Federal “bird of
conservation concern” and State “species of special concern”.
Southwestern willow flycatcher (Empidonax traillii extimus) BCC; SE: The southwestern
willow flycatcher is a rare summer resident which must have dense willow thickets along
perennial streams for nesting. Over the past couple of decades, this species has been virtually
extirpated as a breeder in Southern California due to destruction of riparian woodlands and
brood parasitism by brown-headed cowbirds. However, suitable breeding habitat is present
along the Arroyo Conejo in the Conejo Canyons Open Space. The southwestern willow
flycatcher is listed as Endangered by the California Department of Fish and Wildlife and a
Federal “bird of conservation concern”.
Loggerhead shrike (Lanius ludovicianus) BCC; SSC: The loggerhead shrike is an uncommon
year-round resident of open grasslands and sparse coastal sage scrub. There is some influx of
birds into the area during winter months. Shrikes have declined worldwide due to loss of
grassland habitat and consequently it is a State "species of special concern" as well as a
Federal ‘bird of conservation concern”.
Least Bell’s vireo (Vireo bellii pusillus) SE; FE: This small song-bird nests in willow thickets
and other low shrubs along perennial or intermittent streams. Like the previous species, brood
parasitism by brown-headed cowbirds and destruction of riparian woodlands have led to
significant declines, however, the species has been observed along the ArroyoConejo. The
least Bell’s vireo is listed as Endangered by both the California Department of Fish and Wildlife
and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
Oak titmouse (Baeolophus inornatus) BCC: This obligate inhabitant of oak and riparian
woodlands is closely associated with coast live oaks (Quercus agrifolia). The oak titmouse has
declined as a breeder in Southern California due to destruction of its oak woodland habitat,
consequently it is a Federal “bird of conservation concern”. It should be noted, however, that it
is common within the City’s open space system.
Coastal California gnatcatcher (Polioptila californica californica) FT; SSC: This obligate
resident of dense California sage scrub has recently been noted in several areas of the City.
Favored habitats include arid sage scrub with patches of prickly pear cactus. Declines have
resulted from the destruction of California sage scrub and undoubtably broon parasitism by
brown-headed cowbirds. The coastal California gnatcatcher is listed as Threatened by the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
Yellow warbler (Dendroica petechia brewsteri) BCC; SSC: This small songbird is an
occasional summer resident and regular spring and fall transient in the Conejo Valley. This
species requires tall riparian growth of cottonwoods, alders and willows for breeding. It has
undergone significant population declines due to destruction of riparian vegetation as well as
                                                                                                 83

                                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendix G                                                  Conservation Element 2013 Update
brown cowbird brood parasitism and as a result has been designated a Federal “bird of
conservation concern and a State "species of special concern".
Yellow-breasted chat (Icteria virens) SSC: This large warbler is an uncommon inhabitant of
dense riparian vegetation and may occur along the Arroyo Conejo and its principal tributaries. Like
the yellow warbler, there has been a notable decline in the number of breeding pairs as a result of
destruction of habitat and cowbird brood parasitism. It is a State "species of special concern".
Grasshopper sparrow (Ammodramus savannarum) SSC: This small sparrow is a summer
resident in grassland in the western side of the City. Due to its small size and secretive habits it
is usually detected by its insect-like call. Its numbers have declined due to development of its
grassland habitat and it is on the State “species of special concern” list.
Bell's sage sparrow (Amphispiza belli ssp. belli) BCC; WL: Bell's sage sparrow is an
uncommon, local resident of dry chaparral and coastal sage scrub. The species seems to prefer
rather monotypic vegetation such as low dense chamise or dry coastal sage scrub for breeding.
Because of its uncommon status and limited distribution, the coastal subspecies is a Federal
“bird of conservation concern” and is on the State watch list.
Southern California rufous-crowned sparrow (Aimophila ruficeps canescens) WL: The
Southern California rufous-crowned sparrow is a fairly common resident in sparse coastal sage
scrub within the Open Space System. It is most frequently encountered on slopes where there
is intergrading coastal sage scrub and grassland with rocky outcrops. Because of its uncommon
status throughout much of Southern California and its limited distribution, this subspecies is on
the State watch list.
Bats – Order Chiroptera: Several species of bats which have been designated as State
"species of special concern" may occur within the Planning Area. These are designated as
such in the Mammal List, Appendix D. However, the distribution of these species is poorly
known, and there is no available information on which to base conclusions about their
occurrence locally.
(San Diego) black-tailed hare (Lepus californicus ssp bennettii) SSC: If present, the black-
tailed hare is expected to occur in ecotones between shrub habitats and grasslands. However,
there have been few reliable sightings of black-tailed hares within the Conejo Valley in recent
years and it may already be extirpated from the area. Because of its diminishing numbers due to
habitat destruction and hunting, the black-tailed hare is a State "species of special concern".
(San Diego) desert woodrat (Neotoma lepida ssp. intermedia) SSC: The Conejo Valley is
within the range of the desert woodrat which has undergone population reductions due to
habitat destruction. This species inhabits a variety of habitats from arid scrub to chaparral,
particularly in the vicinity of cliffs and rocky outcrops. The desert woodrat is a State "species of
special concern".
American badger (Taxidea taxus) SSC: This large member of the weasel family has been
extirpated from many areas of Southern California as a result of habitat loss, deliberate killing,
and secondary poisoning. There appears to be a small but stable population of this species
within the open space system. Suitable habitat includes grassland, savannah and meadow
areas where they prey on gophers, ground squirrels and kangaroo rats. The American badger is
a State "species of special concern".
84

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Conservation Element 2013 Update                                            Bibliography
BIBLIOGRAPHY
American Ornithologists Union, 2013. Checklist of North American Birds, 7 th edition and
its supplements.
Baldwin, B.G., D.H. Goldman, D.J. Keil, R. Patterson, T.J. Rosatti, and D.H. Wilken,
editors, 2012. The Jepson Manual: Vascular Plants of California, second edition,
University of California Press, Berkeley.
California Department of Fish and Wildlife. Special Animals, State of California, the
Resources Agency, Department of Fish and Wildlife, Biogeographic Data Branch,
California Natural Diversity Database, January, 2011.
California Department of Fish and Wildlife. California Natural Diversity Database.
Special Vascular Plants, Bryophytes, and Lichens List. Quarterly Publication, January
2013.
California Department of Fish and Wildlife. State and Federally Listed Endangered and
Threatened Animals of California. State of California, the Resources Agency,
Department of Fish and Wildlife, Biogeographic Data Branch, California Natural
Diversity Database, January, 2013.
California Department of Fish and Wildlife. State and Federally Listed Endangered,
Threatened, and Rare Plants of California. State of California, the Resources Agency,
Department of Fish and Wildlife, Biogeographic Data Branch, California Natural
Diversity Database, January, 2013.
California Native Plant Society. Online Inventory of Rare and Endangered Plants, 7 th
Edition.
City of Thousand Oaks 1979. Conejo Canyons Study. Thousand Oaks, California.
Consortium of California Herbaria Database (UC Jeps.berkeley.edu/consortium/).
Dunn, Jon L. and Jonathan Alerderfer, editors, 2006. National Geographic Field Guide
to the Birds of North America, Fifth Edition. National Geographic Society.
Governor’s Office of Planning and Research, Technical Advisory – CEQA and Climate
Change: Addressing Climate change through California Environmental Quality Act
(CEQA) Review.
Ingles, Lloyd, G. 1965. Mammals of the Pacific States, California, Oregon, Washington.
Stanford University Press, Stanford, California.
Koch, Alison, et al 2004 Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area
Paleontological Survey. Geological Resources Division, National Park Service, Denver
Colorado.
                                                                                       85

                                                           Thousand Oaks General Plan
Bibliography                                        Conservation Element 2013 Update
Nafis, G (2000 – 2013) A Guide to the Amphibians and Reptiles of California. Available
at: http:// www.californiaherps.com
Open Space Institute, Open Space- The Newsletter of the Open Space Institute, Vol 14;
winter/spring 2013.
Penrod et al. 2006 South Coast Missing Linkages Project: A Linkage Design for the
Santa Monica – Sierra Madre Connection. South Coast Wildlands, Idyllwild, Ca.
RBF Consulting, June 2011, City of Thousand Oaks 2010 Urban Water Management
Plan. Irvine, California
Sawyer, John O., Todd Keeler-Wolf, Julie M. Evans 2009. A Manual of California
Vegetation, 2nd Edition. California Native Plant Society Press, Sacramento, Ca.
United State Geological Survey, Canyonlands Research Center, Southwest Biological
Science Center. Available at: http://www.soilcrust.org
Ventura County Cultural Heritage Board 1992. Ventura County Historical Landmarks
and Points of Interest. Ventura, California
86













































Housing Element
Thousand Oaks General Plan
              City of Thousand Oaks
                      City Council
             Mayor Claudia Bill-de la Peña
             Mayor Pro-Tem Andrew P. Fox
             Councilmember Jacqui V. Irwin
              Councilmember Joel R. Price
                Councilmember Al Adam
                 Planning Commission
                   Peter Turpel, Chair
              Daniel Roundtree, Vice-Chair
             Michael Farris, Commissioner
            Douglas Nickles, Commissioner
             Daryl Reynolds, Commissioner
             City of Thousand Oaks Staff
John C. Prescott, AICP, Community Development Director
      Mark A. Towne, Deputy Director/City Planner
              Jeff Specter, Senior Planner
                       July, 2013

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                             Table of Contents
                                 Table of Contents
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ................................................................................................ v
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................... 1
     A.    Overview .................................................................................................... 1
     B.    Public Participation .................................................................................... 1
     C.    Consistency with Other Elements of the General Plan .............................. 2
CHAPTER 2: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT .......................................................... 5
     A.    Population Characteristics ......................................................................... 5
           1.     Population Growth Trends .............................................................. 5
           2.     Age.................................................................................................. 6
           3.     Race, Ethnicity and Citizenship ....................................................... 7
     B.    Household Characteristics ......................................................................... 8
           1.     Household Composition and Size ................................................... 8
           2.     Housing Tenure............................................................................... 9
           3.     Overcrowding .................................................................................. 9
           4.     Household Income ........................................................................ 10
           5.     Overpayment................................................................................. 13
     C.    Employment ............................................................................................. 14
           1.     Current Employment ..................................................................... 14
           2.     Projected Job Growth .................................................................... 15
           3.     Jobs-Housing Balance .................................................................. 16
     D.    Housing Stock Characteristics ................................................................. 18
           1.     Housing Type and Growth Trends ................................................ 18
           2.     Housing Age and Conditions ......................................................... 19
           3.     Vacancy ........................................................................................ 20
           4.     Housing Cost................................................................................. 21
     E.    Special Needs Housing............................................................................ 24
           1.     Persons with Disabilities ............................................................... 25
           2.     Elderly ........................................................................................... 26
           3.     Large Households ......................................................................... 27
           4.     Female-Headed Households ........................................................ 28
           5.     Farmworkers ................................................................................. 29
           6.     Homeless Persons ........................................................................ 30
     F.    Assisted Housing at Risk of Conversion .................................................. 36
           1.     Units at Risk .................................................................................. 39
           2.     Preservation Cost Analysis ........................................................... 39
           3.     Resources and Programs for Preservation ................................... 40
                                                                                                                          i
                                                                        Thousand Oaks General Plan
Table of Contents                                            Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
      G.    Future Growth Needs............................................................................... 40
            1.     Overview of the Regional Housing Needs Assessment ................ 40
            2.     2014-2021 RHNA Allocation ......................................................... 41
CHAPTER 3: RESOURCES ......................................................................................... 43
      A.    Land Resources ....................................................................................... 43
            1.     Units Preserved............................................................................. 43
            2.     Densities for Lower, Moderate and Above Moderate Income
                   Housing ......................................................................................... 43
            3.     Inventory of Sites for Housing Development ................................. 44
      B.    Financial and Administrative Resources .................................................. 48
            1.     State and Federal Resources ....................................................... 48
            2.     Local Resources ........................................................................... 50
      C.    Energy Conservation Opportunities ......................................................... 53
CHAPTER 4: CONSTRAINTS ...................................................................................... 55
      A.    Governmental Constraints ....................................................................... 55
            1.     Land Use Plans and Regulations .................................................. 55
            2.     Development Processing Procedures ........................................... 69
            3.     Development Fees and Improvement Requirements .................... 71
            4.     Inclusionary Housing Ordinance ................................................... 73
            5.     National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.......................... 74
      B.    Non-Governmental Constraints ............................................................... 74
            1.     Environmental Constraints ............................................................ 74
            2.     Infrastructure Constraints .............................................................. 75
            3.     Land and Construction Costs ........................................................ 76
            4.     Cost and Availability of Financing ................................................. 77
      C.    Fair Housing ............................................................................................ 77
CHAPTER 5: EVALUATION OF THE 2006-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT..................... 79
CHAPTER 6: HOUSING ACTION PLAN ...................................................................... 97
      A.    Units Approved and Not Built ................................................................. 103
      B.    Vacant Land........................................................................................... 103
      C.    Underutilized Sites/Redevelopment Potential ........................................ 103
      D.    Pending Projects with Affordable Housing Partner ................................ 103
CHAPTER 7 APPENDICES ........................................................................................ 105
ii
Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                           Table of Contents
TABLES
Table II-1 Population Trends 1990-2010 - Thousand Oaks vs. Ventura County ...................... 6
Table II-2 Age Distribution - Thousand Oaks vs. Ventura County.............................................. 7
Table II-3A Race/Ethnicity - Thousand Oaks vs. Ventura County ............................................. 7
Table II-3B Citizenship Status - Thousand Oaks vs. Ventura County ....................................... 8
Table II-4 Household Composition - Thousand Oaks vs. Ventura County ................................ 9
Table II-5 Household Tenure - Thousand Oaks vs. Ventura County ......................................... 9
Table II-6 Overcrowding - Thousand Oaks vs. Ventura County............................................... 10
Table II-7A Median Household Income - Cities and Ventura County ...................................... 11
Table II-7B Income Distribution - Thousand Oaks vs. Ventura County ................................... 11
Table II-7C Annual Income by Source - Thousand Oaks ......................................................... 12
Table II-8 Overpayment by Income Category - Thousand Oaks vs. Ventura County ............ 13
Table II-9 Labor Force - Thousand Oaks vs. Ventura County.................................................. 14
Table II-10 Employment by Occupation - Thousand Oaks ....................................................... 15
Table II-11 Projected Job Growth by Occupation 2008-2018 - Oxnard-Thousand Oaks-
               Ventura Metropolitan Statistical Area ................................................................. 16
Table II-12A Job Location for Thousand Oaks Residents ........................................................ 17
Table II-13 Housing by Type - Thousand Oaks ......................................................................... 18
Table II-14 Age of Housing Stock - Thousand Oaks vs. Ventura County................................ 19
Table II-15 Kitchen and Plumbing Facilities - Thousand Oaks vs. Ventura County................ 20
Table II-16 Housing Vacancy Rates - Thousand Oaks vs. Ventura County ........................... 21
Table II-17 Income Categories and Affordable Housing Costs for 2012 - Ventura County... 22
Table II-18 2011 Home Sales by Zip Code and Housing Type - Thousand Oaks vs. Ventura
               County .................................................................................................................. 23
Table II-19 2012 Apartment Rents by No. of Bedrooms - Thousand Oaks vs. Ventura
               County Market Area ............................................................................................. 24
Table II-20 Non-institutionalized Persons with Disabilities by Age Group - Thousand Oaks . 25
Table II-21 Elderly Households by Tenure - Thousand Oaks .................................................. 27
Table II-22 Household Size by Tenure - Thousand Oaks......................................................... 28
Table II-23 Household Type by Tenure - Thousand Oaks ....................................................... 29
Table II-24 Agricultural Employment - Thousand Oaks vs. Ventura County ........................... 30
Table II-25 2012 Homeless Profile - Thousand Oaks vs. Ventura County .............................. 30
Table II-25A Ventura County Emergency Shelter and Transitional Housing1 ......................... 31
Table II-25B Homeless Facilities and Services in Thousand Oaks.......................................... 34
Table II-25C Social Service Programs that Assist the Homeless............................................. 35
Table II-26 Assisted Affordable Housing Developments in Thousand Oaks........................... 37
Table II-27 RHNA Allocation Detail for Thousand Oaks ........................................................... 41
Table III-1 Densities of Affordable Housing Projects ................................................................. 44
Table III-2 Land Inventory Summary to Meet RHNA................................................................. 48
Table IV-1 General Plan Land Use Element Designations for Residential.............................. 56
Table IV-2 Residential Zones ...................................................................................................... 58
Table IV-3 Permitted Residential Development By Zone ......................................................... 58
Table IV-4 Residential Parking Requirements ........................................................................... 60
Table IV-4A Homeless Assistance Funding .............................................................................. 67
Table IV-5 Average Permit Processing Fees Per Dwelling Unit (2013)................................... 72
                                                                                                                                          iii
                                                                     Thousand Oaks General Plan
Table of Contents                                        Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
Table IV-6 Processing and Development Impact Fees (2013) ................................................ 73
Table IV-7 Land and Construction Costs (2007) ....................................................................... 77
Table V-1 Housing Element Program Evaluation: 2006-2014.................................................. 81
Table V-2 Progress in Achieving Quantified Objectives: 2006-2012 ....................................... 96
Table VI-1 Housing Action Plan: 2014-2021.............................................................................. 99
Table VI-2 Quantified Objectives: 2014-2021 .......................................................................... 101
Appendix
Table A-1 Inventory of Projects Approved and Not Yet Built .................................................. 107
Table A-2 Inventory of Vacant Land (See Figure A-1 for Site Locations) .............................. 109
Table A-3 Inventory of Underutilized Sites with Redevelopment Potential ............................ 117
Table A-4 Pending Project with Affordable Housing Partner .................................................. 121
FIGURES
Figure A-1    Vacant Sites with Potential for Residential Development ............................... 123
Figure A-2    Underutilized Sites with Potential for Residential Development ..................... 124
Figure A-3    Pending project with Affordable Housing Partner ............................................ 125
iv
Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                    Executive Summary
                                 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The City of Thousand Oaks has been and continues to be a proponent of housing for
persons of all income levels and special needs. This Housing Element Update identifies
new strategies for expanding housing opportunities during the 2014-2021 planning
period. Major components of the Housing Element include:
      A review of progress made under the previous Housing Element (2006-2014). A
       total of 932 homes were permitted for construction, rehabilitated, or conserved as
       affordable housing:
       o       Permits for 669 new homes were issued from 2006 through 2012. Of
               these, 60 permits were issued to build an affordable housing project. The
               project includes 30 apartments designated for extremely low-income
               homeless persons and persons with disabilities.
       o       173 existing housing units were rehabilitated.
       o       90 existing housing units were conserved as affordable housing.
      An assessment of existing and projected housing needs for the 2014-2021
       projection period (1/1/14-10/31/21), including the City’s share of the regional
       need for housing as mandated by State law. The City’s share of the regional
       need for this time frame of 7.75 years is 192 units.
      An analysis of constraints to housing development.
      A detailed inventory of land where new housing can be built, including vacant
       residential and underutilized residential sites
      Continued support for the development of affordable housing, including financial
       support to affordable housing providers with use of the City’s Housing Trust
       Fund.
      Continuation of housing programs relative to fair housing and housing for
       persons with special needs.
                                                                                        v

                                                Thousand Oaks General Plan
Executive Summary                       Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                  This page intentionally left blank.
vi
     Chapter I
Introduction

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 1
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                               Introduction
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
A.      Overview
State law requires the preparation of a Housing Element as part of a jurisdiction's
General Plan (Government Code §65302(c)). Each Housing Element must be updated
periodically and is subject to review and certification by the State Department of
Housing and Community Development. This update addresses housing needs from
January 1, 2014 to October 31, 2021 as required by State law.
As specified in Government Code Section §65583, all Housing Elements must contain
the following:
          A review of progress made under the previous Housing Element
          An assessment of existing and projected housing needs
          A detailed inventory of sites where new housing can be built
          An analysis of constraints to the development of new housing
          Opportunities for energy conservation for residential development
          An analysis of existing assisted housing that could change from low-income
           to market rate housing during the next 10 years
          Housing goals, objectives and policies relative to the preservation and
           development of housing
          Programs for implementing the housing goals, objectives and policies
B.      Public Participation
Public participation is an important component of the planning process in Thousand
Oaks. This update to the Housing Element has provided City residents and other
interested parties with numerous opportunities for review and comment.
To solicit public input early in the preparation process, a workshop was held at City Hall
on November 8, 2012. Public workshop notices were mailed to individuals and
organizations known to be interested in affordable housing and housing for persons with
special needs. Notices were also published in the local newspaper, posted at both
libraries and City Hall, on the cable television public access bulletin board and the City’s
website. A news release was also sent to local newspapers. About 10 people attended
the workshop, including a reporter for the Acorn newspaper. Written comments were
also received in response to the meeting notice.
The following comments were received at the workshop or in written correspondence:
        a. Consider acquisition of underutilized property in business parks.
        b. What is the City involvement in bank-owned properties?
                                                                                           1

Chapter 1                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Introduction                                         Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
       c. High density zoning is critical for affordable housing.
       d. Consider deferring or waiving development impact fees to reduce the cost of
           affordable housing.
       e. Address the effect of rent increases in Ranch Mobile Home Park on the City’s
           stock of affordable housing.
       f. Take into account the growing housing needs of seniors and "baby boomers"
           who will become seniors.
       g. Address the housing needs of persons with disabilities (e.g. persons with
           brain injuries), not only those with developmental disabilities.
       h. The City needs more than the RHNA allocation of 192 units to meet the
           housing needs of low income households and homeless people.
       i.  The City should encourage the Area Housing Authority to give housing
           preference to homeless families and seek Veterans Affairs Supportive
           Housing (VASH) vouchers from the Department of Veterans Affairs for
           homeless veterans.
       j.  Consider some new one story homes for seniors, perhaps with 2 master
           suites, a third bedroom/office, lots of storage, that are close to shopping,
           doctors, etc. Encourage a development like Leisure Village.
These public comments were considered during preparation of the Draft Housing
Element. For example, a discussion was added pertaining to the City’s efforts to
mediate a rental rate agreement between mobile home park owners and mobile home
park residents.
Public comments were solicited on the Draft Housing Element Update. Notices were
circulated to individuals and organizations representing the interests of lower income
and special needs households. Comments from the general public were solicited on the
City’s website at www.toaks.org. The draft document was made available for review at
City Hall, at Public Libraries, and the City’s website. The public was also able to provide
feedback at the Planning Commission study session on the Draft Housing Element
Update that took place on February 4, 2013.
C.     Consistency with Other Elements of the General Plan
State law requires that all portions of the General Plan be internally consistent. A
number of other General Plan Elements are related to the Housing Element, or serve to
carry out the goals and policies of the Housing Element. Five elements in particular
address environmental or man-made factors that limit the location or type of housing
that can be developed: Land Use, Safety, Noise, Open Space, and Conservation. The
Safety and Noise Elements address hazards or nuisances that should be avoided in the
location of housing, or mitigated in the construction of housing. The Open Space and
Conservation Elements concern land resources that should be protected from
2

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                      Chapter 1
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                             Introduction
development. All of these factors affect the type, location and cost of housing and could
also affect the City’s ability to meet the goals of the Housing Element.
The Housing Element is closely related to development policies contained in the Land
Use Element, which establishes the type, intensity and distribution of land uses
throughout the City. The Land Use Element determines the number and type of housing
units that can be constructed in the various land use categories. Areas designated for
commercial and industrial uses create employment opportunities, which in turn create
demand for housing. The Circulation Element establishes the location and scale of
streets, highways and other transportation routes that provide access to residential
neighborhoods.
                                                                                        3

Chapter 1                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Introduction                       Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
             This page intentionally left blank.
4
       Chapter II
Housing Needs
  Assessment

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                              Housing Needs Assessment
CHAPTER 2: HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
The City of Thousand Oaks is located in the southeastern corner of Ventura County, in an
area known as the Conejo Valley. The City was incorporated in 1964 and encompasses
nearly 55 square miles. Thousand Oaks has grown considerably since its incorporation
and is a desirable and attractive residential location for many households.
The City is economically diverse and provides a range of employment, lifestyle, and
housing opportunities. Since its incorporation it has grown from 20,000 residents to
126,683 in 2010. The City is surrounded by approximately 15,000 acres of open space.
Thousand Oaks also has a significant employment base, with an estimated 1.4 jobs per
housing unit in 2007. The population is also relatively affluent, but it includes people of
all income levels.
The American Community Service (ACS) is a national sample survey performed by the
US Census Bureau. It supplements the US Census which is completed every 10 years.
According to the ACS, the estimated median household income in 2010 was $95,281,
while the median household income for Ventura County was $75,348. However, the
median household income figure used to determine eligibility for affordable housing
programs is set by California Department of Housing and Community Development
(HCD). HCD established a median household income of $86,700 in 2010 and $89,300
for 2012 (Source: California Dept. of Housing and Community Development).
This chapter examines general population and household characteristics and trends,
such as age, race and ethnicity, employment, household composition and size,
household income, and persons with special needs. Characteristics of the existing
housing stock (e.g., number of units and type, tenure, age and condition, costs) are also
addressed. Finally, the City’s projected housing growth needs based on the 2014-2021
Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) are examined.
The Housing Needs Assessment utilizes the most recent data available. In many cases the
only available data is from the 2010 U.S. Census (data gathered as of April 1, 2010).
Additional data was obtained from California Department of Finance (DOF), California
Employment Development Department (EDD), Southern California Association of
Governments (SCAG) and other relevant sources. In addition, the City’s Consolidated Plan
provided useful information. The Consolidated Plan (CP) is a five-year strategy submitted to
the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for the expenditure of
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds. The CDBG funds are used for capital
projects and social services that primarily benefit lower income persons.
A.      Population Characteristics
         1.     Population Growth Trends
In the two decades following its incorporation, Thousand Oaks’ population grew rapidly.
During the 1965-1975 decade, the City population more than doubled. The population
increased from 19,300 persons in 1965 to 53,754 persons in 1975 and averaged a yearly
                                                                                           5

Chapter 2                                                     Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                                 Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
growth rate of 11.8 percent. In the decade 1975-1985, the City continued its rapid growth
rate. By January 1, 1985, the total City population count was 94,160 persons.
After 1985 the City’s growth rate decreased from its rapid pace of the previous decades.
The California Department of Finance estimates that the population of Thousand Oaks
as of January 1, 2012 was 128,031, representing a 9.4% increase since 2000, less than
1% per year. The recent population growth rate is less than the recent growth rate for
Ventura County (see Table II-1).
                                              TABLE II-1
           POPULATION TRENDS 1990-2010 - THOUSAND OAKS VS. VENTURA COUNTY
                                                                Growth      Growth
                                    1990    2000       2010    1990-2000   2000-2010
       Thousand Oaks              104,352  117,005   126,683     12.1%       8.3%
       Ventura County             669,016  753,197   823,318     12.6%       9.3%
       Sources: 1990,2000 and 2010 Census)
According to the population estimates provided by the California Department of
Finance, the City’s growth rate slowed dramatically between the 2000 and 2010 Census
counts. The City’s population grew much faster during the first half of the decade than
the second half of the decade.
           2.      Age
Housing needs are influenced by the age characteristics of the population. Different
age groups have different housing needs based on lifestyles, family types, income
levels, and housing preference. Table II-2 provides a comparison of the City’s and
County’s population by age group in 2010. This table shows that the City’s population is
slightly older than Ventura County as a whole, with a median age of about 41.5 as
compared to the County median of 36.2 years.
The City’s population over age 85 is the fastest growing age group, having increased by
56.1% from 2000 to 2010 (1,862 persons to 2,907 persons). Adults between the ages
of 25 and 44 have been declining in number, with the population of this group
decreasing by 15.4% from 2000 to 2010 (35,293 persons to 29,853 persons)1.
1 2000 and 2010 Census
6

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                               Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                     Housing Needs Assessment
                                                  TABLE II-2
                   AGE DISTRIBUTION - THOUSAND OAKS VS. VENTURA COUNTY
                                            Thousand Oaks          Ventura County
                     Age Group            Persons        %      Persons        %
                 Under 18 years             30,076        23.7 211,915            25.7
                 18 to 24 years             10,226         8.1    81,371           9.9
                 25 to 44 years             29,853        23.5 216,543            26.3
                 45 to 64 years             37,964        30.0 217,180            26.4
                 65 to 74 years              9,971         7.9    51,396           6.2
                 75 to 84                    5,686         4.5    30,870           3.8
                 85 and over                 2,907         2.3    14,043           1.7
                 Total                     126,683       100.0 823,318          100.0
                 Median Age                       41.5                  36.2
                 Source: 2010 Census, Table QT-P1
          3.       Race, Ethnicity and Citizenship
The racial and ethnic composition of the City differs from the County in that a lower
proportion of City residents are Hispanic/Latino or racial minorities. The 2010 Census
showed that approximately 70.2% of City residents are non-Hispanic white, contrasted with
48.7% for the County as a whole. The percentage of Hispanics residing in the City
increased from 13.1% of the population in 2000 to 16.9% in 2010. Asians, with about 8.6%
of the City population, represent the largest non-Hispanic minority group (Table II-3).
                                                 TABLE II-3A
                    RACE/ETHNICITY - THOUSAND OAKS VS. VENTURA COUNTY
                                                         Thousand Oaks        Ventura County
                                                       Persons      %      Persons       %
      Not Hispanic or Latino
          -White                                         88,970       70.2   400,868      48.7
          -Black or African American                      1,508        1.2    13,082        1.6
          -American Indian/Alaska Native                    231        0.2     2,389         .3
          -Asian                                         10,928        8.6    54,099        6.5
          -Native Hawaiian/Pacific Islander                 134        0.1     1,353         .2
          -Other races or 2+ races                        3,571        2.8    19,960        2.4
      Hispanic or Latino (any race)                      21,341       16.9   331,567      40.3
      Total                                             126,683     100.0    823,318     100.0
      Source: 2010 Census, SF2 Table DP-1
Residents who are not U.S. citizens might have a more difficult time earning a living and
acquiring affordable housing than U.S. citizens. Estimates of the citizenship status of
the City and County residents are provided in Table II-3B. No information was available
regarding the legal status of the residents that were not U.S. citizens. The estimates
shown in Table II-3B indicate that 80.8 % of the City’s residents became U.S. citizens
                                                                                                 7

Chapter 2                                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                                           Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
by birth, 9.9 % became U.S. citizens by naturalization and 9.3% were not U.S. citizens.
In contrast, approximately 13.2% of County residents were not U.S. citizens.
Non-citizens who recently entered the U.S. are likely to have a harder time earning a
living and securing affordable housing than those who entered the U.S. a long time ago.
More than half (51.5%) of City residents who are not U.S. citizens entered the U.S.
since 2000. On the other hand, 39.4% of the non-citizen residents of the County entered
the U.S. since 2000.
                                                  TABLE II-3B
                  CITIZENSHIP STATUS - THOUSAND OAKS VS. VENTURA COUNTY
                                                            Thousand Oaks              Ventura County
                                                          Persons           %        Persons      %
       Total                                               127,041                    825,706
           -U.S. Citizen by birth                          102,673          80.82 635,731         76.99
           -U.S. citizen by naturalization                  12,600            9.92     81,242      9.84
           -Not a U.S citizen                               11,768          9.263 108,733        13.172
       Year of Entry of Non-Citizens
           -2000 or later                                     6,060           51.5     42,870     39.43
           -1990 to 1999                                      2,696         22.91      34,196     31.45
           -1980 to 1989                                      2,187         18.58      20,040     18.43
           -Before 1980                                          825          7.01     11,627     10.69
       Source: 2010 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates: Tables B05001 and B05005
B.      Household Characteristics
        1.       Household Composition and Size
Household characteristics are important indicators of the type and size of housing
needed in a city. The Census defines a “household” as all persons occupying a housing
unit, which may include single persons living alone, families related through marriage or
blood, or unrelated persons who share a single unit. Persons in group quarters such as
dormitories, retirement or convalescent homes, or other group living situations are
included in population totals, but are not considered households.
The City of Thousand Oaks had 45,836 households as reported in the 2010 Census.
Table II-4 provides a comparison of households by type for the City and Ventura County
as a whole. Family households in 2010 comprised approximately 73% of all households
in the City. The percentage of family households with children in the City decreased
from 37.3% in 2000 to 33.4% in 2010. The number of single-person households
increased from 19.6% in 2000 to 21.2% in 2010. The City’s average household size is
smaller than Ventura County as a whole (2.73 persons per household city vs. 3.04
persons for the County).
8

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                          Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                Housing Needs Assessment
                                             TABLE II-4
             HOUSEHOLD COMPOSITION - THOUSAND OAKS VS. VENTURA COUNTY
                                              Thousand Oaks         Ventura County
               Household Type              Households     %      Households       %
       Family Households
        -Without Children Under 18              18,089      39.5     103,095       39.6
        -With Children Under 18                 15,302      33.4       94,083      35.2
       Non-family Households
        -Single living alone                     9,717      21.2       53,037      19.9
        -2 or more                               2,717       5.9       16,705        6.3
       Total Households                         45,825      100      266,920        100
       Average Household Size                      2.73                   3.04
       Source: 2010 Census, Table DP-1
         2.       Housing Tenure
Housing tenure (owner vs. renter) is an important indicator of the housing market.
Communities need an adequate supply of units available both for rent and for sale in
order to accommodate a range of households with varying incomes, family sizes and
composition, and lifestyles. The percentage of owner-occupied homes in the City
decreased from 75% in 2000 to 73% in 2010. Table II-5 provides a comparison of the
number of owner-occupied and renter-occupied units in the City in 2010 as compared to
the County as a whole. It reveals a higher level of homeownership in the City,
approximately 8 percentage points higher than the County.
                                             TABLE II-5
                 HOUSEHOLD TENURE - THOUSAND OAKS VS. VENTURA COUNTY
                                                Thousand Oaks      Ventura County
                     Tenure Type               Units    Percent    Units     Percent
          Owner Occupied                        33,501      73.1  174,168        65.3
          Renter Occupied                       12,335      26.9   92,752        34.7
          Total Occupied Units                  45,836       100  266,920        100
          Source: 2010 Census, Table QT-H3
         3.       Overcrowding
Overcrowding is often closely related to household income and the cost of housing.
The U.S. Census Bureau considers a household to be overcrowded when there is more
than one person per room, excluding bathrooms and kitchens, with severe
overcrowding when there are more than 1.5 residents per room. Overcrowded
households are usually a reflection of a shortage of affordable housing. The percentage
of overcrowded households in the City decreased from 2.4% in 2000 to 1.3% in 2010.
                                                                                            9
Chapter 2                                                                Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                                        Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
As show in Table II-6, overcrowding in Thousand Oaks in 2010 was significantly less
than the County as a whole.
                                                  TABLE II-6
                     OVERCROWDING - THOUSAND OAKS VS. VENTURA COUNTY
                                                 Thousand Oaks              Ventura County
                                               Households         %        Households    %
             Occupied Units                          45,316                    265,904
               Overcrowded                              496        1.1          11,516     4.3
               Severely Overcrowded                       72       0.2           4,555     1.7
             Source: 2010 CensusDP04 2010 American Community Survey 1-year
Overcrowding has been more prevalent among renters than for owners. The 2000
Census showed that approximately 6.5% of the City’s renter-occupied households were
overcrowded compared to 1% for owner-occupied households. The 2010 Census did
not provide overcrowding information by tenure.
Lack of affordable housing is the primary source of overcrowding. Several programs
described in the Housing Action Plan (Chapter VI) address the problems of affordability
and overcrowding, including Program 1 (affordable ownership housing), Program 2
(Affordable Housing Trust Fund), Program 3 (inclusionary housing in-lieu and linkage
fees), Program 5 (10-Year Plan to End Homelessness), Program 6 (special needs
households), Program 7 (acquisition and rehabilitation of existing housing), Program 9
(affordable housing at risk of conversion to market rate), Program 10 (ongoing
affordability of affordable units), and Program 11 (extension of existing affordability
covenants).
          4.       Household Income
Household income is a primary factor affecting housing needs in a community, as the
ability of residents to afford housing is directly related to household income. “Median”
income is the figure at which half of the households have greater income, and half have
lower incomes.
Table II-7A shows the median household income in Thousand Oaks and other
jurisdictions based on the 2010 American Community Survey 5-Year Estimate. Neither
the 1-year or 3-year estimates were available for all jurisdictions. The median household
income in the City was one of the highest in Ventura County.
10

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                        Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                           Housing Needs Assessment
                                                  TABLE II-7A
                MEDIAN HOUSEHOLD INCOME - CITIES AND VENTURA COUNTY
                                               Median Household              % of County
                    Jurisdiction                      Income               Median Income
              Camarillo                                        $81,518                      108
              Fillmore                                         $58,076                       77
              Moorpark                                        $101,962                      135
              Ojai                                             $61,990                       82
              Oxnard                                           $59,015                       78
              Port Hueneme                                     $51,555                       68
              Santa Paula                                      $51,233                       68
              Simi Valley                                      $88,675                      118
              Thousand Oaks                                    $98,715                      131
              Ventura, City                                    $65,782                       87
              Ventura County                                   $75,348                      100
              California                                       $60,883                       81
              Source: DP-3 Selected Economic Characteristics; 2010 American Community Survey 5-
              Year Estimate (2010 Inflation-Adjusted Dollars)
Median household income provides only a partial insight into the City’s income profile. A
more detailed breakdown of households by income is shown in Table II-7B. It shows
that approximately 27% of City residents live in households with incomes of less than
$50,000, in comparison to 35% of the residents in Ventura County. Households with
limited income usually have a higher incidence of housing problems such as
overpayment (paying more than 30% of income on housing) and overcrowding.
                                                  TABLE II-7B
              INCOME DISTRIBUTION - THOUSAND OAKS VS. VENTURA COUNTY
               Household Income                  Thousand Oaks             Ventura County
                   and Benefits                Persons          %       Persons           %
             Less than $10,000                     1,777           3.9       9,235            3.5
             $10,000 to $14,999                    1,109           2.4      11,258            4.2
             $15,000 to $24,999                    3,079           6.8      21,796            8.2
             $25,000 to $34,999                    2,709           6.0      19,825            7.5
             $35,000 to $49,999                    3,598           7.9      30,816          11.6
             $50,000 to $74,999                    6,086         13.4       45,462          17.1
             $76,000 to $99,999                    5,264         11.6       35,235          13.3
             $100,000 to $149,999                  9,666         21.3       47,914          18.0
             $150,000 to $199,999                  4,683         10.3       21,439            8.1
             $200,000 or more                      7,345         16.2       22,924            8.6
             Mean (Average)                   $120,468                    $92,290
             Median                             $95,281                   $71,864
             Source: 2010 American Community Survey, Table DP03: Selected Economic
             Characteristics:1-Year Estimates
                                                                                                        11

Chapter 2                                                                     Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                                             Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
Information about income sources is provided in Table II-7C. It shows, for example, that
approximately 84.7% of the City’s 45,316 households had earned income and 27.3%
received social security income. The sum of the percentages exceeds 100% because
many households receive income from multiple sources.
                                                     TABLE II-7C
                              ANNUAL INCOME BY SOURCE - THOUSAND OAKS
            Income Source                  Households                Percent of All          Median Income
                                                                      Households              from Source
       Earnings                                       38,384                       84.7             $116,526
       Social Security                                12,373                       27.3               $17,762
       Retirement Income                               7,672                       16.9               $31,357
       Suppl. Social Security                          1,191                         2.6               $9,012
       Cash public assistance                             507                        1.1               $9,565
       Food stamps                                     1,048                         2.3         not identified
       Source: 2010 American Community Survey, Table DP03, Selected Economic Characteristics
The 2010 Census did not identify the median income attributable to food stamps.
However, the average value of food stamps received in California in 2010 was
approximately $339 per month per household, or $4,068 per year (Source: USDA’s 2011
Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Report No. SNAP-11 CHAR: “Characteristics
of Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program Households: Fiscal Year 2010”).
Table II-7C also does not provide a complete picture of household finances. For
example, it does not include money obtained from interest, dividends, rents, trusts,
alimony, child support, unemployment insurance, disability insurance or workers
compensation. It also does not include subsidies that augment the purchasing power of
income-eligible households.
Lower income households are also eligible to receive earned income tax credits and
subsidies for child care, transportation, school breakfasts and lunches, medical care,
utilities, college education, home repairs, and rent. For example, the Federal earned
income tax credit supplements the earnings of workers with low wages. Households
claiming the credit can reduce their tax burden and obtain a refund if the credit exceeds
their tax liability. In 2012, the maximum credit varied from $475 for households with no
children to $5,891 for households with 3 or more children. Nationally, households that
claimed this credit on their 2011 returns received an average refund of $2,240 (Source:
“Don't overlook this $6,000 tax credit” by Blake Ellis; CNN Money, April 12, 2012).
Rent subsidies also increase the purchasing power of lower income households. As of
August of 2012, 1,037 households lived in subsidized rental housing operated by Many
Mansions (395 units), Shadows TC Investors LP (147 units), Area Housing Authority
and Oak Creek Housing Investors (57 units), Conejo Future Apartments (90 units), the
Area Housing Authority (267 units) and others. Many, but not all, of the households
living in subsidized rental housing received assistance through the Federal Section 8
program. As of May 24, 2012, 565 households were receiving an average of $10,931
12

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                 Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                               Housing Needs Assessment
per year in rent assistance through the Section 8 program (Source: Area Housing
Authority website).
            5.        Overpayment
According to State housing policy, overpayment occurs when housing costs exceed 30%
of gross household income. Table II-8 displays housing overpayment estimates for
Thousand Oaks and Ventura County provided by the 2010 American Community
Survey. Of the renter households in Thousand Oaks, 55% paid more than 30% of their
gross income on housing. Approximately 40.5% of the owner households overpaid for
housing. As expected, overpayment was more prevalent for households in the lower
income brackets. Of the households who made less than $50,000 per year, 93.9% of
the renters and 74.6% of the owners overpaid for housing. In comparison, of the
households in Ventura County with incomes of less than $50,000 per year, 84.2% of the
renters and 63.8% of the owners overpaid for housing.
                                                     TABLE II-8
         OVERPAYMENT BY INCOME CATEGORY - THOUSAND OAKS VS. VENTURA COUNTY
                                           Renters                                          Owners
     Household               Thousand Oaks Ventura County                  Thousand Oaks            Ventura County
        Income             House- % over- House- % over-                   House % over- House- % over-
                             holds     paying       holds paying            holds      paying holds             paying
Less than $20,000             1,957        87.4 16,850             84.6       2,251        97.6 10,677             80.6
$20,000 to $34,999            1,463      100.0 16,927              87.9       2,624        75.1 14,440             57.3
$35,000 to $49,999            1,636        96.3 14,683             79.7       1,962        47.7 15,543             58.3
$50,000 to $74,999            2,335        67.1 18,251             42.4       3,751        47.8 26,778             54.3
$75,000 or more               5,551        14.7 25,667             11.0     21,228         28.2 101,387            27.5
Total                        12,942        55.0 92,378             55.6     31,816         40.5 168,825            40.5
Less than $50,000             5,056        93.9 48,460             84.2       6,837        74.6 40,660             63.8
Source: 2010 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates; Table B25106: Tenure by Housing Costs as a Percentage of
Household Income in the Past 12 Months
Extremely low income (ELI) households are households with incomes that are less than
30 percent of the area median income. The housing affordability problems of extremely
low income people are particularly severe. They have difficulty obtaining decent, safe or
affordable housing and may be homeless or in danger of becoming homeless. In 2010,
the income limit for an ELI household was $26,000 per year (based on a 4-person
household). ELI households include the income group shown in Table II-8 who made less
than $20,000 and part of the group who made between $20,000 and $34,999 per year.
About 88.5 percent of the households in these two groups overpaid for housing in 2010.
The housing affordability problems for ELI households have become more severe over
time due to the increasing costs of housing. The Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD) generated information on housing affordability for ELI households
in 2000 (see Table 8A). At that time, the income limit for an ELI household was $20,550.
In 2000, approximately 74 percent of the ELI households in Thousand Oaks paid more
than 30 percent of their income towards housing.
                                                                                                                    13
Chapter 2                                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                                          Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                  TABLE II-8A:
               OVERPAYMENT BY EXTREMELY LOW-INCOME HOUSEHOLDS (2000)
                                                                   Renters             Owners       Total
 Households (all income levels)                                          10,207            31,539    41,746
 Percent ELI households                                                      12.6             4.4        6.4
 Percent ELI households overpaying for housing                                  69             79         74
Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) Data Book, 2000
Several programs described in the Housing Action Plan (Chapter VI) address the
problems of overpayment, including Program 1 (affordable ownership housing), Program
3 (inclusionary housing in-lieu and linkage fees), Program 5 (10-Year Plan to End
Homelessness), Program 6 (special needs households), Program 7 (acquisition and
rehabilitation of existing housing), Program 9 (affordable housing at risk of conversion to
market rate), Program 10 (ongoing affordability of affordable units), Program 11
(extension of existing affordability covenants, and Program 12 (housing for persons with
disabilities). Program 2 (Housing Trust Fund) calls for, where feasible, giving priority to
housing projects that address the needs of extremely low income households.
C.      Employment
Employment is an important factor affecting housing needs within a community. The
jobs available in each employment sector and the wages for these jobs affect the type
and size of housing residents can afford.
        1.      Current Employment
Current employment and projected job growth have a significant influence on housing
needs during this planning period. Table II-9 shows that the City had a workforce
(employed plus unemployed) of 69,324 persons, or about 69% of the working-age
population, as reported in the 2010 Census. Approximately 31% of the City’s working-
age residents were not in the labor force. This table shows that the characteristics of the
City’s working-age population are similar to those of the County population.
                                                    TABLE II-9
                      LABOR FORCE - THOUSAND OAKS VS. VENTURA COUNTY
                                                    Thousand Oaks                 Ventura County
                Employment Status                   Persons          %           Persons       %
             Employed                                    62,905      62.5           391,498    61.1
             Unemployed                                   6,419        6.4           44,133     6.9
             Not in labor force                          31,333      31.1           204,646    32.0
             Total population age 16+                  100,657                      640,277
             Source: 2010 Census, Table DP-3: Selected Economic Characteristics
In 2010, approximately 49% of the City’s working residents were employed in
management and professional occupations (Table II-10). Approximately 28% were
14

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                       Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                         Housing Needs Assessment
engaged in sales and office occupations. A low percentage of workers (about 14%)
were employed in service related occupations such as waiters, waitresses and
beauticians. Blue collar occupations such as machine operators, assemblers, farming,
transportation, handlers and laborers constituted about 8% of the working population.
                                               TABLE II-10
                         EMPLOYMENT BY OCCUPATION - THOUSAND OAKS
                                   Occupation                                Jobs          %
            Management, professional and related                             30,840         49.1
            Service                                                           9,048         14.4
            Sales and office                                                 17,845         28.4
            Farming, fishing and forestry                                         42         0.0
            Construction, extraction, and maintenance                         2,887          4.6
            Production, transportation, and material moving                   2,137          3.4
            Total                                                            62,799
            Source: 2010 American Community Survey, Table DP-03 and S2401 1-Year Estimates
         2.      Projected Job Growth
Future housing needs are affected by the number and type of new jobs created during
this planning period. Table II-11 shows projected job growth by occupation for the
Oxnard-Thousand Oaks-Ventura Metropolitan Statistical Area (Ventura County) along
with median hourly wages for the period 2008-2018. Total employment in Ventura
County is expected to grow by 7.7 percent. The overall growth is expected to add
26,500 new jobs and bring the employment of Ventura County to 371,400 by 2018.
Table II-11 shows that employment in some high-wage occupations is expected to
grow, including: computer and mathematical (12.4%); life, physical, and social science
(14%); and healthcare practitioners and technical (16.9%). However, the number of low-
wage service jobs is also expected to grow, including health care support (22.2%), food
preparation and serving (14%), building and grounds cleaning and maintenance (5%),
sales (7.5%), and personal care and service (15.9%). Generally, residents that are
employed in low-paying occupations have more difficulty obtaining adequate housing
than residents in high-paying occupations.
                                                                                                       15
Chapter 2                                                                 Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                                            Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                      TABLE II-11
                         PROJECTED JOB GROWTH BY OCCUPATION 2008-2018 -
              OXNARD-THOUSAND OAKS-VENTURA METROPOLITAN STATISTICAL AREA
                                                          Annual Average       Employment      Median
                 Occupational Title                          Employment          Change        Hourly
                                                             2008    2018 Numerical Percent Wage*
Total, All Occupations                                     344,900 371,400     26,500     7.7 $17.55
Management                                                   25,340 26,110        770     3.0 $48.71
Business and Financial Operations                            15,950 17,580      1,630    10.2 $30.88
Computer and Mathematical                                     8,240   9,260     1,020    12.4 $37.56
Architecture and Engineering                                  8,150   8,630       480     5.9 $40.68
Life, Physical, and Social Science                            5,220   5,950       730    14.0 $33.21
Community and Social Services                                 3,880   4,140       260     6.7 $22.49
Legal                                                         2,170   2,230        60     2.8 $45.05
Education, Training, and Library                             17,890 18,700        810     4.5 $25.10
Arts, Design, Entertainment, Sports & Media                   4,780   5,130       350     7.3 $23.60
Healthcare Practitioners and Technical                       12,330 14,410      2,080    16.9 $35.12
Healthcare Support                                            7,060   8,630     1,570    22.2 $13.87
Protective Service                                            5,480   5,690       210     3.8 $19.49
Food Preparation and Serving Related                         25,820 29,430      3,610    14.0     $9.33
Building & Grounds Cleaning & Maintenance                    11,680 12,260        580     5.0 $11.55
Personal Care and Service                                    10,850 12,580      1,730    15.9 $11.11
Sales and Related Occupations                                37,200 40,000      2,800     7.5 $12.41
Office and Administrative Support                            53,920 56,060      2,140     4.0 $16.42
Farming, Fishing, and Forestry                               20,750 22,200      1,450     7.0     $9.27
Construction and Extraction                                  17,930 19,030      1,100     6.1 $21.60
Installation, Maintenance, and Repair                        10,870 11,500        630     5.8 $22.05
Production                                                   21,760 22,330        570     2.6 $14.36
Transportation and Material Moving                           17,830 18,540        710     4.0 $12.31
Source: California Employment Development Dept., Oct 7, 2010                                *2010 Wages
            3.       Jobs-Housing Balance
A regional balance of jobs to housing helps to ensure that the demand for housing is
reasonably related to supply. Jobs-housing balance is expressed as a ratio of jobs to
housing units or jobs per household. When the number of jobs significantly exceeds the
housing supply, the rental and for-sale housing markets may become overheated,
requiring households to pay a larger percentage of their income for housing. In
addition, a tight housing market can result in overcrowding and longer commute times
as workers seek more affordable housing in outlying areas.
A desirable jobs/housing ratio can help, but cannot eliminate, housing demand and
traffic congestion problems. This is the case because convenience to employment is
only one factor that people take into account when they choose a home or place of
employment. Published studies show there is a weak correlation between place of
employment and place of residence. More than a dozen studies that quantified the
16
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                              Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                              Housing Needs Assessment
impact of jobs/housing balance on vehicle miles traveled or commute time were
reviewed in a 2010 report.22 After analyzing the studies, the author of the report
concluded: “although some are difficult to summarize, four demonstrate no or almost no
impact, four show a modest impact relative to other factors that influence commuting
choices, and three demonstrate a substantive impact.” A study in the Portland, Oregon
area33 found that only in cases of extreme imbalance did changes in jobs/housing ratio
have a noticeable effect on vehicle miles traveled.
Locally, empirical evidence shows that there is almost no relationship between where
workers reside versus where they work. Workers in Ventura County do a great deal of
in- and out-commuting regardless of the jobs/housing ratio. For example, survey data
taken from 2006 to 2010 indicate that the City of Camarillo had approximately 1.3 jobs
per housing unit (32,790 jobs/24,376 housing units), yet only 36% of its employed
residents had jobs in town. Thousand Oaks had an estimated 1.4 jobs per housing unit
(65,442 jobs/45,776 housing units) and 47% of its employed residents worked in town.
The City of Oxnard had approximately 0.92 jobs per housing unit (46,757 jobs/50,694
housing units), yet 44% of its working residents had jobs in town. In every case, the
majority of the people who worked in these cities commuted in from other areas.44
As of 2010, about 48.7% of all employed Thousand Oaks residents had jobs within the City
limits. Approximately 22.2% of employed Thousand Oaks residents worked elsewhere in
Ventura County and 28.8% worked outside of Ventura County (Table II-12A).
                                                   TABLE II-12A
                            JOB LOCATION FOR THOUSAND OAKS RESIDENTS
                                      Job Location                           Jobs           %
                   Work in Thousand Oaks                                      29,905         48.7
                   Work elsewhere in Ventura County                           13,633         22.2
                   Work in another California county                          17,685         28.8
                   Work outside of California                                    184           0.3
                   Total workers age 16+                                      61,407          100
                   Source: 2010 American Community Survey 1 Year, Table S0801: Commuting
Jobs/housing ratio would be a more useful metric if it were applied to a commuting area
rather than a city boundary. A commuting area could be considered in balance of there
are sufficient employment opportunities for workers who reside within a reasonable
commuting distance. Local workers commute, by and large, from within the City and
from nearby cities and unincorporated communities. These include the cities of
Westlake Village, Agoura Hills, Calabasas, Camarillo, Oxnard, Moorpark and Simi
Valley, the unincorporated islands of Casa Conejo, Lynn Ranch and Rolling Oaks, and
2
   Miller, John S. Ph.D. Feasibility of Using Jobs/Housing Balance in Virginia Statewide Planning, Virginia
   Transportation Research Council Research Report, 2010.
3
   Peng, Z.R. “The Jobs-Housing Balance and Urban Commuting.” Urban Studies, Vol 34, No. 8, 1997, p1215-1235.
4
   Housing units: 2006-2008 American Community Survey 3-Year Estimate of Housing Units; Jobs: HUD State of the
   Cities Data Systems, 2007 County Business Patterns Special Data Extracts; Commuting: 2006-2010 American
   Community Survey 5-Year Estimate: Table S0801: Commuting.
                                                                                                              17

Chapter 2                                                                     Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                                              Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
the adjacent unincorporated communities of Ventu Park, Kelly Estates and Oak Park.
Whether the jobs/housing ratio is based on the City alone or a commuting area,
Thousand Oaks enjoys a good balance between jobs and housing.
D.     Housing Stock Characteristics
This section evaluates the community’s housing stock and helps to identify and prioritize
needs. The factors evaluated include the number and type of housing units, recent
growth trends, age and condition of housing, tenure, vacancy, housing costs, and
affordability. A housing unit is defined as a house, apartment, mobile home, or group of
rooms, occupied as separate living quarters, or if vacant, intended for occupancy as
separate living quarters.
       1.       Housing Type and Growth Trends
As of 2010, the housing stock in Thousand Oaks was comprised mostly of single-family
detached homes, which made up about 68% of all units, while multi-family units
comprised about 18% of the total. About 12% of units were single-family attached
(condominium and townhome) units. Mobile homes comprised the remaining 2 percent.
Overall, the housing stock by type and growth trends for the City is very close to the
County as a whole for the period 2000 – 2010, as indicated in Table II-13.
                                                       TABLE II-13
                                    HOUSING BY TYPE - THOUSAND OAKS
                                                      2000                  2010                 Growth
                                                                                                       % of
                                                                                             New       New
              Structure Type                     Units       %          Units        %       Units Units
       Thousand Oaks
          Single-family detached                 28,521         66       32,115        68     3,594       81
          Single-family attached                  5,148         12        5,680        12        532      12
          Multi-family 2-4 units                  1,732          4        1,532          3      -200       -5
          Multi-family 5+ units                   6,456         15        7,074        15        618      14
          Mobile homes                            1,071          3          994          2        -77      -2
          Total units                            42,928       100        47,345      100      4,467
       Ventura County
          Single-family detached               160,529          64      177,363        63    16,834       56
          Single-family attached                 27,322         11       32,953        12     5,631       19
          Multi-family 2-4 units                 16,410          6       16,175          6      -235       -1
          Multi-family 5+ units                  35,289         14       44,036        15     8,747       29
          Mobile homes                           11,702          5       10,787          4      -915       -3
          Boat, RV, van, etc                         460         0          367          0        -93       0
          Total units                          251,712        100       281,681      100     29,969
       Source: 2000 Census Table DP-4: Profile of Selected Housing Characteristics and 2010 American Community
       Survey 1-year estimates, Table DP04 Selected Housing Characteristics
       Single-family attached structures are for-sale condominiums and townhomes.
18

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                             Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                           Housing Needs Assessment
Between 2000 and 2010, 4,467 dwelling units were constructed in Thousand Oaks,
representing a 10% increase in housing stock. Single-family detached homes
represented about 81% of all units built in the City during that period. Approximately 21%
of residential development in the City during this timeframe was comprised of multi-family
and condominium (single-family attached) units.
Most of the housing growth between 2000 and 2010 occurred through 2006. Housing
production slowed dramatically since 2006. Only 355 homes were completed in the 5
years from 2007 through 2011 (Source: Monthly Housing Reports; Thousand Oaks
Community Development Department).
There are 8 mobile home parks in the City. No new mobile home units were added, and
one, Conejo Mobile Home Park, was closed in 2011.
         2.        Housing Age and Conditions
Housing age is often an important indicator of housing condition. Table II-14 shows the
age distribution of the housing stock in Thousand Oaks compared to Ventura County as
a whole as reported in the 2010 American Community Survey.
                                                TABLE II-14
               AGE OF HOUSING STOCK - THOUSAND OAKS VS. VENTURA COUNTY
                                               Thousand Oaks                    Ventura County
                    Year Built                 Units              %             Units             %
           2005 and later                             998             2.1          11,050             3.9
           2000-2004                                5,546           11.7           21,896             7.8
           1990-1999                                5,695           12.0           29,904           10.6
           1980-89                                  7,768           16.4           47,734           16.9
           1970-79                                14,582            30.8           63,809           22.7
           1960-69                                  9,939           21.0           58,019           20.6
           1950-59                                  2,227             4.7          30,094           10.7
           1940-49                                    437             0.9            9,114            3.2
           1939 or earlier                            153             0.3          10,061             3.6
             Total                                47,345                          281,681
         Source: 2010 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates; Table DP04:Sected Housing Characteristics
This table shows that about 27% of the housing units in Thousand Oaks were
constructed prior to 1970. These findings normally suggest that there may be a need
for maintenance and rehabilitation. However, there is little evidence that these older
homes are in poor condition. A great deal of housing restoration work was done during
the housing bubble years of the last decade.
The lack of complete kitchen or plumbing facilities is often an indicator of housing
problems. Table II-15 identifies the number of occupied housing units lacking complete
kitchen or plumbing facilities in the City and the County as a whole. This table shows
                                                                                                             19
Chapter 2                                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                                         Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
that 0.4% of the housing units lacked a complete kitchen and 0.1% lacked complete
plumbing facilities. This is an improvement from 2000. The 2000 Census reported that
only 0.6% of the housing units lacked a complete kitchen and 0.3% lacked complete
plumbing facilities.
                                                TABLE II-15
        KITCHEN AND PLUMBING FACILITIES - THOUSAND OAKS VS. VENTURA COUNTY
                                                                Thousand Oaks           Ventura County
                            Facilities                            Units         %         Units         %
        Kitchen Facilities
          Complete kitchen facilities                               45,145      99.6     263,686        99.2
          Lacking complete kitchen facilities                           171      0.4        2,218         0.8
        Total Occupied Housing Units                                45,316               265,904
        Plumbing Facilities
          Complete plumbing facilities                              45,266      99.9     264,983        99.7
          Lacking complete plumbing facilities                            50     0.1           921        0.3
        Total Occupied Housing Units                                45,316               265,904
        Source: H342010 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates; Table DP04:Sected Housing Characteristics
The City’s Code Compliance Division responds to citizen complaints about housing that
is in poor condition. Most property owners make the necessary repairs in response to
requests or enforcement by the Code Compliance Division. Code Compliance Division
records from 2009 and 2011 were analyzed. The records included 1,345 cases of which
958 involved property maintenance problems and 387 involved building code issues. As
of October of 2012, only 114 of the property maintenance and 62 of the building code
cases were still active (unresolved). The active property maintenance cases were
concentrated in the area between Moorpark Road, Erbes Road, Hillcrest Drive and
Peterson Road. The active building code cases were concentrated in the area between
Ave de Las Flores, Ave de Los Arboles, Moorpark Road and Highway 23. Housing
Action Plan Program 8 (inspection of resale housing), as described in Chapter VI,
addresses the problem of housing deterioration by encouraging the maintenance of the
housing stock.
          3.       Vacancy
Housing vacancy rates as reported in the 2010 Census are shown in Table II-16. The
table shows that the vacancy rate for rental housing in the City was moderate, with
5.6% of the units available for rent. This vacancy rate is close to the countywide
average, which was 4.8% of the available for-rent units. Rental vacancy rates in the 2%
range or lower indicate nearly full occupancy and contribute to upward pressure on
rents. These rental vacancy rates are much higher than those reported in the 2000
Census: 0.7% for the City and 0.8% for the County.
20

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                  Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                           Housing Needs Assessment
                                                TABLE II-16
             HOUSING VACANCY RATES - THOUSAND OAKS VS. VENTURA COUNTY
                                                          Thousand Oaks Ventura County
                                                            Units         %     Units   %
            Occupied units                                   45,836             266,920
                -Owner-occupied                              33,501 73.1 174,168 65.3
                -Renter-occupied                             12,335 26.9         92,752 34.7
            Rental units                                     13,135              97,740
                -Renter-occupied                             12,335      93.9    92,752 94.9
                -Rented, unoccupied                                61      0.5      324  0.3
                -For-rent, unoccupied                            739       5.6    4,664  4.8
            For-sale units                                   33,884             177,230
                -Owner-occupied                              33,501      98.9   174,168 98.3
                -Sold, unoccupied                                106       0.3      595  0.3
                -For-sale, unoccupied                            277       0.8    2,467  1.4
            Vacant units                                       1,661             14,775
                -For-rent*                                       739     44.5     4,664 31.6
                -For-sale*                                       277     16.7     2,467 16.7
                -Rented or sold, not occupied*                   167     10.1       919  6.2
                -For seasonal or occasional use*                 158       9.5    3,545 24.0
                -For migrant workers*                               0      0.0       12  0.1
                -Other vacant*                                   320     19.3     3,168 21.4
            Total housing units                              47,497             281,695
            Source: 2010 Census SF1 Table QT-H1
         4.       Housing Cost
                a.        Housing Affordability Criteria
State law establishes five income categories for purposes of housing assistance
programs based on the area (i.e., county) median income (AMI). These include
extremely low (30% or less of AMI), very low (31-50% of AMI), low (51-80% of AMI),
moderate (81-120% of AMI) and above moderate (over 120% of AMI). Housing
affordability is based on the relationship between household income and housing
expenses. According to HUD and the California Department of Housing and Community
Development5, housing is considered “affordable” if the monthly payment is no more
than 30% of a household’s gross income. The payment includes rent and utilities for
rental housing or the mortgage payment and housing expenses for for-sale housing.
The income limits for housing assistance are reduced for households with fewer than 4
persons and increased for households with more than 4 persons. In some areas (such
as Ventura County), these income limits are adjusted for high housing costs. HCD and
5
  HCD memo of 4/18/07 (http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/rep/state/inc2k7.pdf)
                                                                                                  21

Chapter 2                                                                          Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                                                   Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
HUD established the 2010 AMI for Ventura County at $86,700. In 2012, the AMI
estimate for Ventura County was $89,300.
Table II-17 shows affordable rent levels and estimated affordable purchase prices for
housing in Ventura County by income category for a family of four. Based on State-
adopted standards, the maximum affordable monthly payment on a 3-bedroom unit for
extremely low income households is $670, while the maximum affordable payment for
very low income households is $1,116. The maximum affordable payment for low
income households is $1,340, while the maximum for moderate-income households is
$2,456.
Maximum purchase prices are more difficult to determine due to variations in mortgage
interest rates and qualifying procedures, down payments, special tax assessments,
homeowner association fees, property insurance rates, etc. With this caveat, the
maximum home purchase prices by income category shown in Table II-17 have been
estimated based on typical conditions with a 30-year mortgage interest rate of 4
percent. The affordable purchase price will fluctuate with interest rates. In 2012, a 30-
year mortgage could be obtained at a rate below 4% and a 5-year adjustable-rate
mortgage could be obtained at a rate below 3 percent. These mortgage interest rates
are low by historical standards. The affordable purchase price would drop by about 10%
if 30-year mortgage rates rise to 5% rather than 4 percent.
                                                          TABLE II-17
                INCOME CATEGORIES AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING COSTS FOR 2012 -
                                                     VENTURA COUNTY
                                                            Income           Affordable    Affordable Home
                Income Category                              Limits1        Rent Range       Price Range
     Above moderate (>120% of AMI)                        $107,150+               $2,457+          $461,000+
     Moderate (81-120% of AMI)                               $107,150 $1,341-$2,456        $300,100-$461,000
     Low (51-80% of AMI)                                      $67,650 $1,117-$1,340        $179,100-$300,000
     Very Low (31-50% of AMI)                                 $44,650        $671-$1,116    $99,100-$179,000
     Extremely Low (<30% of AMI)                              $26,800                $670             $99,000
     Area Median Income                                       $89,300                  n/a                n/a
     Assumptions:
     - AMI for 20121 -Based on a family of 4
     -30% of gross income for rent or principal, interest, taxes and insurance
     -10% down payment, 4% interest, 1.5% taxes and HOA fees, $80/mo PMI. & $481/yr homeowners insurance
     1
      Cal Code Regs. Sec. 6932
     Source: California Dept. of HCD; CNN Money Mortgage Payment Calculator
                  b.        For-Sale Housing
Housing prices are relatively high due to the so-called “housing bubble” that occurred
from 1996 to 2006. Home prices soared largely due to historically low mortgage rates,
lax lending practices and speculation in real estate. Landlords were also able to raise
rental rates on apartments as the purchase price of homes became unaffordable to a
large segment of the population.
22

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                   Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                    Housing Needs Assessment
Home prices took a sharp downturn from 2007 through 2009. Although home values
have come down considerably, home prices are still high by historical standards. At the
national level, average home prices in 2010 were still approximately 45-60% above
where they were in 2000 (Source: S&P/Case-Shiller Home Price Indices: “2010, A Year
In Review”).
Housing sales price statistics for 2011 are shown in Table II-18. Home sales information
is reported by real estate data services companies by community name (e.g. Newbury
Park) or zip code, not by city. Therefore, some home sales located outside of the city
limits are included in these reports. For example, roughly one-half of Zip Code 91361 is
in the city of Westlake Village. Home sales activity reported for Zip Codes 91320, 91360
and 91362 are more representative of home prices within the city limits.
Table II-8 shows that the median home sales price in 2011 was $470,000 within Zip
Code 91320 and $478,500 within Zip Codes 91360 and 91362. The median home price
of $350,000 for Ventura County was considerably lower. Median means that half of the
units sold for less and half sold for more.
Home prices varied considerably by type of home.                            The median price for single-family
detached homes ($465,000 to $685,000) was                                    more than twice the price for
condominiums ($220,000 to $311,000). Based on                               the estimated affordable purchase
prices shown in Table II-17, it is clear that few                            for-sale units were affordable to
extremely low and very low income residents.
At a median price of $265,000 for resale condominiums in Zip Code 91320, there is a
“gap” of over $86,000 between the market price and the maximum price, $179,000 that
a very low income household can afford to pay for a home. There is less of a price gap
in Zip Code 91360 and more of a gap in Zip Code 91362. The price gap would be even
greater for new condominium units, which are more expensive than resale units.
                                                      TABLE II-18
                         2011 HOME SALES BY ZIP CODE AND HOUSING TYPE -
                                  THOUSAND OAKS VS. VENTURA COUNTY
                                                                      Single-                Condominium/
                                               Median                 Family                   Townhouse
                                  Zip           Price          Units         Median         Units       Median
                                 Code            (All)          Sold          Price         Sold         Price
                                 913201        $470,000              381 $520,000               108 $265,000
                                 913602                              360 $465,000                 73 $220,000
       Thousand Oaks                           $478,500
                                 91362                               285 $685,000               213 $311,000
                                 913613        $635,000              130 $810,000               170 $469,000
       Ventura County                          $350,000           5,998 $395,000              2,148 $236,000
       Notes:
       Source: DataQuick News: “California Home Sale Activity by City Home Sales Recorded in the Year 2011” and
       “Southern California Home Sale Activity LA Times Sunday Edition Charts – Data for the Year 2011”
       1 Includes unincorporated County area.
       2 Includes unincorporated County area.
       3 Includes unincorporated County area and portion of City of Westlake Village.
                                                                                                                   23

Chapter 2                                                                      Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                                                  Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                  c.         Rental Housing
Table II-19 shows January 2012 market data for rental apartments in Thousand Oaks
and Ventura County based on recent surveys. The table shows that the average rent
for Thousand Oaks was $1,589 per month, slightly higher than the overall average rent
in Ventura County. Surveyed rental rates for Thousand Oaks decreased slightly from
January of 2011, when the average monthly rent was $1,630.
When market rents are compared to the amounts lower income households can afford to
pay (Table II-17), it is clear that very low and extremely low income households have a
difficult time finding housing without overpaying. The gap between market rent and
affordable rent at the very low income level is about $473 per month, while the gap at the
extremely low income level is $919 per month. However, at the low income and
moderate income levels, households are much more likely to find affordable rentals.
An average rent in 2012 for a 2-bedroom, apartment currently is about $1,651 per month
while the affordable payment (rent plus utility allowance) for a 4-person, low-income
household is $1,786 per month. The affordable payment for a 4-person, moderate income
household is $2,679 per month. The utility allowance for a typical 2-bedroom apartment is
$110 (Source: HUD, “Allowances for Tenant Furnished Utilities and other Services for
Area Housing Authority of Ventura County” 10/1/2012).
                                                         TABLE II-19
                              2012 APARTMENT RENTS BY NO. OF BEDROOMS -
                         THOUSAND OAKS VS. VENTURA COUNTY MARKET AREA
        Unit Type                          Thousand Oaks1                      Ventura County Market Area2
                                   Lowest           Highest         Average     Lowest    Highest   Average
  Studio                               $875         $1,185             $1,073     $695    $1,275     $1,015
  1bd                              $1,025           $1,932             $1,422     $575    $2,000     $1,256
  2bd                              $1,210           $2,500             $1,651     $750    $3,400     $1,543
  3bd                              $1,650           $2,295             $1,995   $1,100    $2,462     $1,868
  Overall                              $875         $2,500             $1,589     $575    $3,400     $1,435
  Source: Ventura County Apartment Market Survey; Dyer Sheehan Group, Inc. 2012
  1
    Minimum property size - 30 units. 2 Minimum property size - 3 units.
E.       Special Needs Housing
Certain groups have greater difficulty finding decent, affordable housing due to special
circumstances. Such circumstances may be related to one’s family characteristics,
disability, or other conditions. As a result, some Thousand Oaks residents may
experience a higher prevalence of overpayment, overcrowding, or other housing
problems.
State Housing Element law defines “special needs” groups to include persons with
disabilities, the elderly, large households, female-headed households with children, farm
workers, and homeless persons. This section contains a discussion of the housing
needs facing each of these groups.
24

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                          Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                    Housing Needs Assessment
      1.          Persons with Disabilities
In 2010, approximately 4,780 non-institutionalized people between the 18 and 64 years
of age, or 6.0% of the age group (working age population), reported a disability in
Thousand Oaks (see Table II-20). Of those aged 65 and over, 5,647 persons, or
33.4%, had some form of disability. Included within these disabilities are persons with
an ambulatory disability that hinders their ability to walk or climb stairs (1.8% of the
working age population and 20.6% of the senior population).
                                                         TABLE II-20
                          NON-INSTITUTIONALIZED PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES
                                      BY AGE GROUP - THOUSAND OAKS
                                                                                                        Percent of
                         Disabilities by Age Group                                 Persons
                                                                                                       Age Group
       Age 5 to 17
         -Persons with one or more disabilities                                           1,017                     4.3
          - with a hearing difficulty                                                         61                    0.3
          - with a vision difficulty                                                          67                    0.3
          - with a cognitive difficulty                                                      774                    3.3
          - with an ambulatory difficulty                                                    154                    0.7
          - with a self-care difficulty                                                      254                    1.1
       - Persons with and without disabilities                                          23,670                     100
       Age 18 to 64
         -Persons with one or more disabilities                                           4,780                     6.0
          - with a hearing difficulty                                                     1,559                     2.0
          - with a vision difficulty                                                         911                    1.1
          - with a cognitive difficulty                                                   1,973                     2.5
          - with an ambulatory difficulty                                                 1,411                     1.8
          - with a self-care difficulty                                                      946                    1.2
          - With an independent living difficulty                                         1,708                     2.1
       - Persons with and without disabilities                                          79,850                     100
       Age 65 and over
        -Persons with one or more disabilities                                            5,647                   33.4
          - with a hearing difficulty                                                     1,911                   11.3
          - with a vision difficulty                                                         745                    4.4
          - with a cognitive difficulty                                                   2,113                   12.5
          - with an ambulatory difficulty                                                 3,487                   20.6
          - with a self-care difficulty                                                   1,629                     9.6
       - Persons with and without disabilities                                          16,926                     100
       Note: Total of persons with specific disabilities exceeds persons with one or more disabilities due to multiple
       disabilities per person
       Source: 2010 American Community Survey 1-Year Estimates; S1810: Disability Characteristics
                                                                                                                          25
Chapter 2                                                           Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                                      Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
According to the Tri-Counties Regional Center, 396 residents of Thousand Oaks are
persons with developmental disabilities. "Developmental disability" means a disability
that originates before an individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be expected
to continue, indefinitely, and constitutes a substantial disability for that individual. This
includes mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, and autism (Section 4512 of the
Welfare and Institutions Code). Among the residents of Thousand Oaks with
developmental disabilities in 2012, 74 individuals were 23 years of age or older, who
lived with their parents. Persons with developmental disabilities often have limited
incomes and impairments that may limit their ability to live independently. These
individuals are in need of affordable, supportive housing.
There are four facilities in Thousand Oaks that focus on the needs of persons with
disabilities. Two of these, Richmond Terrace and Esseff Village, are operated by Many
Mansions, a non-profit housing provider. The other two facilities are owned by the
United Cerebral Palsy/Spastic Children’s Foundation and include a total of 30 beds for
severely disabled persons, of which 20 beds (10 each) are reserved for income-eligible
residents. Another Many Mansions facility, the 60-unit Hillcrest Apartment project, is
scheduled for completion in 2013. One-half of the units will be available to persons with
disabilities and homeless persons.
Title 24, Chapter 11A of the California Building Code contains requirements to address the
needs of persons with disabilities. When a project proposes new construction of three or
more apartments or four or more condominiums, certain dwelling units must be on an
accessible route and be adaptable for use by persons who use wheelchairs or other
mobility aids.
If a project involves 5 or more units and receives federal assistance, 5% of the units (not
less than one unit) must be accessible for persons with mobility disabilities and an
additional 2% of the units (at least one) must be accessible to persons with hearing or
visual disabilities.
Section 104.10 of the California Building Code allows the building official to grant
modifications to the requirements of the building code where strict compliance would be
impractical. This allows individuals with disabilities to make reasonable changes to their
homes to accommodate their particular disabilities.
Constraints on housing for persons with disabilities and programs to address those
constraints are discussed in Chapter IV and Chapter VI.
          2.       Elderly
In 2010, there were 11,641 households (owners and renters combined) in Thousand
Oaks where the householder was 65 or older (Table II-21). Of these, 622 households
were below the poverty level based on surveys conducted from 2008 to 20106. Many
elderly persons are dependent on fixed incomes and a high percentage of the elderly
6
  2008-2010 American Community Survey 3-Year; Table B17017 Poverty Status in The past 12 Months by
    Household Type by Age of Householder - Universe: Households
26

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                Housing Needs Assessment
are disabled. Elderly homeowners may be physically unable to maintain their homes or
cope with living alone. The housing needs of this group can be partially addressed
through smaller units, second units on lots with existing homes, shared living
arrangements, congregate housing and housing assistance programs.
                                              TABLE II-21
                      ELDERLY HOUSEHOLDS BY TENURE - THOUSAND OAKS
                                                    Owners            Renters
                 Householder Age               Households     %   Households    %
         Under 65 years                               24,048 71.7       10,147 82.2
         65 to 74 years                                5,318 15.9          668 5.4
         75 to 84 years                                3,005 9.0           722 5.9
         85 and over                                   1,130 3.4           798 6.5
         Total households                             33,501 100        12,335 100
         Source: 2010 Census, SF1 Table QT-H2
The Thousand Oaks Council on Aging submitted an annual report to City Council on
October 23, 2012 that included information about the future senior population and
senior housing options. It noted that about 30% of the City’s residents were “baby
boomers” between the ages of 45 and 64 who will reach retirement age over the next
ten years. The report summarized the results of an online survey of more than 300 baby
boomers conducted by the Council on Aging Housing Team. It indicated that about 47%
of the respondents said that they would not, or were not sure they would have enough
money after retirement for housing.
The City provides special fee waivers to facilitate housing for the elderly. Section 9-7.01
of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code exempts low income senior citizen housing from
water connection charges, sewer connection charges, water plant investment fees,
cross-connection fees and park in-lieu fees that apply to the development of other
housing projects.
The Housing Action Plan (Chapter VI) includes the following programs that help to
address the needs of elderly households: Program 1 (affordable ownership housing),
Program 2 (Affordable Housing Trust Fund), Program 3 (inclusionary housing in-lieu
and linkage fees), Program 5 (10-Year Plan to End Homelessness), Program 6 (special
needs households), Program 7 (acquisition and rehabilitation of existing housing),
Program 9 (affordable housing at risk of conversion to market rate), Program 10
(ongoing affordability of affordable units), Program 11 (extension of existing affordability
covenants, and Program 12 (housing for persons with disabilities).
         3.       Large Households
Household size is an indicator of a need for large housing units with more bedrooms.
Large households are defined as those with five or more members. The City's average
household size has dropped slightly from 2.82 persons in 1990; 2.75 persons in 2000;
                                                                                         27

Chapter 2                                                               Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                                       Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
to 2.73 persons in 2010. Among both owners and renters, more than half of all
households have only one or two members. About 12.4% of renter households had five
or more members, while about 10.8% of owners were large households (Table II-22).
This distribution indicates that the need for large units with four or more bedrooms is
expected to be less than for smaller units.
                                                 TABLE II-22
                           HOUSEHOLD SIZE BY TENURE - THOUSAND OAKS
                                                 Owners                         Renters
        H Household Size              Households             %         Households             %
           1 person                              5,988         17.9             3,740           30.3
           2 persons                            11,773         35.1             3,272           26.5
           3 persons                             5,903         17.6             2,167           17.6
           4 persons                             6,202         18.5             1,624           13.2
           5 persons                             2,360           7.0              829             6.7
           6 persons                                814          2.4              357             2.9
           7+ persons                               461          1.4              346             2.8
           Total households                     33,501                        12,335
           Source: 2010 Census Summary File 1: Table QT-H2-Geography-Tenure, Household Size, and Age
           of Householder:
The Housing Action Plan (Chapter VI) includes the following programs that help to
address the needs of large families: Program 1 (affordable ownership housing),
Program 2 (Affordable Housing Trust Fund), Program 3 (inclusionary housing in-lieu
and linkage fees), Program 5 (10-Year Plan to End Homelessness), Program 6 (special
needs households), Program 7 (acquisition and rehabilitation of existing housing),
Program 9 (affordable housing at risk of conversion to market rate), Program 10
(ongoing affordability of affordable units), Program 11 (extension of existing affordability
covenants, and Program 12 (housing for persons with disabilities).
         4.       Female-Headed Households
Of the 45,836 households in the City in 2010, 4,260, or about 9%, were headed by a
female (Table II-23). The median household income for female-headed families (with
no husband) is $52,534 per year and $39,541 for female-headed non-family
households. In comparison, male-headed family households (with no wife) have median
household income of $79,680 and male-headed non-family households have a median
household income of $67,318 (2010 American Community Survey: Table S1903).
About 3,327 female-headed households or about 47% of all female-headed households
are made up of woman, age 65 years or over, who live alone. This group has a median
household income of $24,609. In comparison, 1,032 households, or about 26% of all
male-headed households, are made up of men who are age 65 or older. This group has
a median household income of $33,221 (Sources: 2010 Census SF1: Table QT- H3 and
2010 American Community Survey: Table B19215).
28
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                         Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                          Housing Needs Assessment
The Housing Action Plan (Chapter VI) includes the following programs that help to
address the needs of for all lower-income households regardless of gender: Program 1
(affordable ownership housing), Program 2 (Affordable Housing Trust Fund), Program 3
(inclusionary housing in-lieu and linkage fees), Program 5 (10-Year Plan to End
Homelessness), Program 6 (special needs households), Program 7 (acquisition and
rehabilitation of existing housing), Program 9 (affordable housing at risk of conversion to
market rate), Program 10 (ongoing affordability of affordable units), Program 11
(extension of existing affordability covenants, and Program 12 (housing for persons with
disabilities).
                                                 TABLE II-23
                            HOUSEHOLD TYPE BY TENURE - THOUSAND OAKS
                                                      Owners                          Renters
          Household Type                      Households          %         Households             %
      Family Households
        -Married couple family                      22,526          67.2               4,680         37.9
        -Male, no wife present                       1,104            3.3                821          6.7
        -Female, no husband present                  2,473            7.4              1,787         14.5
      Non-family households
        -Male living alone                           2,070            6.2              1,609         13.0
        -Male living with others                        758           2.3                771          6.3
        -Female living alone                         3,918          11.7               2,131         17.3
        -Female living with others                      652           1.9                536          4.3
      Total households                              33,501                           12,335
      Source: 2010 Census SF1 Table QT-H3 Geography
           5.        Farmworkers
Unlike most areas of the Southern California metropolitan area, agriculture is still a
significant component of the economy in Ventura County, with a total value of over $1
billion per year7. There is strong public sentiment and public policy direction for retaining
agricultural production. However, according to the crop report map compiled by the
Ventura County Farm Bureau, virtually no farming takes place in Thousand Oaks
(Source: www.farmbureauvc.com).
The 2010 American Community Survey reported that about 14,379 persons were
employed in farming, fishing and forestry in Ventura County, but only 42 of these
workers live in Thousand Oaks (Table II-24). In addition, the 2010 ACS estimated the
median earnings for these workers at only $17,218 per year.
7
  Workforce Investment Board of Ventura County, The Future of Ventura County Agriculture: Issues and
    Opportunities for Workers and Growers, 2006
                                                                                                          29
Chapter 2                                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                                          Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                   TABLE II-24
             AGRICULTURAL EMPLOYMENT - THOUSAND OAKS VS. VENTURA COUNTY
                                                                                      City as a Percent
                                   Thousand Oaks              Ventura County              of County
    Workers                                            42                    14,379                    0.3
    Source: 2010 American Community Survey, Table DP-03 and S2401 1-Year Estimates
          6.       Homeless Persons
Homelessness is a continuing national problem that persists within local cities and
communities including Ventura County. During the past two decades, an increasing
number of single persons have remained homeless year after year and have become
the most visible of all homeless persons. Other persons (particularly families) have
experienced shorter periods of homelessness.
                                                   TABLE II-25
               2012 HOMELESS PROFILE - THOUSAND OAKS VS. VENTURA COUNTY
                                                          Thousand Oaks             Ventura County
                                                        Persons           %        Persons      %
        Total Homeless                                          90           100      1,936       100
        Age
             Children (under 18)                                13          14.4        214      11.1
             Youth (18-24)                                       5            5.6       139        7.2
             Adults (25-61)                                     67          74.4      1,483      76.6
             Seniors (62+)                                       5            5.6        99        5.1
             Male (Ages 18-62+)                                 61          49.2      1,205        70
             Female (Ages 18-62+)                               16          20.8        517        30
             Families*                                           7                      115
        Race and Ethnicity (Ages 18-62+)
             White                                              56          70.9      1,056      61.5
             Black/African American                              8          10.1         83        4.8
             American Indian/Alaskan                             0            0.0        57        3.3
             Asian or Pacific Islander                           5            6.3        43        2.5
             Other                                               2            2.5        53        3.1
             Hispanic/Latino                                     8          10.1        426      24.8
        Total                                                   79                    1,718
        Source: Ventura County 2012 Homeless Count
        *Combined 2-parent and 1-parent families
Studies and surveys by government agencies and homeless advocacy groups have
shown that homelessness is not pervasive in Thousand Oaks; however, it is still an
important housing issue. A homeless count conducted by the Ventura County Homeless
30
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                        Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                 Housing Needs Assessment
and Housing Coalition and volunteers on January 24, 2012 indicated that there were 90
homeless persons in Thousand Oaks, which represents about 4.6% of the County total
(Table II-25). These include families that might be displaced through evictions, women
and children displaced through abusive family life, persons with mental and/or
substance abuse problems, or persons passing through the City on Highway 101.
Forty-one people (46%) were counted on the streets and 49 people (54%) were at the
Conejo Valley Winter Shelter and transitional housing facilities. The Conejo Valley
Winter Shelter provides emergency shelter at various places of worship throughout the
City on a rotating basis. The most significant difference between the City’s homeless
population and the County’s is that a smaller percentage of the City’s homeless are
Hispanic.
Table II-25A provides information on shelter and transitional housing resources in
Ventura County and the need for additional resources, as determined by the Ventura
County Homeless and Housing Coalition (VCHHC) in 2011.
                                                    TABLE II-25A
                   VENTURA COUNTY EMERGENCY SHELTER AND TRANSITIONAL HOUSING1
                                                                     Inventory           Need    Gap
    Year-Round Shelter Beds                                              115              400    275
    Winter Shelter Beds                                                  229            1,415   1,186
    Transitional Housing – Individuals                                   392              455     63
    Transitional Housing – Families                                      308              625    317
    Permanent Supportive Housing – Individuals                           132              400    265
    Permanent Supportive Housing – Families                               15              295    280
    1
      Source: “Ventura County Local Emergency Shelter Strategy (LESS)” dated February 17, 2011
Not every homeless person seeks emergency shelter at the same time, so the need for
emergency shelter is smaller than the number of people living on the street. Winter
shelter use is a good indicator of the need for year-round emergency shelter in
Thousand Oaks, which is estimated at 25-30 beds.
                   a.       Causes of Homelessness
Although there are many causes of homelessness, among the most common causes
are the following:
                           Substance Abuse and Alcohol
The incidence of alcohol and other drug abuse within the homeless population is
estimated to be three times higher than the general population (30% vs. 10%). This
estimate is closely aligned with national survey statistics.
The State of California Department of Alcohol and Drug Programs licenses residential
facilities and/or certified alcohol and drug programs in Ventura County. There are
                                                                                                        31

Chapter 2                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                            Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
eleven residential facilities and two residential detoxification facilities in the County and
three residential treatment facilities in Thousand Oaks. The Ventura County Housing
and Homeless Coalition identified a need for additional treatment facilities with housing
and clinical staff in Ventura County. They also recommend that a treatment facility be
established for youth with drug and alcohol addiction.
                     Domestic Violence
The Ventura County Housing and Homeless Coalition has also identified a need for
additional shelters for battered women and runaway youth. These individuals also
require counseling and assistance to become self-sufficient or return to their families.
Victims of household violence can become homeless as a result of escaping abusive
living environments, and suffer physical and psychological trauma as a result of the
abuse. Many of these persons (almost exclusively women) are ill equipped to fend for
themselves and their children. Without access to low-income housing, reliable
transportation and supportive counseling, they are at a greater disadvantage and create
special homeless needs. Common issues faced by battered women are lack of jobs,
lack of child care, lack of affordable housing, underemployment, codependent
substance abuse, and a need for marketable skills.
Based on the 2011 “Local Emergency Shelter Strategy (LESS)” prepared by the
Ventura County Designated Local Board for the State of California, Emergency Housing
and Assistance Program (EHAP), Round 15, there are 2 emergency shelters in Ventura
County that provide 35 beds for victims of domestic violence.
                     Mental Illness
According to the Turning Point Foundation, persons who are homeless and mentally ill
have special needs and are not being served well in traditional homeless shelters.
Many are at risk in the community, frequently being victimized and often suffering from
physical and mental illnesses. Many of the homeless mentally ill do not avail
themselves of services or cannot be served by traditional services due to their untreated
psychiatric symptoms, active substance abuse, and histories of abusive behaviors.
The incidence of homelessness for the chronically mentally ill is expected to increase in
Ventura County due to a shortage of affordable housing and the closing of single
occupancy hotels and residential care facilities. Thousand Oaks, as part of the Ventura
County service area, receives assistance with the homeless mentally ill from the Ventura
County Behavioral Health Department. According to the 2012 County of Ventura
Homeless Survey, approximately 38% of the homeless population has a mental illness.
                     Developmental and physical disabilities
The 2012 County of Ventura Homeless Survey determined that about 20% of homeless
people have a developmental disability. In addition, approximately 42% of homeless
persons have a physical disability.
              b.      Homeless Population Subgroups
Shelter and service needs of the homeless population are significantly different
depending on the population subgroup. The City’s and County’s Continuum of Care
32

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                               Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                         Housing Needs Assessment
approach to homelessness involves focusing new and existing tools and resources on
the following three sub-populations of homeless persons and those at risk of becoming
homeless8.
                         Chronic Homeless Persons
According to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), chronic
homeless persons are individuals who are homeless for one year or more, or four times
in three years, and have a disability which is often mental illness and/or substance
abuse. They are often the most visible and the hardest to reach of all homeless
persons. Based on the 2012 County of Ventura Homeless Survey, about 56% of the
homeless in the County are chronically homeless.
                         Episodic Homeless Persons
Episodic Homeless Persons are individuals or families who are homeless for a short
period of time—days, weeks, or months—but less than a year.
                         Persons at Risk of Becoming Homeless
Persons at risk of becoming homeless have limited income and often have to choose
between paying their rent or mortgage and other daily living costs which often put them
at risk of becoming homeless. According to the 2010 American Community Survey
(Table DP-03) there were approximately 5,965 households, approximately 13.2% of all
households in Thousand Oaks, whose annual income was less than $25,000. These
households are at risk of becoming homeless. The Institute for Urban Research and
Development estimates that a large majority of households at risk of becoming
homeless and who eventually become homeless do not seek and/or receive resources
until the days immediately before or after they become homeless. Once a household
becomes homeless, it generally costs thousands of dollars to help these households
gain housing once again.
                 c.       Resources to Address Homelessness
The County of Ventura, Human Services Agency, publishes a brochure, “Resources for
Homeless People in Eastern Ventura County” covering the cities of Moorpark, Simi
Valley and Thousand Oaks. All of the resources listed therein are available to homeless
persons in Thousand Oaks and the City distributes the brochures to local social
services agencies, law enforcement and interested parties. Table II-25B below lists
resources located in Thousand Oaks.
8
  Source: 10-Year Strategy to End Homelessness for Ventura County, June 2007
                                                                                               33

Chapter 2                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                              Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                        TABLE II-25B
                      HOMELESS FACILITIES AND SERVICES IN THOUSAND OAKS
  1. Area Housing        1400 W. Hillcrest Drive          Affordable Rental Housing (no
     Authority           Newbury Park, CA 91320           emergency housing)
  2. Conejo Free Clinic  80 East Hillcrest Drive, # 211   Legal Services, Medical Services
                         Thousand Oaks, CA 91360
  3. Conejo Valley       72 Moody Ct Thousand Oaks,       Mental Health Services
     Behavioral Health   CA 91360
  4. Conejo Valley       223 E. 1000 Oaks Blvd. # 102     Legal and Medical Services
     Family Care         Thousand Oaks, CA 91360
  5. Conejo Valley       Rotating Sites (Dec – March)     Cots for approx. 30 persons
     Winter Shelter      Call 497-6207
  6. Conejo Valley Year- Rotating Sites (365 Days)        Daily evening hot meal
     Round Meals         Call 497-6207
     Program
  7. East County Job &   80 E. Hillcrest Dr, #200         Employment / Job Training
     Career Center       Thousand Oaks, CA 91360
     Satellite Office
  8. Los Robles Hospital 215 W. Janss Road                Medical Services
                         Thousand Oaks, CA 91360
  9. Lutheran Social     80 East Hillcrest Drive          Clothing, Drop-In Center, Emergency
     Services            Thousand Oaks, CA 91360          Housing Assistance, Food, Laundry,
                                                          Mail/Messages, Meals, Re-employ-
                                                          ment Program, Showers, Toilets
 10. Manna – Conejo      3020 Crescent Way                Food
     Valley Food Bank     Thousand Oaks, CA 91362
 11. Many Mansions –     1425 1000 Oaks Blvd., # 101      Affordable Rental Housing (may
     Housing Central      Thousand Oaks, CA 91362         include emergency housing if
                                                          available)
 12. Senior Advocates    Goebel Senior Adult Center       Information and Referrals
                          1385 East Janss Road
                          Thousand Oaks, CA 91362
 13. Senior Nutrition    Goebel Senior Adult Center       Daily Midday Congregate Meal
                          1385 East Janss Road            Site
                          Thousand Oaks, CA 91362
 14. St. Vincent de Paul c/o St. Paschal Baylon Church,   Food Pantry, Rental Assistance,
                         155 East Janss Road,             prescriptions, gas money, other
                         Thousand Oaks, CA 91360          services
 15. Westminster Free     United Methodist Church of      Patient Care, Advocacy,
     Clinic               Thousand Oaks, 1000 E. Janss    Counseling, Training & Education
                          Rd, Thousand Oaks, CA 91360
 16. Transitional and    Stoll House, Casa de Paz,        Transitional and supportive housing
     Supportive Housing   Esseff Village, Richmond        for extremely low income, homeless
                          Terrace and Hillcrest Apts.     persons and persons with disabilities
The City allocates portions of its federal Community Development Block Grant (CDBG)
funds and part of the City’s Social Services Endowment Fund (SSEF) to social services
34

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                   Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                             Housing Needs Assessment
agencies to help prevent homelessness and assist the homeless. The City’s Ad Hoc
Social Services Funding Committee, appointed by the City Council, reviews funding
requests and prepares annual recommendations on the allocation of funds. Table II-
25C, below, describes the funds that were granted in Fiscal Year 2011-2012.
                                                TABLE II-25C
                         SOCIAL SERVICE PROGRAMS THAT ASSIST THE HOMELESS
         Federal CDBG Funds                Activities                                   Funds
         Lutheran Social Services          Homeless Programs                            $17,056
                                           Medical Exams & Meds for Uninsured,
         Conejo Free Clinic                                                             $13,722
                                           Needy Persons
                                           Medical Exams, Lab Tests, Meds,
         Westminster Free Clinic           Counseling for uninsured, low-income          $5,489
                                           persons
         Catholic Charities                Emergency Food, Shelter                      $11,526
         Total CDBG Funds                                                               $47,793
         Local SSEF Funds
         Community Action                  Emergency Rent & Lease Payments               $8,690
         St. Vincent de Paul               Homeless Assistance                           $7,318
         County of Ventura                 RAIN Transitional Living Center               $6,769
         Food Share                        Emergency Food                                $5,763
         Manna                             Emergency Food                                $5,763
         Turning Point Foundation          Appleton House Homeless, Mentally Ill         $4,574
         Lutheran Social Services          Meals and Shelter                             $1,238
         Total SSEF Funds                                                               $40,115
         Source: FY 2011-2013 Consolidated Annual Performance and Evaluation Report
In addition to the rotating Conejo Valley Winter Shelter, there are four transitional or
supportive housing projects in Thousand Oaks operated by non-profit affordable
housing developer Many Mansions. These include:
      Stoll House is an 11-unit transitional and supportive housing facility. It was
       founded in 1998. The facility assists single parents who have been homeless by
       providing short-term housing (up to 2 years) and on-site counseling, job
       development and a savings program.
      Richmond Terrace is a 27-unit supportive housing project that was acquired in
       2004 at a total cost of approximately $5 million, including a City Redevelopment
       Loan of $420,000. The facility includes 13 units that are reserved for homeless
       residents and persons with disabilities.
      Esseff Village is a 51-unit supportive facility acquired in 2001. The development
       provides for homeless people, persons with disabilities, and very low income
                                                                                                   35

Chapter 2                                                     Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                               Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
         residents. The total project cost was approximately $4.9 million, including a City
         redevelopment grant of $1.3 million.
        Hillcrest Apartments is a 60-unit affordable housing project that was under
         construction in 2012 and scheduled for occupancy in 2013. It was developed with
         assistance from the City’s Redevelopment Agency and other sources for a total
         construction cost of $26 million. Half of the units are available to extremely low-
         income households who are homeless. Many units are designated for persons
         with disabilities.
Constraints on housing for homeless persons and programs to address those
constraints are discussed in Chapter IV and Chapter VI.
F.       Assisted Housing at Risk of Conversion
This section identifies all residential projects in the City that have been assisted under a
federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), state, local and/or other
program, including those that are under an affordability covenant, and those that are at risk
of losing their low income affordability restrictions. This information is used in establishing
quantified objectives for units that can be conserved during this planning period.
An affordability covenant is a recorded document stating terms of affordability, level of
affordability including the number of units, bedroom size, and target income level (i.e.
extremely low, very low, low, and moderate income) often restricted by percent of median
income and family size. Most affordable projects have more than one financing source and
each financing source may require different affordability restrictions (i.e. level of affordability
or term of affordability restrictions). For example an affordable project financed in part with
HOME funds may specify only a specific number of units targeted for low-income at 60% of
median income, where another funding source such as redevelopment funds require units
restricted at both very low income (not to exceed 50% of median income) and low income
(not to exceed 80% of median income). An affordability covenant will describe each
restriction and specify certain terms that are required.
Table II-26 provides a list of 22 rental developments within the City of Thousand Oaks
that participate in a federal, state or local program that provided some form of
assistance to lower income households, either through financial subsidy or a control
measure. These projects provide a total of 1,021 units affordable to lower income
households.
36

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                     Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                            Housing Needs Assessment
                                     TABLE II-26
            ASSISTED AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS IN THOUSAND OAKS
                             No. of
                     Year    Lower
                   Income Income                                               Covenant
No.     Project   Restricted Units                 Description                  Expires
 1 Conejo            1974      90   Owner: Private; Senior housing for low
    Future Apts                     income; Section 8 Rental Contract; HUD        N/A
                                    Section 221(D)(4) Senior Project; deed
                                    restricted
 2 Sunset Villas     2002      11   Owner: Area Housing Authority; Family        2017
                                    housing for very low income
 3 Schillo           1988      29   Owner: City of Thousand Oaks (managed        2018
    Gardens                         by Many Mansions); Family housing for
                                    low income
 4 Arroyo Villas     1995      40   Owner: Private; Family housing for low       2025
                                    income (Section 8) There are 206 units in
                                    the development.
 5 Stoll House       1997      11   Owner: Many Mansions; Transitional           2027
                                    housing for extremely low income
                                    families
 6 Los Arboles       1998      43   Owner: Area Housing Authority; Family        2028
                                    housing for very low and low income
 7 Villa Garcia      1998      80   Owner: Many Mansions; Family housing         2038
                                    for very low and low income
 8 Esseff            1999      50   Owner: Many Mansions; Supportive             2029
    Village                         housing for homeless, disabled, and very
                                    low income. 50 affordable and 1
                                    managers unit
 9 Leggett           1986      49   Owner: Area Housing Authority; Family        2036
    Court                           housing for low income
 10 Mountclef        1997      18   Owner: Private; HUD restricted for very      2047
                                    low, low, and moderate income
 11 Hacienda de      2003      25   Owner: Many Mansions; Family housing         2058
    Feliz                           for low income
 12 Richmond         2004      26   Owner: Many Mansions; Supportive             2059
    Terrace                         housing for very low and low income; 13
                                    units reserved for homeless residents and
                                    persons with disabilities. 26 lower income
                                    and 1 managers unit.
 13 Oak Creek        2004      57   Owner: Area Housing Authority; Senior        2059
    Senior Villas                   housing for very low and low income
                                                                                       37
Chapter 2                                                                             Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                                                    Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                            TABLE II-26
                 ASSISTED AFFORDABLE HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS IN THOUSAND OAKS
                                              No. of
                               Year          Lower
                             Income Income                                                                             Covenant
No.         Project        Restricted Units                                   Description                               Expires
 14    Shadow Hills            2005              41      Owner: Many Mansions; Family housing                              2060
                                                         for very low, low and moderate income.
                                                         41 lower income; 60 moderate income or
                                                         unrestricted units.
 15    Bella Vista             2005              71      Owner: Many Mansions; Family housing                              2060
                                                         for very low and low income. 71 lower
                                                         income and 1 managers unit.
 16    Shadows                 2007             147      Owner: Shadows TC Investors; housing                              2062
                                                         for very low and low Income. 147 lower
                                                         income and 1 managers unit.
 17    Fiore                   1996              50      Owner: Area Housing Authority; Family                             2095
       Gardens                                           housing for low income
 18    Florence                1988              64      Owner: Area Housing Authority; Senior                             N/A1
       Janss                                             housing for low income, disabled
 19    Glenn Oaks              1997              39      Owner: Area Housing Authority; Senior                             N/A1
                                                         housing for low income
 20    Hillcrest               1993              10      Owner: United Cerebral Palsy/ Spastic                             N/A2
                                                         Children’s Foundation; 15 beds for
                                                         severely disabled persons; 10 beds for
                                                         income eligible residents
 21    Belair                  1993              10      Owner: United Cerebral Palsy/ Spastic                             N/A2
                                                         Children’s Foundation; 15 beds for
                                                         severely disabled persons; 10 beds for
                                                         income eligible residents
 22    Hillcrest               2013              60      Owner: Many Mansions. For families and                            2068
       Apartments                                        individuals; 30 extremely low-income
                                                         supportive housing units for homeless
                                                         and/or persons with disabilities; 8 low-
                                                         and 21 very low-income units and 1
                                                         managers unit
                  Total                    1,021         22 developments: 12 family, 4 senior,
                                                         1 transitional, 2 supportive, 1
                                                         supportive for homeless and disabled,
                                                         2 for severely disabled
1 Units are owned by a joint powers authority of local governments whose mission is to provide affordable housing. As such, these
units are not at-risk of conversion to market rate housing.
2 Facility is owned by national charitable organization dedicated to serving the needs of persons with disabilities. The facility is not
at-risk of conversion to market rate housing.
38

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                         Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                             Housing Needs Assessment
       1.      Units at Risk
Conejo Futures Apartment was financed by a HUD Section 221(D)(4) program. The
project is owned by Conejo Future Apartments, a limited partnership. The project has
90 senior units restricted for low income residents. Affordability restrictions imposed by
HUD ended September 2004, however the project continues to receive Project-Based
Section 8 Housing Assistance Payments from HUD based on a 5-year renewable HAP
contract. The current contract expires September of 2014; however, the property is
governed by a Declaration of Restrictions recorded on March 6, 1974, limiting use of the
property to the development of subsidized housing for senior citizens. Moreover, in
March of 2012, the management company (TOPA Management Co.) stated that it
intends to seek renewal of the Section 8 contract. The project is considered to be at a
low risk of converting to market rate during the Housing Element term.
The Housing Action Plan (Table VI-1) contains a program (Program 9) to evaluate the
threat that Conejo Future Apartments will convert to market rate housing and, if
threatened, a plan for preservation as affordable housing.
          2.     Preservation Cost Analysis
Preservation Cost Analysis provided herein assumes sale of at risk projects and
purchase by a non-profit affordable housing provider. Two acquisition and rehabilitation
projects (Shadows Apartment – 2007 and Bella Vista Apartment – 2005) totaling 220
units calculate a per unit acquisition/rehabilitation cost of approximately $242,000 and
$212,000 respectively. The average per unit cost acquisition/rehabilitation was
$232,313. The City of Thousand Oaks/Redevelopment Agency financial participation in
these two projects totaled $12.2 million or $55,746 per unit. Thus, should an ‘at risk’
project be identified and financial assistance for acquisition preservation, it is anticipated
similar financial assistance would be required.
Recent project proposals, pro forma analysis and actual developments in Thousand
Oaks and/or Ventura County suggest a cost per affordable unit ranging from $200,000
to $300,000 (without land cost and dependent on project size i.e. number of units). In
that a senior unit would likely be smaller in square footage than family affordable unit,
for this analysis assume lower unit cost of $200,000 per unit (without land cost).
Property was acquired for two affordable projects in Thousand Oaks at a cost per unit of
approximately $100,000. The cost per unit for these acquisitions was particularly high
because they occurred during the real estate boom of the mid-2000’s. At a development
cost of $300,000 per unit (including land) it would cost $27,000,000 to replace the 90-
unit Conejo Futures Apartment. This estimate reflects 2008 dollars and does not
account for changes in economic conditions that could impact land, construction
material or labor expenses in the future.
Other means of extending affordability restrictions for the units may be available to
owners. At this time City has no reason to believe any at-risk property will be offered
for-sale, or convert to market rate.
                                                                                            39

Chapter 2                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                           Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
          3.    Resources and Programs for Preservation
According to Section 65583(a)(8)(C) of the California Government Code, the Housing
Element should identify public and private nonprofit organizations that have the capacity
to acquire and manage assisted housing developments. Inclusion on this list should be
based on the entity’s expression of interest in acquiring and managing such projects.
Until 2012, the Thousand Oaks Redevelopment Agency was a significant source of
funding for the development of affordable housing. However, in 2011, the State enacted
legislation to dissolve all redevelopment agencies and use redevelopment agency
revenue to help close the States’ budget deficit. Cities and counties sued to block the
measure and on December 29, 2011, the California Supreme Court ruled in favor of the
State. Redevelopment agencies were dissolved in February of 2012, thereby eliminating
a major source of funding for affordable housing.
The City and the former Thousand Oaks Redevelopment Agency primarily partnered
with two non-profit entities to provide affordable housing and preserve affordable
housing opportunities in the community. These include: 1) Area Housing Authority of
the County of Ventura, formed under a Joint Powers Agreement among the cities of
Camarillo, Fillmore, Moorpark, Ojai, Simi Valley, Thousand Oaks and Ventura County;
and 2) Many Mansions, a California nonprofit corporation. Both of these entities
continue to express interest in acquiring and managing additional affordable housing
projects. The City has also partnered with for-profit developers (Arroyo Villas, Shadows
Apartments and others) to provide or preserve affordable housing.
City and former Redevelopment Agency, in cooperation with affordable housing
partners have utilized a variety of funding sources to finance affordable housing projects
including, but not limited to: Redevelopment Agency Housing Funds (Tax Increment
financing), Mortgage Revenue Bonds, Tax Credits, Community Development Block
Grant Funds, other State and Federal funding sources including HOME funds, Multi-
family Housing Program (AHP) funds, Affordable Housing Program funds, Housing
Enabled by Local Partnerships Program (HELP) funds, Housing Bond Funds and
private lending sources.
G.      Future Growth Needs
        1.    Overview of the Regional Housing Needs Assessment
The Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) must be considered by local
governments in their plans for future growth. The RHNA quantifies the anticipated need
for housing within each jurisdiction for the 7.75-year period from January 1, 2014 to
June 30, 2021. Communities then determine how they will address this need by
updating the Housing Elements of their General Plans.
The future need for housing is determined primarily by the forecasted growth in
households in a community. Each new household, created by a child moving out of a
parent's home, by a family moving to a community for employment, and so forth,
creates the need for a housing unit. The housing need for new households is then
40

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                       Chapter 2
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                    Housing Needs Assessment
adjusted to maintain a desirable level of vacancy to promote housing choice and
mobility. An adjustment is also made to account for units expected to be lost due to
demolition, natural disaster, or conversion to non-housing uses. The sum of these
factors – household growth, vacancy need, and replacement need – determines the
construction need for a community. Total housing need is then distributed among four
income categories9 on the basis of the County’s income distribution, with adjustments to
avoid an over-concentration of lower-income households in any community.
           2.        2014-2021 RHNA Allocation
In accordance with Government Code Section 65584, projected housing needs for each
city and county in the Southern California region are prepared by the Southern
California Association of Governments (SCAG) through RHNA. SCAG’s Regional
Council adopted the final Regional Housing Need Allocation October 4, 2012 for the
2014-2021 planning period.
The RHNA process began with an update of the population, employment and household
forecasts for both the region as a whole and for each county. These forecasts were
largely derived from local input, 2010 Census and California Department of Finance
(DOF) population and employment forecasts and modified by regional demographic and
modeling efforts by SCAG.
SCAG then distributed the regional and county forecasts to each subregion and
jurisdiction. The forecasts took vacancy rates and projected housing demolitions into
consideration. The total housing needed in each jurisdiction was then distributed by
income category (very low, low, moderate and above moderate income).
The final RHNA allocation for the City of Thousand Oaks is shown below:
                                                         TABLE II-27
                             RHNA ALLOCATION DETAIL FOR THOUSAND OAKS
                                                                            Housing            Lower-Income
                 Income Category                           %                   Units                 Units
          Above Moderate                                  40%                    77
          Moderate                                        19%                    36
          Low                                             17%                    32
                                                                                                       79
          Very Low                                        24%                    47
          Total                                          100%                   192
          *Government Code (Section 65583(a)(1) requires housing elements to analyze the housing needs for
          extremely low income households. The regulations allow local agencies to calculate the projected housing
          need for extremely low income households at 50% of the projected need for very low income households.
          Therefore, the City’s housing need for the extremely low income category is presumed to be 24 housing
          units and the housing need for the remainder of the very low income category is presumed to be 23 units.
9 Although AB 2634 requires Housing Elements to consider the needs of extremely-low-income households, the
    RHNA does not quantify the need for this category.
                                                                                                                       41

Chapter 2                                            Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Needs Assessment                        Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
The projected housing need for extremely low income households is assumed to equal
50% of the projected need for very low income households. Therefore, the projected
housing need for extremely low income households is 24 units. Programs to address
the housing needs of extremely low income households are described at the end of
Section B of Chapter II (Housing Needs Assessment)
.
42
  Chapter III
Resources

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 3
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                Resources
CHAPTER 3: RESOURCES
A.      Land Resources
        1.     Units Preserved
State law (Government Code Section 65583.1, as amended by AB 720) allows up to
25% of the RHNA allocation to be met by counting existing units made available or
preserved for very-low and low-income households with committed assistance.
Committed assistance involves entering into a legally enforceable agreement from the
beginning of the “projection period” to the end of the second year of the “planning
period” (January 1, 2014 to October 15, 2015) that obligates sufficient funds to make
the units affordable and requires the units to be available for occupancy within two
years of execution of the agreement. Given that the State dissolved the City’s
Redevelopment Agency, which was the main source of funding for affordable housing, it
is unlikely that funds will be available to convert existing market-rate housing to very-low
or low-income housing.
          2.      Densities for Lower, Moderate and Above Moderate Income
                  Housing
Housing Element law recognizes that sites in jurisdictions like Thousand Oaks with
development standards that allow a minimum of 30 dwellings per acre are acceptable
for lower income (low income and below) housing. Alternatively, the law allows
jurisdictions to demonstrate that densities below 30 units per acre are appropriate for
the development of housing for lower income households. The analysis described below
show that densities below 30 units per acre are suitable for lower income housing.
Affordable housing developer Many Mansions determined that a site that allows a
maximum density of 15 units per net acre is suitable for lower income housing. State
and local regulations permit a density bonus of up to 35% for affordable housing
projects, which increases the resulting density from 15 to 20 dwellings per net acre.
With this in mind, affordable housing provider, Many Mansions is constructing a 60-unit
housing project on a site with a maximum zoning density of 15 dwellings per net acre.
A density bonus was applied in this case, thereby allowing the project to be developed
at a density of 20 units per net acre. All of the units are affordable to lower income
households and about half to extremely low income households including the homeless
and persons with disabilities. The project will be completed in 2013.
Table III-1 shows the densities of several housing projects that provide very low and low
income housing in Thousand Oaks. All of these projects required government subsidies
to create housing affordable to lower income households either by acquisition and
rehabilitation or new construction.
                                                                                          43

Chapter 3                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Resources                                            Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                         TABLE III-1
                        DENSITIES OF AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROJECTS
               Project            Year    Income      Zone     Units   Acres   Density
                                         Category                               DU/Ac
  Bella Vista (Rehab)             2005   Very Low   RPD-15U         72   4.90        15
                                          and Low
  Fiore Gardens (New)             1996   Very Low   RPD-14U         50   4.48        11
                                          and Low
  Hacienda De Feliz (New)         2005      Low     RPD-15U         25   1.38        18
  Oak Creek Senior Villas (New)   2005   Very Low   RPD-30U         57   1.83        30
                                          and Low
  Richmond Terrace (Rehab)        2004      Low     R-3             27   1.41        19
  Shadows (Rehab)                 2006   Very Low   R-3            147   4.91        30
                                          and Low
  Sunset Villas (New)             2003      Low     RPD-15U         11   0.66        17
  Hillcrest Apartments (New)      2013   Extremely  RPD-15U         60   2.96        20
                                         Low, Very
                                          Low and
                                            Low
Table III-1 shows that housing affordable to very low and low income households has
been provided at densities from 11 to 30 units per acre. The median density is 18 units
per acre and the average density is 20 units per acre.
Based on this development history, densities of 30 or more units per acre are not
considered necessary for the development of lower income housing. Sites with zoning
that allows 30 units per acre are considered suitable based on density alone, and
zoning that allows densities of 15 units per acre is considered suitable for sites
controlled by an affordable housing provider .
Market-rate apartments can provide housing affordable to low and moderate income
households. As such, sites with densities of 12 to 19.9 units per acre, appropriate for
apartments, are considered suitable for low and moderate income housing.
Densities of less than 12 units per acre are typically developed with detached single
family homes and townhouses. These housing types are suitable for households with
above moderate incomes.
           3.     Inventory of Sites for Housing Development
Section 65583(a)(3) of the Government Code requires Housing Elements to contain an
“inventory of land suitable for residential development, including vacant sites and sites
having potential for redevelopment, and an analysis of the relationship of zoning and
public facilities and services to these sites.” A detailed analysis has been prepared of
vacant land and potential redevelopment opportunities (see Appendix A). The projected
housing capacity for each parcel of land was adjusted where appropriate to account for
44

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 3
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                Resources
environmental constraints (e.g. steep terrain), land use controls (e.g. zoning) and
availability of public utilities (e.g. water service).
A discussion of public facilities and infrastructure needed to serve future development is
contained in Section IV.B, Non-Governmental Constraints. There are currently no
known service limitations that would preclude the level of development reflected in the
City’s RHNA allocation. Developers are required to pay fees and construct public
improvements related to the demand their projects place on infrastructure prior to, or
concurrent with, development.
The estimated capacity of every parcel in the land inventory was based on experience
with actual developments designed under existing development standards. Densities of
30 units per acre can be achieved under the existing development standards, which is
the maximum density allowed in the R-3 and RPD-30U zoning classifications. For
example, the 28-unit Avalon Bay project at 2225 Los Feliz Drive is zoned R-3 (Multiple-
family Residential). The project was developed in 2003 at 30 dwellings per net acre.
As described above, the housing capacity of sites listed in the land inventory accounted
for known constraints to development. The following examples from Table A-3 show
how theoretical capacity was reduced to arrive at an estimate of realistic capacity:
               Site 57 is 36.66 acres in area and is zoned R-1-8, which allows single-
                family lots with a minimum lot size of 8,000 square feet. However, the
                housing capacity was reduced from a theoretical capacity of more than
                150 dwellings to only 20 dwellings because most of the site is constrained
                by existing wetlands and future flood control improvements.
               Site 49 contains 23.74 acres with RPD-0.4U-SFD zoning. The housing
                capacity was reduced from a theoretical 9 lots at 0.4 dwellings per acre, to
                only 1 lot. The site has substantial development constraints involving
                secondary road access, steep slopes and endangered plants, but
                development of one custom home is considered feasible.
The inventory of land also includes developed, but underutilized, sites suitable for
redevelopment with new housing (see Table A-4). These sites are currently developed
at densities or intensities that do not fully realize the economic potential of these sites.
Moreover, most of these sites contain aging buildings. The following examples illustrate
the point:
               Site 22 contains 3 underutilized parcels on Los Feliz Drive. Each parcel
                contains a single family residence. Two of the parcels are under common
                ownership and are located west of the Leggett Court affordable apartment
                project. One parcel is located to the east of Leggett Court. It would be
                relatively simple to incorporate these parcels into the existing housing
                project. The owner of the two adjacent lots located west of Leggett Court
                has expressed interest in redeveloping his property for multiple-family
                housing.
                                                                                         45

Chapter 3                                                 Thousand Oaks General Plan
Resources                                          Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
            Site 23, consisting of 1.18 acres, is also underutilized. The site has two
             zoning classifications: R-1 (Single Family Residential) and RPD-30U
             (Residential Planned Development -Up to 30 dwellings per net acre). The
             R-1 portion of the property contains a small church, but the northern 0.68
             acres of the site is zoned RPD-30U and is undeveloped, but suitable for
             future development. If just the RPD-30U portion is developed, this site
             could accommodate 20 housing units.
            Site 43 consists of 8 lots on 2.15 acres located on the west side of Conejo
             School Road at Chiquita Lane. The entire site is zoned RPD-30U and
             contains 23 dwellings. The existing uses are expected to constrain
             redevelopment of the site. If redeveloped at the maximum of 30 dwellings
             per net acre, the site could provide 64 dwellings, but the housing capacity
             shown in the land inventory was adjusted downward to 53 units. Four of the
             8 parcels are under common ownership and each parcel contains an aging
             4-unit apartment building. Two of the 8 parcels each contain a 2-unit
             apartment building. The 2 remaining parcels are the largest and the most
             underutilized of the group. One contains a single-family home on 0.47 acres
             and the adjacent parcel contains an aging 3-unit apartment building on 0.55
             acres. The owner of the 3-unit apartment building has expressed interest in
             redeveloping his property in conjunction with the adjacent property.
            Site 53 consists of two adjacent parcels on the west side of Erbes Road,
             involving 1.41 acres. Both of these underutilized parcels contain single-
             family residences. The properties are zoned R-3 and, if redeveloped at the
             maximum of 30 dwellings per net acre for the R-3 zone, could
             accommodate 42 dwellings. However, the estimated housing capacity for
             the site was reduced to 17 dwellings to adjust for site constraints. Site 95
             involves 1.43-acres on Erbes Road. It is zoned R-3 (Multiple Family
             Residential). The site is significantly underutilized. The front of the site
             contains a window tinting business in a building that is approximately 2,500
             square feet in area. The building encompasses only 4% of the site. If
             redeveloped for housing, this site could accommodate 35 dwellings.
            Other underutilized parcels have been developed or approved for housing
             development, but have yet to be constructed. For example, in 2006, an
             11-unit townhouse project was developed on a 1-acre parcel on Chiquita
             Lane. In 2007, two 0.49 acre parcels were combined on Chiquita Lane to
             develop another 11-unit townhouse project. In 2012, a 10-unit apartment
             project was approved on Oak View Drive. All 4 of these parcels contained
             a single-family home.
The land inventory includes a few small parcels deemed appropriate for lower income
housing that are less than one-half acre in size. Other small parcels are deemed
appropriate for moderate income housing because the zoning allows for medium
density (12-15 dwellings per acre) housing. Although small sites are more challenging to
46

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 3
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                 Resources
develop, the City has a track record of housing development activity and consolidation
of small parcels, including:
              In 1998, the City provided financial assistance to non-profit housing
               developer Many Mansions for the development of the Stoll House
               transitional and supportive housing project. The project involved 11 very
               low income housing units on 0.47 acres.
              Land Inventory Sites 113, 114, 116, 118, 123 and 139 are within two
               areas with special development standards that encourage redevelopment
               of small lots for multiple family housing. These sites are appropriate for
               moderate income housing because the zoning allows for development at
               12-15 dwellings per net acre.         There is a good track record of
               redevelopment of small lots in these areas without government
               assistance. A total of 26 small lots have been redeveloped with multiple
               family housing, applications involving another 7 small lots are being
               processed and a small lot project has been approved on Site 116, but has
               yet to be constructed.
              In 2007, a 0.49-acre parcel with a single-family home was approved for 4
               housing units. The zoning for this site allows up to 12 dwellings per net
               acre. This project, located at the northwest corner Chiquita Lane and
               Oakview Drive, has yet to be constructed.
The previous Housing Element included a program to adopt an ordinance granting
incentives for developing underutilized and small lots for affordable housing. This
program was implemented with adoption of Ordinance 1568-NS on February 7, 2012.
Under Ordinance 1568-NS, any two of the incentives described under the density bonus
program are available to developers of affordable housing at 20 or more dwellings per
net acre on underutilized lots or lots that are 1/2-acre or less in area. The land inventory
includes an approved 60-unit affordable housing project proposed by the Area Housing
Authority.
State law (Cal. Govt. Code § 65584.09) requires the City to accommodate its current
RHNA allocation, plus any un-accommodated portion of its prior RHNA allocation. The
City was unable to accommodate 63 units of its previous RHNA allocation for lower-
income housing. Therefore, this 63-unit shortfall was combined with the current RHNA
allocation for the purpose of this land inventory analysis. Table III-2 shows that the City
has enough land with appropriate zoning to meet the “combined” RHNA allocation for all
                                                                                          47

Chapter 3                                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Resources                                                           Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                        TABLE III-2
                                LAND INVENTORY SUMMARY TO MEET RHNA
                                                          Housing Unit Need by Income Category
                                                                                Above-
                                                    Lower1         Moderate    Moderate      Total
   Current RHNA Allocation                                    79          36            77       192
   Unmet Need from Prior Period                               63            0            0         63
   Combined RHNA Allocation                                 142           36            77       255
   Land Inventory
         Units Approved (Table A-1)                           56          10          213        279
         Vacant Land Inventory                              314           83          307        704
         (Table A-2)
         Underutilized Land                                 145          424             6       575
         Inventory (Table A-3)
         Pending Project with                                 80            0            0         80
         Affordable Housing Partner
         (Table A-4)
         Land Inventory Total                               595          517          526       1638
   RHNA Surplus                                             453          481          449       1383
   1
     Lower income includes extremely low, very low and low income.
   Source: Appendix A: Tables A-1, A-2, and A3
The previous Housing Element included a program to accommodate that portion of the
City’s RHNA allocation (63 units) that could not be met by the City’s land inventory (the
RHNA shortfall). It called for amending the General Plan land use and specific plan/
zoning designations for Site 104 (Conejo Center Drive at Conejo Spectrum Street) or a
portion thereof, to accommodate the RHNA shortfall.
The proposed rezoning of Site 104 was not accomplished as planned. The City and a
pension fund were parties to a Land Dedication and Implementation Agreement for the
construction and operation of an affordable housing project on the property. The
pension fund chose not to build the project and assigned the agreement to another
party. The City Council approved assignment of the agreement to Meta Housing, Inc. on
May 22, 2012, and is reviewing proposed changes to the agreement that Meta Housing
would like to make.
B.       Financial and Administrative Resources
         1.        State and Federal Resources
                   a.       Community Development Block Grant Program (CDBG)
Federal funding for housing programs is available through the Department of Housing
and Urban Development (HUD). As an Entitlement City, Thousand Oaks participates in
48

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                     Chapter 3
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                              Resources
the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program. The City’s 2011-2012
CDBG entitlement grant totaled $607,098. During the program year, $334,000 was
used for improvements at 3 multi-family, rental complexes restricted to occupancy by
lower-income households. The City used an additional $91,062 for grants to non-profit
agencies providing social services to lower-income residents. The City uses 15% of its
annual CDBG entitlement (approximately $101,000 in FY 2008/2009) for grants to non-
profit social service providers to help address the needs of low and very low income
households, including special needs populations. Uses of federal funds are described
in detail in the City’s 2005-2010 Consolidated Plan. Usually, CDBG funds can be used
in areas where at least 51% of the households have annual incomes that are less than
50% of the Area Median Family Income (MFI). Because Thousand Oaks meets HUD’s
“exception criteria”, the City is permitted to use CDBG funds in areas where at least
29.4% of the households earn less than 50% of the Area MFI.
               b.      Section 8 Rental Assistance
The City maintains membership in, and is served by the Area Housing Authority of the
County of Ventura, which administers the Section 8 Housing Assistance Payments
Program. In 2012, the Area Housing Authority assisted 567 lower-income households
in Thousand Oaks with Section 8 vouchers. The Section 8 vouchers assist lower-
income households by paying the difference between 30% of an eligible household's
income and the actual cost of renting a unit.
               c.      Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Program
The Low-Income Housing Tax Credit Program was created by the Tax Reform Act of
1986 to provide an alternate method of funding low-and moderate-income housing.
Each state receives a tax credit, based upon population, which can be used to fund
housing that meets program guidelines. The tax credits are then used to leverage
private capital into new construction or acquisition and rehabilitation of affordable
housing. Limitations on projects funded under the Tax Credit programs include
minimum requirements that a certain percentage of units remain rent-restricted, based
upon median income. Thousand Oaks has leveraged tax credits with other resources
for several affordable housing projects in the City.
               d.      Mortgage Credit Certificates (MCC)
This program provides a federal tax credit for income-qualified homebuyers’ equivalent
to 20% of the annual mortgage interest. Generally, the tax savings are calculated as
income to help buyers qualify to purchase a home. The City participates in this program
as a member of a countywide consortium with the County of Ventura and other local
cities. The program is administrated by Affordable Housing Applications, Inc.
               e.      Other State and Federal Resources
City and local affordable housing developers have also utilized other state and federal
funding sources to help provide affordable housing where possible. HOME funds have
been awarded to non-profit Community Housing Development Organizations (CHDOs)
                                                                                      49

Chapter 3                                                     Thousand Oaks General Plan
Resources                                              Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
as residual receipts loans. Many Mansions used HOME funds to build or acquire the
following affordable housing developments: Hacienda de Feliz, Bella Vista, Richmond
Terrace, Esseff Village and Stoll House. Mortgage revenue bond financing has also
been used by the City when financing terms and conditions were appropriate. These
funding sources are typically used on a project-by-project basis and are not stable
annual funding sources like CDBG However, they do represent the City’s commitment
to work with non-profit and for profit developers in applying for all available funding
resources that could be used to ensure an affordable housing project.
          2.      Local Resources
                a.      Social Services Endowment Fund
The City established a $2,000,000 Social Services Endowment Fund in 1986 to improve
social services within Thousand Oaks. The City uses interest from that Fund to
supplement the social services component of the CDBG program. In 2011-2012, a
Social Services Endowment Fund grant of $105,737 was combined with $91,062 in
CDBG funds to create a social services budget of $196,799.
                b.      Thousand Oaks Redevelopment Agency Set-aside Funds
Until 2012, the Thousand Oaks Redevelopment Agency was a significant source of
funding for the development of affordable housing. The Agency set-aside 20% of its
annual tax increment to assist in the production and preservation of affordable housing.
In June 2011, the Governor signed legislation to eliminate all redevelopment agencies
in the State. The constitutionality of the legislation was challenged, but on December
29, 2011, the Supreme Court determined that the legislation was constitutional. As a
result, the Thousand Oaks Redevelopment Agency and all other redevelopment
agencies in the State ceased to exist as of February 1, 2012. This severely limited the
ability of local jurisdictions to provide financial assistance to affordable housing projects.
The City of Thousand Oaks opted to assume the housing-related duties and obligations
of the former Redevelopment Agency and to retain its assets (other than cash in the low
and moderate income housing fund, per State law).
                c.      Tenant Based Rental Assistance (TBRA)
The City’s Tenant Based Rental Assistance (TBRA) program has been in existence
since 2004. This program has been funded through three grants under the State of
California HOME Program in the amounts of $250,000 for 15 tenants (03-HOME-0682),
$500,000 for 30 tenants (05-HOME-2124), and $800,000 for 30 tenants (09-HOME-
6257). The Redevelopment Agency provided additional administrative support of
$18,950 to the 2003 HOME award. For the interim period after the 2005 HOME award
expired, the Redevelopment Agency budgeted $346,200 for the program prior to the
City receiving the 2009 HOME award. The City contracts with the Area Housing
Authority of the County of Ventura (AHA) to be the Program Administrator for these
grants. AHA screens and approves eligible Thousand Oaks recipients for TBRA
funding, and monitors and administers the program.                 Consistent with program
50

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 3
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                Resources
guidelines, income-eligible Thousand Oaks residents on the Section 8 wait list may
receive temporary rental assistance for two years while waiting to receive a permanent
Section 8 certificate. TBRA program requirements mirror HUD Section 8 Voucher
Choice Program restrictions, thus TBRA recipients are able to transition to permanent
assistance from the Section 8 program. Funding for the TBRA program will end in May
2013.
                d.    Affordable Housing Programs/ Housing Trust Fund
In order to provide additional funding sources for affordable housing, on September 9,
2008, the City Council adopted an ordinance creating certain affordable housing
programs. The ordinance created a housing trust fund, an inclusionary housing program
and a nonresidential development linkage fee program. Under the inclusionary housing
program, certain residential projects are required to allocate 10% of the units as
affordable housing or pay an in-lieu fee. Resolutions were also approved establishing
the inclusionary housing in-lieu fee and nonresidential development linkage fee.
The in-lieu fee was set at $9,000 per detached single-family dwelling and $25,000 per
condominium/townhome unit. Nonresidential development linkage fees were
established at $4.50 a square foot for retail/commercial land uses and, $2.50 a square
foot for office and lodging use categories. Depending on density and development type,
these fees could generate approximately $28.6 to $42.4 million for affordable housing
through build out of the City.
The in-lieu fee and non-residential development linkage fee were set to zero in May of
2009 in consideration for the weak market conditions. The fees have been re-examined
every year since then, but they have not been raised in light of continued weak
economic conditions. When economic conditions change and the fees are raised, the
resulting funds will be placed in the City’s Housing Trust Fund for the purpose of
developing affordable housing. On December 18, 2012, City Council directed Staff to
report back prior to June 30, 2013 with an updated analysis of the in-lieu and non-
residential linkage fees and recommend adjustments, if appropriate.
The balance in the Housing Trust Fund, as of February of 2013, is approximately $2.5
million. This resource is available to support future affordable housing projects.
                e.    Habitat for Humanity
Habitat for Humanity is an international organization that assists in providing
homeownership opportunities for lower income households. Through volunteer labor
and donations, members of the local chapters assist families in building or rehabilitating
housing. One of the goals of the program is to provide long-term affordable housing.
Habitat for Humanity of Ventura County (“Habitat”) is active in Thousand Oaks as well
as other areas of the County. In Thousand Oaks, Habitat has assisted four households
in becoming homeowners to date.
                                                                                        51

Chapter 3                                                 Thousand Oaks General Plan
Resources                                           Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
              f.      Area Housing Authority
The City is served by the Area Housing Authority of Ventura County (AHA), a public
housing authority of which the City is a member. The AHA assists lower-income
households in Thousand Oaks. Households assisted by the AHA in the City include the
567 Section 8 vouchers, 160 public housing units, and 98 locally-owned affordable
units.
In 2006 and 2007, the City helped the AHA acquire land on Los Feliz Drive for a future
affordable housing project. In June of 2006, the Redevelopment Agency loaned the
AHA $5,200,000 from Redevelopment Housing Tax Allocation Refunding Bonds to
acquire four parcels at 1972, 1994, 2020, and 2026 Los Feliz Drive. In March of 2007,
the Redevelopment Agency agreed to loan the AHA an additional $750,000 to purchase
an adjacent parcel located at 1990 Los Feliz Drive. The five parcels encompass a total
of 2.2 acres. The City approved a 60-unit affordable housing project for this site in 2009.
              g.      Non-Profit Affordable Housing Corporations
Many Mansions is a non-profit affordable housing and services agency that has been
very active in the Thousand Oaks area for over 30 years. The organization provides a
variety of services and programs including owning and managing affordable housing
developments. The City has collaborated with Many Mansions to acquire existing
housing units for preservation as affordable units and to construct new units to increase
the City’s inventory of affordable and workforce housing units. Examples of City/Many
Mansions collaborations include development of the Bella Vista Apartments, Hacienda
de Feliz, and Richmond Terrace (formerly Warwick) Apartments.
Many Mansions also provides a variety of support programs for its residents and the
community, including:
             Children’s programs for its resident children, including an after-school
              homework tutoring program, a summer camp program, the back-pack
              school supplies program and life skills programs for teens;
             Adult programs for its resident adults, including emergency food through
              FOOD Share, counseling, case management, job development and
              parenting training for its formerly homeless residents and/or persons with
              disabilities; and
             The “More-Than-Housing” office which is a community resource center
              with information on housing and other social services throughout the
              Conejo Valley.
Cabrillo Economic Development Corporation (CEDC) is another non-profit housing and
services agency. The organization provides comprehensive housing services to
individuals and families who are in need throughout Ventura and Santa Barbara
counties. CEDC builds, rehabilitates and manages affordable housing. CEDC also
provides education, counseling and lending services to help low and moderate income
households become homeowners.
52

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 3
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                 Resources
              h.     For-Profit Affordable Housing Providers
The former Redevelopment Agency also partnered with for-profit developers to produce
affordable housing. A recent example of this type of project was the funding assistance
provided to Shadows TC Investors LP to acquire and rehabilitate the 148-unit Shadows
Apartment project. The project, which is located at 1949 Los Feliz Drive, was acquired
and rehabilitated in 2007 with $6,900,000 in assistance from the Agency as well as a
variety of other sources including tax credits. Affordability restrictions were extended for
45 units (30 very low and 15 low income units) and new affordability restrictions were
attached to 102 units (15 very low and 87 low income units). One unit was also reserved
for an on-site manager. All of the income-restricted units must remain affordable for at
least 55 years.
C.     Energy Conservation Opportunities
State law requires all new construction to comply with "energy budget" standards that
establish maximum allowable energy use. These requirements apply to such design
components as structural insulation, air infiltration and leakage control, setback features
on thermostats, water heating system insulation (tanks and pipes) and swimming pool
covers if a pool is equipped with a fossil fuel or electric heater. State law also requires
that a tentative tract map provide for future passive or natural heating or cooling
opportunities in the subdivision, including designing the lot sizes and configurations to
permit orienting structures to take advantage of a southern exposure, shade or
prevailing breezes.
Southern California Edison and the Southern California Gas Company offer energy
conservation programs to residents of Thousand Oaks including audits of home energy
use to reduce electricity consumption, refrigerator rebates, appliance repair and
weatherization assistance to qualified low income households, buyer’s guides for
appliances and incentives to switch from electric to gas appliances.
Both companies have programs to encourage energy conservation in new construction.
Southern California Edison’s energy rebate program applies to residential developers as
well as individual customers, and the Gas Company’s Energy Advantage Home
Program is offered to residential developers who install energy-efficient gas appliances.
Changes to the state’s building energy efficiency standards for new construction, known
as Title 24, went into effect on July 1, 2009. The standards for new homes require
windows that are more resistant to heat and better insulated, more efficient lighting,
heating, ventilating and air conditioning systems, and “cool roofs” that stay cooler than
normal roofs when exposed to the sun. These changes will substantially reduce the
amount of energy consumed in every new residence.
The City’s guidelines for development of residential, industrial and institutional projects
(Resolution No. 2006-108), require additional energy conservation measures in building
design. These measures include, but are not limited to, extended eaves or roof
overhangs, external shade features, and solar-treated glass for south and west facing
windows.
                                                                                         53

Chapter 3                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Resources                                             Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
The previous Housing Element contained a program to allow the City’s housing
rehabilitation program to provide financial assistance for energy conservation measures.
Given that the City’s redevelopment agency was terminated by the State, the City has
limited funding, if any, to provide financial assistance for energy conservation.
54

  Chapter IV
Constraints

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                     Chapter 4
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                             Constraints
CHAPTER 4: CONSTRAINTS
In planning for the provision of housing, constraints to housing development must be
recognized. Local government cannot mitigate many of these constraints, particularly
those related to the condition of the national economy and a jurisdiction’s environmental
setting, but others can be addressed. Constraints to housing are addressed below as
either governmental constraints or non-governmental constraints.
A.      Governmental Constraints
Governmental regulations, while intentionally requiring the infrastructure necessary to
serve development and regulating the quality of development in the community can
also, unintentionally, increase the cost of development and thus the cost of housing.
These governmental constraints include land use controls, building codes and their
enforcement, site improvements, fees, and other exactions required of developers, and
local processing and permit procedures. Land use controls may limit the amount or
density of development, thus increasing the cost per unit.
Off-site improvements, such as road improvements, traffic signals on adjacent streets,
drainage, water and wastewater system improvements necessary to serve a project
may increase costs of development. Processing and permit requirements may increase
financing and/or overhead costs. The following section evaluates potential
governmental constraints that may affect the cost of housing in Thousand Oaks.
        1.     Land Use Plans and Regulations
               a.      General Plan
Each city and county in California must prepare a comprehensive, long-term General
Plan to guide its future. The Land Use Element of the General Plan establishes the
basic land uses and maximum density of development within the various areas of the
City. Under state law, the City’s zoning must be consistent with the General Plan.
The Thousand Oaks General Plan provides the framework for the physical development
of the City itself, and certain nearby unincorporated areas, which together comprise the
Thousand Oaks Planning Area.
The residential land use designations of the Land Use Element of the General Plan can
be grouped into four broad density categories: Very Low Density Residential (Up to 2
dwellings per net acre), Low Density Residential (2 to 4.5 dwellings per net acre),
Medium Density Residential (4.6 to 15 dwellings per net acre) and High Density
Residential (15 to 30 dwellings per net acre). The Element also contains a “Mobile
Home Exclusive” category and one flexible “Commercial/Residential” designation for a
specific parcel governed by a specific plan allowing either commercial or residential
uses in accordance with a specific plan.
                                                                                      55

Chapter 4                                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Constraints                                                           Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                         TABLE IV-1
                GENERAL PLAN LAND USE ELEMENT DESIGNATIONS FOR RESIDENTIAL
                             Maximum
      Designation              Density1                                  Description
   Very Low                          2           This density is characteristic of large single-family estate
   Density                                       lots and equestrian estates, often in environmentally
                                                 sensitive areas or areas of steep slope.
   Low Density                     4.5           This density would include predominantly single-family
                                                 detached or attached homes.
   Medium Density                   15           Medium density may include townhouses, garden and
                                                 condominium apartments and mobile homes. This
                                                 density should be located predominantly near major
                                                 centers of activity.
   High Density                     30           Dwelling units can be of any type, and should be located
                                                 primarily at sites accessible and close to major centers of
                                                 activity and along the Ventura Freeway.
   Mobile Home                     Not           Mobile Home Exclusive land use category established in
   Exclusive                 Applicable          August 2008 for nine existing mobile home parks in City.
   Source: City of Thousand Oaks General Plan.
   1
     Density expressed in dwelling units per net acre.
                    b.       Measure E
City Ordinance No. 1280-NS (Measure E) was adopted in response to a ballot initiative
passed by the electorate in November 1996. This ordinance requires that any
amendment to the Land Use Element of the City’s General Plan that would increase
residential land use density or increase the amount of commercial acreage beyond the
City’s General Plan of November 5, 1996, is subject to approval of the electorate.
The following exemptions are provided in the ordinance:
         1.         Where the amendment is necessary to avoid, or the application of the
                    voter approval requirement of this section would be deemed, an
                    unconstitutional taking of property under the United States or California
                    Constitutions, be contrary to federal laws, or the laws of this state.
         2.         Where the amendment is necessary in order to comply with, or is directed
                    under a court order, judgment, writ or mandate.
         3.         Where the amendment is necessary for a viable use of publicly-owned
                    land which has been determined by the owner to be, and is declared
                    surplus as no longer needed for a public purpose, such as unneeded
                    school sites.
Since Measure E was approved, there have been no amendments to the Land Use
Element that have required a vote of the electorate. Therefore, to date, Measure E has
not been a significant impediment to the development of housing. Although the cost,
56

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                      Chapter 4
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                             Constraints
delay and uncertainty of holding such elections could eventually pose a constraint on
housing development, Measure E is not a constraint at this point. The existing Land Use
Element has sufficient capacity to accommodate housing growth during this Housing
Element projection period.
               c.    SOAR
The Save Open Space and Agricultural Resources (SOAR) initiative was passed by the
voters of Ventura County in November of 1998. A companion initiative, the “City Urban
Reserve Boundary” (CURB) was also passed by the voters of Thousand Oaks at the
same time. It created a prohibition on most urban development outside of the City’s
Sphere of Influence until December 31, 2030, unless approved by the electorate.
However, it exempts development that will help fulfill the City’s highest priority housing
need as required by State law (i.e. for low and very low income housing).
Most of the area outside of the City’s Sphere of Influence is already planned for very low
density residential development. As such, although SOAR also limits the density of
development in this area, it is not a significant constraint on the development of housing
in Thousand Oaks.
               d.    Zoning Designations
The City regulates the type, location, density, and scale of residential development
through the Municipal Code. Zoning regulations serve to implement the General Plan
and are designed to protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of
residents. The Municipal Code also helps to preserve the character and integrity of
existing neighborhoods, by setting forth residential development standards for each
zone district.
The nine zones that allow residential development are as follows:
               R-A Rural Agriculture
               R-O Single-Family Estate
               R-E Rural Exclusive
               R-1 Single Family Residential
               R-2 Two-Family Residential
               R-P-D Residential Planned Development
               R-3 Multiple-Family Residential
               H-P-D Hillside Planned Development
               T-P-D Trailer Park Development
A summary of the zoning standards for the residential zones is provided in Table IV-2.
These zoning standards continue to be viewed as necessary to protect the public
health, safety and welfare and maintain the quality of life, and are not considered
constraints on the development of housing.
                                                                                        57

Chapter 4                                                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Constraints                                                                     Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                              TABLE IV-2
                                                        RESIDENTIAL ZONES
    Development                                                     Zoning Designations
      Standard                 R-O          R-1        R-2     R-P-D R-3                R-A         R-E       T-P-D       H-P-D
Maximum                                                                                                                    varies
Density                           2          6          12        301         30           1          4         12
(DU/net ac)                                                                                                               w/slope
Minimum Lot                  20,000 7,000             7,000 5,5002 7,000 43,560 10,000 2,5006                               n/a
Area (sq. ft.)
Minimum Front                    35          20         20        203        203         20          20         20           20
Yard (ft.)
Minimum Interior
Side Yard (ft.)                  5+         5+         5+       0-159       8-109        5+          5+         5+           20
Minimum Rear                     20          20         20         20         20         20          20         5+           20
Yard (ft.)
Maximum
Building Height                 255         255        255        254        254         255        255         327          25
(ft.)
Source:
1
          Thousand Oaks Zoning Ordinance
 Top of R-P-D sub-zone density range
2
  Average lot area. Reduced to 5,000 sq ft for SFD only
3
4
  20 ft plus 5 ft for each 10 ft in height above 25 ft
  May increase 2 ft for every 0.5 ft increase in side yard. (additional height increase allowed for affordable housing)
5
  May increase to 35 ft if two side yards are each 15 ft
6
7
  Minimum mobile home space. Average space: 3,500 square feet
   Applies to permanent structures only
8
   Density varies based on average slope from 4 units/ac to 0.1 units/ac
9
  Minimum side yard varies by housing type and wall height
Densities range from the lower-density rural single-family zones with a maximum of 0.1
units per acre in the H-P-D zone to a maximum of 30 units per acre in the R-3 and RPD
Zones. Density bonuses would permit up to 35% more units than permitted by the
underlying zone, subject to the provision of affordable housing as specified by State law.
It should be noted that an additional “farm cottage” for farm workers is permitted for
each 10 acres in both the Rural Agricultural (R-A) and Rural Exclusive (R-E) zones if
the parcel is 10 acres or larger.
A summary of the type of residential development permitted by the City’s zoning code is
provided in Table IV-3.
                                                              TABLE IV-3
                                    PERMITTED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT BY ZONE
    Housing Type Permitted                    RO         R-1     R-2      R-P-D        R-3       R-A        R-E     T-P-D H-P-D
  Single Family Detached                        P         P        P         P           P         P          P         X      P
  Multi-Family Rental (Apts)                    X         X        P         P*          P         X          X         X     P**
  and For-sale (Condos)
  High Density Multi-family                     X         X        X         P*          P         X          X         X      X
  Source: Thousand Oaks Zoning Ordinance
  P = Permitted X= Not expressly allowed
  *
    Depending on subzone (e.g. RPD-7U-SFD, RPD-15U or RPD-30U)
  **Except in H-P-D S-F-D sub-zones
58

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 4
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                Constraints
Low income housing can be accommodated in all zones permitting residential use in
Thousand Oaks. These include second residential units that can be developed in each
residential zone, provided the lot already contains a single-family detached unit. No
minimum unit sizes are required in any zone, thereby permitting a wide range of unit types.
The Residential Planned Development (R-P-D) Zone is the most flexible zone category
and permits varying densities from under two dwelling units per net acre up to 30
dwelling units per net acre, depending on the sub-zone and the underlying General Plan
Land Use Element designation. The RPD Zone permits multi-story apartment structures
if increased setback standards are satisfied.
Special development standards have also been established for selected areas with
R-P-D zoning. The special standards are intended to encourage redevelopment with
multiple family housing in certain aging, small lot, single family neighborhoods. These
include the “Royal Oaks Model Neighborhood Area” east of Hampshire Road and north
of the Ventura Freeway, as well as a small area on the north side of Los Robles Road.
Special development standards also apply to 35 acres west of Hampshire Road, north
of Highway 101, south of Crescent Way and east of Live Oak Street. In consideration
for the small size of the lots in these areas, special development standards allow fewer
and/or smaller parking spaces, tandem parking, reduced setbacks and narrower
driveways than would otherwise be allowed.
Certain specific plan areas allow for residential development. The Rancho Conejo
Specific Plan (Specific Plan No. 7) contains two vacant parcels with the “High Density”
Specific Plan Designation (See Appendix A, Table A-2, Sites 105 and 106). This
designation defaults to the development standards of the RPD-30U zoning
classification. The Thousand Oaks Boulevard Specific Plan (Specific Plan No. 20)
allows up to 214 dwellings as residential stand-alone or mixed-use development (See
Appendix A, Table A-3, Site 171). Residential projects must consist of attached multi-
family units with a minimum density of 10 dwellings per acre. No guest parking is
required. The 401 West Hillcrest Specific Plan (Specific Plan No. 17) allows for senior
housing only (See Appendix A, Table A-2, Site 100). Maximum densities range from 15
dwellings per net acre in Planning Area 1 (mixed-use permitted) to 20 dwellings per net
acre (stand-alone only) in Planning Area 2. However, residential development potential
within Specific Plan No. 7 is constrained by steep terrain and other site limitations.
The City’s zoning classification system does not pose a significant constraint on housing
development.
               e.     Development Standards
The City’s development standards have not significantly constrained housing supply in
Thousand Oaks or the ability of developers to achieve the maximum permitted
densities. For example, the 28-unit Avalon Bay project was developed in 2003 at 30
dwelling per net acre, which is the maximum density allowed in the R-3 (Multiple-family
Residential) zoning classification for the project. The project is located at 2225 Los Feliz
Drive. While it is possible to build at the maximum density, many for-profit developers
build at less than the maximum density. They do so because there has been a higher
                                                                                         59

Chapter 4                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Constraints                                          Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
market demand for 2-story townhomes than there is for stacked-flat one-story
condominiums and apartments.
Off-street Parking Requirements
The City’s parking requirements for residential zones vary by housing product as shown
in Table IV-4. According to a 2002 survey (“Parking Standards; Selected cities and
counties” by Choate Parking Consultants, Inc.), these standards are common
throughout California. They are reasonable and necessary to protect the public health,
safety and general welfare.
In 2005, a change to California Government Code (Section 65915 (p)) allows for lower
parking standards for developments eligible to receive a density bonus. Developers that
agree to provide senior housing or a certain percentage of affordable units can request a
density bonus incentives and lower parking standards. Such developments can provide
one parking space for units with less than two bedrooms, two parking spaces for two and
three bedroom units and two and one-half spaces for units with four of more bedrooms.
The previous Housing Element included a program to study the City’s regulations
governing parking structures and recommend revisions, if necessary, to ensure that
they do not unreasonably constrain the development of affordable housing. It also
contained a program to amend the Municipal Code to expressly allow parking
reductions for housing types with a demonstrated lower need for parking, including
housing for the elderly and persons with disabilities, and to clarify that parking standards
may be reduced for affordable housing that meets the criteria for a density bonus per
Government Code Section 65915 (p). These programs were implemented with adoption
of Ordinance 1569-NS on February 7, 2012. For example, Ordinance 1569-NS changed
the City’s regulations to expressly allow parking structures if needed to accommodate
residential densities of 20 or more dwellings per net acre.
Except for the Model Neighborhood Area, a standard parking space must be at least 9’
wide and 20’ deep and tandem parking is not allowed. With respect to apartment and
condominium developments, up to 35% of the guest parking can consist of compact
spaces with minimum dimensions of 8 by 16 feet. In consideration for the small size of
the lots in the Model Neighborhood, a standard parking space of 8.5’ by 19’ deep is
allowed.
                                         TABLE IV-4
                           RESIDENTIAL PARKING REQUIREMENTS
           Type of Unit                  Minimum Parking Spaces Required
     Single Family Residence 4 or fewer bedrooms- 2 enclosed spaces
                              5-6 bedrooms – 3 enclosed spaces
                              7 or more bedrooms – 4 enclosed spaces
     Mobile Home Park         2 spaces (may be tandem, 1 covered); plus 1 space per unit
                              for guest parking
     Condominiums1            2 spaces (enclosed or covered); plus 1 space per unit for
                              guest parking
60

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                            Chapter 4
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                   Constraints
                                             TABLE IV-4
                               RESIDENTIAL PARKING REQUIREMENTS
             Type of Unit                    Minimum Parking Spaces Required
                   1
      Apartments
       - Studio or 1 Bedroom      1 space covered; plus ½ guest space
       - 2 Bedroom                1 ½ spaces (1 covered); plus ½ guest space
       - 3 or more bedrooms       2 spaces (1 covered); plus ½ guest space
      Senior housing2             1 space; plus ¼ guest space
      Persons with disabilities2  Based parking study to demonstrate need
      Density bonus incentive2    Refer to density bonus program incentives
      1
        Planning Commission may approve condominiums and apartments with fewer spaces
      Source: Thousand Oaks Municipal Code
       2
         Added to implement program in the 2006-2014 Housing Element
Thousand Oaks Municipal Code Section 9-4.904 (b) allows the Planning Commission to
modify the parking requirements with respect to apartment and condominium housing
projects in the R-P-D Zone.
Building Height Limits
Limitations on height can also affect the amount of housing that can be built on a given
site. The maximum height in the zones where multiple family housing is permitted (R-3
and R-P-D) is 25’ plus 2’ for every ½ foot increase in side yard setback.
The minimum side yard for a 2-story apartment building is 10 feet in the R-3 zone. The
minimum side yard setback for an apartment building in the R-P-D zone is 15 feet. As
such, side yards of 15’ in the R-3 zone and 20’ in the R-P-D zone are necessary to
establish a 35’ high apartment building. It is possible that the existing building height
limits may affect the otherwise allowable density, with a commensurate effect on
housing costs or the ability to achieve densities appropriate for affordable housing,
particularly for smaller infill properties.
The previous Housing Element included a program to study the City’s regulations
governing building height and recommend revisions, if necessary, to ensure that they do
not unreasonably constrain the development of affordable housing. This program was
implemented with adoption of Ordinance 1569-NS in February of 2012. Ordinance
1569-NS allows the side yard setback requirements for buildings in excess of 25’ to be
modified when necessary to accommodate the housing need for lower income
households specified in the Housing Element of the Thousand Oaks General Plan.
Conclusion
The City’s current development standards do not present a significant constraint on the
development of housing.
                                                                                            61

Chapter 4                                                 Thousand Oaks General Plan
Constraints                                        Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
               f.     Accessory Units
The City of Thousand Oaks allows for the development of second dwelling units by-right
(i.e., no discretionary approval required) within each residential zone if a single-family
detached dwelling unit already occupies the lot. The development standards are
reasonable to ensure neighborhood compatibility and meet the requirements of State
law governing second units in Government Code Sections 65852.150 and 65852.2. No
credit has been taken for accessory housing units in the City’s inventory of land for
residential development shown in Chapter III of the Housing Element. The City’s
requirements for the development of accessory units do not hinder the City from
meeting its share of the regional need for housing for households of all income levels,
nor the housing needs of persons with disabilities and homeless persons.
               g.     Density Bonus
Under State law (SB 1818 of 2004), cities and counties must provide a density increase
up to 35% over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the zoning
ordinance and the Land Use Element of the General Plan when builders agree to
construct housing developments for seniors or containing a certain percentage of units
affordable to very low, low or moderate income households. In addition to a density
bonus, if requested by a builder, certain incentives, modifications, concessions or
waivers must be granted. California Government Code 65915 et seq requires all cities
and counties to adopt an ordinance that describes how the local jurisdiction will
implement State density bonus law. The City Council adopted such an ordinance to
comply with State law on September 9, 2008 and modified on June 8, 2010 to address
changes to State density bonus law.
               h.     Manufactured Housing
State law (Government Code Section 65852.3), precludes local governments from
prohibiting the installation of manufactured homes on permanent foundations on single-
family lots. Manufactured homes are allowed in any residential zone in Thousand Oaks
subject to the same development standards and guidelines as conventional homes.
Both manufactured and conventional homes must comply with the City’s architectural
review guidelines. These requirements are not a significant constraint on housing
development.
               i.     Mobile Homes
Government Code Section 65852.7 declares a mobile home park to be a permitted land
use on any land planned and zoned for residential use as designated in the General
Plan. In addition, mobile home parks are the only residential use permitted in the Trailer
Park Development (T-P-D) Zone. Mobile home parks in the T-P-D zone must include a
minimum site area of 10 acres and at least 3% of the site area must be devoted to
recreational purposes. A minimum of 2,500 square feet of net lot area and an average
of 3,500 square feet of net lot area must be provided for each home, exclusive of roads,
recreation areas or other common facilities. These requirements are not a significant
constraint on housing development.
62

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                      Chapter 4
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                              Constraints
There are now eight mobile home parks in Thousand Oaks. All mobile home parks in
the City were affected by a ballot initiative. The initiative qualified for the November
2008 election, but under State law the City had the option of adopting the measure. The
City adopted the measure on July 15, 2008. The initiative placed all mobile home parks
in Thousand Oaks in a new General Plan land use category of “Mobile Home Exclusive”
and changed the zoning for all parks to T-P-D (Trailer Park Development). Any future
change to the land use designation and zoning requires approval by a vote of the
people, unless park tenants receive certain payments as dictated by the measure. The
initiative also requires a mobile home park owner proposing to close or change the use
of a park to pay the tenants displaced by the closure or change of use for the
reasonable costs of relocation as defined in the Initiative.
The owner of Conejo Mobile Home Park and the City became involved in litigation
related to a proposal by the owner to close the park. The main dispute centered on
whether the City had the authority to require the park owner to make payments to
displaced tenants as spelled out in the Initiative. Government Code §65863.7 specifies
that the required payments may not exceed the “reasonable costs of relocation.” The
Court issued a Statement of Decision on January 8, 2010. It determined that the
payments specified in the Initiative exceeded the parameters of Government Code
§65863.7. The City could not, therefore, require the park owner to make the payments
outlined in the initiative. Conejo Mobile Home Park closed in 2011 and all of the
displaced tenants received payments in conformance with the Court decision.
In addition, mobile home parks are subject to the City’s Mobile Home Park Rent
Stabilization Ordinance. The ordinance limits the amount that space rental rates can
increase over time. While this may discourage developers from creating new mobile
home parks, it protects existing park tenants from large rental rate increases.
In 2010, a park owner applied for rent increases for two parks, seeking a “just and
reasonable” return, as allowed by the Mobile Home Rent Stabilization Ordinance. These
rent increases would have been detrimental to mobile home park residents due to the
large percentage increase in existing rents being sought.
In 2010, the City Council decided it was in everyone’s best interest to develop a
comprehensive approach to future mobile home rent issues and embarked on a
program to reach a mediated agreement among the park residents and park owners.
One park had already been approved for closure and another was approved for
conversion (subdivision) into an ownership park. The City also faced potential litigation
from park owners concerning its decision to grant smaller “just and reasonable” rent
increases than requested by the two park owners. City, owner and park resident
representatives, respectively, met on several occasions to negotiate a global agreement
on local park rents. Ranch Mobile Home Park tenant representatives did not participate
in the mediation.
The City comprehensively updated its Mobile Home Park Rent Stabilization Ordinance
in 2011 as a result of the mediation. The changes were agreed to by park owners and
park resident representatives. The ordinance allowed greater annual rent increases
                                                                                       63

Chapter 4                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Constraints                                          Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
than the previous ordinance, but the park owners agreed not to seek any “just and
reasonable” increases or convert their parks for 10 years. New tenants at all parks
would be subject to market rent when they moved in, after which their rents would also
be subject to rent stabilization. It should also be noted that park owners agreed to defer
rent increases for existing tenants that are “very low” income and meet certain other
criteria, with the deferred rent to be paid upon sale of the coach.
Condominium Conversions
When for-sale real estate prices escalated in California, many developers started buying
existing apartment buildings and converting them to condominiums. High sales prices
made selling the units more profitable than renting them as apartments.
In many cases, condominium conversions provide entry-level housing that allows
renters to become home owners. On the other hand, condominium conversions reduce
the supply of apartments which is often the only market-rate housing that is affordable
to many households. In addition, renters in the apartments who don’t have the down
payment, income, credit record or desire to buy the converted units are displaced in the
conversion process.
The City has stringent requirements governing the conversion of existing apartments to
condominiums. Tenants who choose not to purchase converted units are eligible to
receive relocation assistance. Condominium conversions must also meet strict design
and construction standards. Moreover, approval of a conversion is contingent on a
finding that the conversion would not adversely affect the supply and availability of
rental housing within the City.
As a result of these requirements, the potential impact of condominium conversions is
not a significant constraint on the preservation of affordable rental housing. No
condominium conversions took place during the prior Housing Element planning period
and no requests have been submitted under this period.
                j.     Building Codes
State law prohibits the imposition of building standards that are not necessitated by
local geographic, climatic or topographic conditions and requires that local governments
making changes or modifications in building standards must report such charges to the
Department of Housing and Community Development and file an expressed finding that
the change is needed.
The City’s building codes are based upon the California Building, Plumbing, Mechanical
and Electrical Codes. These are considered to be the minimum necessary to protect
the public’s health, safety and welfare. The City adopted a number of changes to the
2007 California Codes that are necessary to protect life, health and property based on
local geographic, climatic or topographic conditions. For example, local standards have
been adopted concerning the minimum fire rating for roofing materials and the
reinforcement and depth of footings. These standards are designed to protect the
public from high fire hazards and expansive soil conditions. The amended building
64

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                      Chapter 4
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                             Constraints
standards are reasonable and not considered to be a constraint on housing
development.
               k.      Definition of a Family
The previous Housing Element included a program to amend the definition of the term
“family” to treat unrelated people who live together the same way as related people who
live together. This program was implemented with adoption of Ordinance 1547-NS on
December 14, 2012. The definition of the term family was revised to read: “one or more
persons living together as a single housekeeping unit.”
               l.      Special Needs Housing
Special needs housing includes housing for persons with disabilities, farm workers,
emergency shelters, transitional housing, supportive housing, and single room
occupancy units. The City’s provisions for these housing types are discussed below.
Housing for Persons with Disabilities
The City enforces the requirements of the Building Code which address the needs of
persons with disabilities. The City of Thousand Oaks adopted the 2007 California
Building Code, Plumbing Code, Mechanical Code, and Electric Code with a number of
amendments based on local conditions. The City incorporated and enforces the
accessibility requirements of the Building Code contained in Title 24 without
amendments.
According to Title 24, Chapter 11A of the California Building Code, projects involving 3
or more apartments or 3 or more condominiums must ensure that certain dwelling units
are on an accessible route and are adaptable for use by persons who use wheelchairs
or other mobility aids. If a project involves 5 or more units and receives federal
assistance, 5% of the units (not less than one unit) must be accessible for persons with
mobility disabilities and an additional 2% of the units (at least one) must be accessible
to persons with hearing or visual disabilities.
The previous Housing Element included a program to amend the City’s regulations to
allow parking reductions for housing types with a demonstrated lower need for parking,
including housing designated for persons with disabilities. It also included a program to
establish a written procedure for handling requests for reasonable accommodations for
persons with disabilities in the enforcement of its zoning and development regulations.
Both of these programs were implemented with adoption of Ordinance 1547-NS on
December 14, 2010 and Ordinance 1569-NS on February 7, 2012.
Farm Worker Housing
Although farm worker housing is not a permitted use within residential zoning districts,
farm cottages for on-site farm workers (“farm cottage”) are permitted in the Rural-
Agricultural and Rural Exclusive zones, provided the minimum lot size is met (10 acres).
However, as stated in Chapter 2 (Needs Assessment), the Ventura County Agricultural
                                                                                      65

Chapter 4                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Constraints                                           Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
Commission determined that no farming takes place in the City and only 155 of Ventura
County’s 10,869 agricultural workers lived in the City at the time of the 2000 Census.
Although there is no agricultural production in Thousand Oaks, some farm workers in
surrounding communities may wish to live in the City. Programs to encourage affordable
housing for all lower-income households, regardless of occupation, are included the
Housing Action Plan (Chapter VI).
Emergency Shelters
An emergency shelter provides housing and minimal supportive services for homeless
persons for no more than six months (Health and Safety Code Section 50801). The
City has a rotating seasonal emergency shelter program, but does not have an existing
year-round emergency shelter.
Senate Bill 2 (Government Code Section 65583(a)(4)) requires local jurisdictions to
identify where year-round emergency shelters exist or where they can be located to
meet the need for these facilities. Within one year of adoption of the previous Housing
Element Update, the City had to identify at least one zone that can accommodate at
least one year-round emergency shelter without a discretionary permit. The City could
also consider additional zones where emergency shelters may be allowed with a
discretionary permit. In addition, the City could adopt certain objective development
and management standards for emergency shelters concerning the maximum number
of beds, size of waiting and intake areas, parking, on-site management, proximity of
other shelters, length of stay, lighting and security.
The previous Housing Element included a program to amend the City’s zoning
regulations to comply with Senate Bill 2. The City implemented that program with
adoption of Ordinance 1547-NS on December 14, 2010. The change allows emergency
shelters by right in the 349-acre, Specific Plan 15 (Rancho Conejo Industrial Park). It
also allows emergency shelters with approval of a special use permit in the following
zones: P-L (Public, Quasi –Public and Institutional Lands and Facilities), C-2 (Highway
and Arterial Business), M-1 (Industrial Park) and M-2 (Light Manufacturing). In addition,
the Ordinance established a set of objective standards for emergency shelters.
The previous Housing Element included a program calling for the City to provide
assistance to local agencies and non-profits to implement the 10-Year Plan (2008-2017)
to End Homelessness in Ventura County and to provide funds to social service
agencies that assist the homeless and strive to prevent homelessness. The City
implemented that program by funding (through its Redevelopment Agency) the
construction of supportive housing by Many Mansions in which about half of the 60 units
are designated for the homeless and persons with disabilities. In addition, the City
continued to provide a portion of its Federal Community Development Block Grant funds
and the City’s Social Services Endowment Fund to social services agencies that assist
the homeless. For example, the following table shows actual grants approved for FY
2010-2011, 2011-2012, 2012-2013 and estimates grants for 2013-2014:
66

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                      Chapter 4
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                               Constraints
                                          TABLE IV-4A
                                  HOMELESS ASSISTANCE FUNDING
                                                                                FY13/14
                                                  FY10/11 FY11/12 FY12/13 Estimated
 Agency             Program                       Funding Funding Funding       Funding
 Lutheran Social    Homeless and Needy Meals $25,000 $18,294 $25,000              $22,500
 Services           and Shelter
 County of          RAIN Transitional Living        $8,000   $6,769     $8,000     $7,200
 Ventura            Center
 Manna              Conejo Valley Food Bank         $8,000   $5,763     $8,000     $7,200
 St. Vincent de     Poor and Homeless               $8,000   $7,318     $8,000     $7,200
 Paul               Program
 Turning Point      Appleton House for              $4,000   $4,574     $4,000     $3,600
 Foundation         Homeless Mentally Ill
 Conejo Free        Medical Services               $15,000  $13,722    $15,000    $13,500
 Clinic
 Westminster        Medical Services                $6,000   $5,489    $10,000     $9,000
 Free Clinic
 Ventura County     Regional coordination and      $15,000  $10,000    $10,000     $9,000
 Homeless and       Advocacy for local efforts to
 Housing Coalition  end homelessness
 Total                                             $89,000  $71,929    $88,000    $79,200
Transitional Housing and Supportive Housing
Transitional housing provides short-term housing for individuals and families who are
ready to make the transition from homelessness toward self-sufficiency and permanent
housing. Transitional housing is defined further in California Health and Safety Code
Section 50675.2(h).
Supportive housing provides long-term housing to target populations (adults with low-
income) who need supportive services (on-site and/or off-site services) to help them
manage one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance
abuse or other chronic health conditions as well as developmental disabilities such as
mental retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy and autism. Supportive housing is defined in
more detail in Health and Safety Code Sections 50675.14(b) and 53260.
Senate Bill 2, which took effect January 1, 2008, requires that transitional housing and
supportive housing be considered residential uses and only be subject to those
restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zones.
There are currently four transitional or supportive housing projects in Thousand Oaks.
These include:
        1.     Stoll House is an 11-unit transitional and supportive housing facility that
               was founded in 1998. The facility assists single parents who have been
               homeless by providing short-term housing (up to 2 years) and on-site
               counseling, job development and a savings program.
                                                                                        67
Chapter 4                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Constraints                                           Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
        2.     Richmond Terrace is a 27-unit supportive housing project. The facility
               includes 13 units that are reserved for homeless and persons with
               disabilities.
        3.     Esseff Village is a 51-unit supportive facility. One unit is occupied by a
               resident manager. The development provides for homeless and very low
               income residents and persons with disabilities.
        4.     Hillcrest Apartment project is a 60-unit affordable housing project. Half of
               units are designated as supportive housing for homeless and disabled
               families and individuals. The project started construction in 2012 and is
               expected to be ready for occupancy in 2013.
The previous Housing Element included a program to amend the City’s zoning
regulations to define transitional and supportive housing and indicate that such housing
is subject to the same standards that apply to conventional residential uses of the same
type in the same zones. This program was implemented with adoption of Ordinance
1547-NS on December 14, 2010.
Residential Care Facilities
Residential care facilities refers to family homes for children, group homes, or
rehabilitation facilities for adults that do not meet the target population requirements for
supportive housing and that provide non-medical care to persons in need of personal
services, protection, supervision, assistance, guidance, or training essential for daily
living. According to the Department of Social Services Community Care Licensing
Division, as of September of 2012, there were 8 assisted living facilities in Thousand
Oaks with a capacity of 878 residents and 60 residential care facilities for the elderly
that serve 6 or fewer residents.
Residential care facilities that serve six or fewer persons are permitted in all residential
zones under the same regulations as for single-family units, per State law. The City
imposes no spacing requirements on the siting of residential care facilities or other
requirements that do not apply to other residential uses.
The previous Housing Element includes a program to amend the zoning regulations to
define residential care facilities for 7 or more persons and indicate where such facilities
can be established. This program was implemented with adoption of Ordinance 1547-
NS on December 14, 2010. The change allows residential care facilities for 7 or more
persons with approval of a special use permit in the following zones: P-L (Public, Quasi-
Public and Institutional Lands and Facilities) and C-O (Commercial Office),
Single Room Occupancy
Single room occupancy (SRO) housing is a form of multiple family housing consisting of
small, single room, living spaces. A SRO unit is typically occupied by one or two people.
The previous housing element included a program called for amending the Municipal
Code to explicitly allow SRO housing in the R-3 zone and in R-P-D zones that allow
68

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 4
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                Constraints
multiple family housing. This program was implemented with adoption of Ordinance
1547-NS on December 14, 2010.
        2.     Development Processing Procedures
               a.      Residential Permit Processing
State Planning and Zoning Law provides permit processing requirements for residential
development. Within the framework of state law, the City has structured its development
review process to minimize review time while ensuring that projects receive careful
consideration and due process.
Residential projects are subject to a range of review procedures, depending on the
nature of the development. A tentative map is required for almost all subdivisions,
including single family tracts, townhouse and condominium projects. All multiple-family
housing projects require a Residential Planned Development (RPD) Permit. No
residential project requires a special use permit or conditional use permit.
Housing projects within the H-P-D (Hillside Planned Development) Zone, which is a
single-family residential zone, must obtain a Hillside Planned Development Permit.
Custom homes require Precise Plan of Design (PPD) permits.
The following findings must be made to approve a Precise Plan of Design permit:
        1.     The project complies with the applicable sections of the Thousand Oaks
               Municipal Code and the Precise Plan of Design Guidelines.
        2.     The project will not be detrimental to public safety, health and welfare.
Before a tentative map is approved or denied for a single-family housing project, the
decision-making body must make all of the findings set forth in the Subdivision Map Act.
These include the findings specified in Government Code Sections 66473.5, 66474,
66473.1 and 66474.6. No city or county can adopt findings for approving or denying a
tentative map other than those set forth in the Map Act.
Unless there is an accompanying application involving a zone change or other legislative
matter, projects involving 4 or fewer lots or dwellings units are normally reviewed by City
staff. Single-family and multiple family housing projects involving 5 or more lots are
reviewed at public hearings before the Planning Commission. If appealed, the City
Council reviews decisions made by the Planning Commission.
Public hearings are reasonable forums for obtaining and responding to public input on
proposed housing projects and associated environmental documents. Public hearings
have not posed a constraint on housing development in Thousand Oaks. They
sometimes facilitate the resolution of disputes, thereby avoiding the cost, delay and
uncertainty of litigation. All housing projects must comply with the “Architectural Design
Review Guidelines for New Residential Development” contained in City Council
Resolution No. 2003-090. Like most local jurisdictions, the City uses its design review
                                                                                         69

Chapter 4                                                 Thousand Oaks General Plan
Constraints                                         Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
guidelines to avoid unattractive and monotonous buildings and thereby discourage blight
and neighborhood deterioration.
All design review is conducted concurrently with the rest of the review process. The City
does not have a separate design review process or Design Review Board. This allows
design review to take place without significantly increasing the time and cost of
development.
As required by California law, legislative approvals must be reviewed at public hearings
before the Planning Commission and City Council. In such cases, the Planning
Commission makes a recommendation to the City Council and the City Council makes
the final decision.
Most new projects and significant renovations are reviewed and approved by the
Planning Commission. The review process for a simple project takes about 6 months.
However, the review process can take longer than 6 months, particularly if the project
must be redesigned or difficult environmental issues need to be addressed.
Early consultation with City staff is encouraged to identify issues as soon as possible
and reduce processing time. A “pre-application” is encouraged so that applicants can
become acquainted with the information and fees required by each department and
agency. This process is required for projects within the R-P-D District. This allows the
applicant to make adjustments during the preliminary planning stages to minimize costs.
Simultaneous processing of required entitlements (e.g., zone changes, subdivisions and
planned developments permits) is also provided as a means of expediting the review
process.
Processing time and cost is greatly affected by the size and complexity of the project
and the physical characteristics of the property. Much of the remaining developable land
has one or more physical constraints, such as steep terrain and oak trees. This
complicates the review process. Slope studies and oak tree reports are often necessary
to evaluate proposed developments.
The previous housing element included a program to evaluate the development review
process and amend the process as appropriate to mitigate any identified constraints. An
evaluation was conducted of the previous findings for approval of a residential planned
development permit and they were found to be confusing and difficult to apply.
Ordinance 1555-NS, adopted on April 12, 2011, implemented the aforementioned
program. Ordinance 1555-NS revised the findings for approval to read as follows:
       1.      The project is consistent with the Thousand Oaks General Plan and any
               applicable specific plan or redevelopment plan;
       2.      The project complies with all applicable laws, regulations and policies,
               including the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code;
       3.      The project will not be detrimental to the public health, safety or general
               welfare; and
70

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                      Chapter 4
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                             Constraints
       4.      The project has been reviewed in conformance with the provisions of the
               California Environmental Quality Act;
The City’s current development processing procedures are reasonable and do not pose
a significant constraint on housing development.
               b.     Environmental Review
Environmental review is required for all development projects under the California
Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). Most projects in Thousand Oaks are either
Categorically Exempt or require only an Initial Study and Negative Declaration or a
Mitigated Negative Declaration if potentially significant environmental impacts can be
mitigated to a level that is less than significant. Developments that have the potential of
creating significant impacts that cannot be mitigated require the preparation of an
Environmental Impact Report.
State law also requires payment of a CEQA document filing fee to the Department of
Fish and Game for filing the required Notice of Determination for a Negative
Declaration, Mitigated Negative Declaration or Environmental Impact Report with the
County Clerk. The CEQA filing fee is waived if a project (1) will have no effect on fish
and wildlife or (2) is statutorily or categorically exempt from CEQA. As of January 1,
2013, the fee was $2,156.25 for a Negative Declaration (or Mitigated Negative
Declaration) and $2,995.25 for an Environmental Impact Report. The County Clerk
collects the filing fee plus an additional $50 processing fee when the notice of
determination is filed. Although environmental review and Department of Fish and
Game fees can add to the time and cost of processing development applications, it is
mandated by State law and therefore does not pose a significant constraint to housing
development.
       3.      Development Fees and Improvement Requirements
State law limits fees charged for development permit processing to the reasonable cost
of providing the service for which the fee is charged. Application processing fees are
charged to defray the costs of reviewing and processing development proposals,
reviewing plans and inspections. This includes the costs of staff time, use of vehicles,
publishing public notices, mailing notices and printing reports.
Planning, building, and engineering fees were analyzed in 2013 as part of an
assessment of the City’s inclusionary housing in-lieu fee. The assessment evaluated
four prototype housing projects consisting of 25 dwellings. Application fees were
compared on a per dwelling unit basis as shown below in Table IV-5:
                                                                                        71

Chapter 4                                                                               Thousand Oaks General Plan
Constraints                                                                  Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                            TABLE IV-5
                     AVERAGE PERMIT PROCESSING FEES PER DWELLING UNIT (2013)
                                             Large lot               Small lot             Town-house                Condo
 Service                                  single family           single family               For-sale             For-sale*
 Grading                                             $1,200                     $800                  $600                   $300
 On-site Improvements                                $1,000                  $1,000                 $1,000                 $1,000
 Off-site Encroachment                                 $480                     $320                  $360                   $180
 Building Permit                                     $4,072                  $2,619                 $2,286                 $2,030
 Building Plan Check                                 $3,461                  $2,226                 $1,943                 $1,726
 Planning Entitlement                                  $750                     $606                  $606                   $606
 Total                                              $10963                    $7571                  $6795                 $5842
 The large lot single family prototype consists of 10,000 square foot lots and 3,700 square foot homes with three-car garages. The
 small-lot single-family prototype involves 5,000 square foot lots and 2,000 square foot homes with two-car garages.
  * Fees for an apartment project would be similar to the fees for the condo for-sale prototype.
Processing fees are set to cover the full costs of processing, including personnel,
material and overhead costs. In 2007, the City conducted a user fee study with the
assistance of a consulting firm to establish user fees for Fiscal Years 2007-08 and
2008-09. The fees have been reviewed periodically to reflect current costs and ensure
that the fees do not exceed the cost of providing these services.
Various fees and assessments are also charged by the City and other public agencies
to cover the costs of providing facilities such as schools, parks, police facilities, water
and wastewater infrastructure, road improvements and traffic signals. Almost all of
these fees are assessed through a pro rata share system, based on the magnitude of
the project’s impact or on the extent of the benefit that will be derived.
Public agencies which levy processing or impact fees in Thousand Oaks, either directly
or indirectly through the City, include:
                     City of Thousand Oaks, Department of Public Works (Development
                      Services Division)
                     City of Thousand Oaks, Community Development Department (Building
                      and Planning Divisions)
                     Conejo Recreation and Park District
                     Conejo Valley Unified School District
                     Ventura County Fire Protection District
                     County of Ventura, Sheriff’s Department (Thousand Oaks Police
                      Department)
                     Triunfo County Sanitation District
72

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                  Chapter 4
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                           Constraints
              Ventura County Watershed Protection District
              Calleguas Municipal Water District
              Department of Fish and Game (CEQA filing fees)
Examples of typical fees for single-family and multi-family development were estimated
in 2013 as part of an assessment of the City’s inclusionary housing in-lieu fee.. The total
processing and development impact fees were estimated on a per unit basis for four
prototype housing projects as shown below in Table IV-6.
                                                      TABLE IV-6
                       PROCESSING AND DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES (2013)
                Type of Unit                                                   Total Fees Per Unit
                Single Family, Large Lot                                                $54,739
                Single Family, Small Lot                                                $45,819
                Townhomes                                                               $40,737
                Condominiums*                                                           $39,016
                The large lot single family prototype consists of 10,000 square foot lots and 3,700 square
                foot homes with three-car garages. The small-lot single-family prototype involves 5,000
                square foot lots and 2,000 square foot homes with two-car garages.
                * Fees for an apartment project would be similar to the fees for the condominium
                prototype.
The City requires developers to provide on-site and off-site improvements necessary to
serve their projects. Such improvements may include water, sewer and other utility
extensions, street construction and traffic control device installation that are reasonably
related to the project. Dedication of land or in-lieu fees may also be required of a
project for rights-of-way, transit facilities, recreational facilities and school sites,
consistent with the Subdivision Map Act.
The City’s Capital Improvement Program (CIP) contains a schedule of public
improvements including streets, bridges, overpasses and other public works projects to
facilitate the continued build-out of the City’s General Plan. The CIP helps to ensure
that construction of public improvements is coordinated with private development.
Although development fees and improvement requirements increase the cost of
housing, cities have little choice in establishing such requirements to pay for the impact
of new development on public facilities.
         4.    Inclusionary Housing Ordinance
On September 9, 2008, the City Council adopted an Inclusionary Housing Ordinance.
The ordinance requires most for-sale housing developers to set aside at least 10% of
the housing units that they build for income-restricted affordable housing. The ordinance
also allows developers the option of satisfying this requirement by paying an in-lieu fee.
The in-lieu fee was initially set at $9,000 per detached single-family dwelling and
                                                                                                                    73

Chapter 4                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Constraints                                           Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
$25,000 per condominium or townhouse unit. The in-lieu fee was set to zero in May of
2009 due to weak market conditions. The fees were re-considered periodically, but have
not been raised because economic conditions have remained weak. When conditions
change and the fees are raised, the resulting funds will be placed in the City’s Housing
Trust Fund. The Housing Trust Fund will be used develop affordable housing.
The Inclusionary Housing Ordinance includes incentives for home builders who elect to
construct inclusionary housing units. Builders may elect to reduce the size of the
inclusionary units or the number of bedrooms, relative to the market rate units. Builders
may also construct one story inclusionary units rather than multi-story units and use less
expensive alternative interior finishes and features for the inclusionary units.
       5.       National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
The 1972 Federal Clean Water Act (CWA) established the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) to regulate the discharge of pollutants into the surface
waters of the United States. The CWA established a NPDES permit program with the
goal of reducing pollutants in stormwater runoff to the maximum extent practical.
Regional water quality control boards, which are State agencies, are authorized to issue
permits for individual storm water systems.
On July 8, 2010, the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality Control Board issued a
NPDES permit for the Ventura County Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4).
The Ventura County Water Protection District (the District) and each jurisdiction within
Ventura County are required to implement the MS4 permit. The permit requires
stormwater runoff from new development (and extensive redevelopment) to be collected
and treated to remove pollutants. Treatment options include stormwater retention and
re-use or infiltration into the soil through pervious paving or landscaping.
The permit also requires the District and/or the affected cities to implement the permit
which requires, for example, that they administer the program, ensure that developers
comply with the permit, monitor water quality, investigate illicit discharges, prepare
reports and do public outreach. The District levies an annual assessment on property to
cover the cost of implementing the MS4 Permit. Both the District and the affected cities
share in the funds. The assessment for a particular property is based on the proportion
of runoff that the property contributes to the total amount of runoff.
The NPDES permit requirements increase the cost of housing construction and
ownership. In some cases, compliance could necessitate a reduction in the density of
development. Therefore, the permit is a constraint to housing development. However, it
cannot be avoided because it mandated by Federal law.
B.     Non-Governmental Constraints
       1.       Environmental Constraints
Environmental constraints include physical features such as steep slopes, floodplains,
sensitive biological habitat, landslides, oak trees and wildland fire hazards. Steep slopes
74

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                         Chapter 4
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                 Constraints
and oak trees are the environmental constraints most frequently encountered in the
City.
In many cases, development of environmentally constrained areas is regulated by state
and federal laws (e.g., FEMA). The City is nearly built out and many of the remaining
undeveloped sites have physical constraints (floodplain regulations, the Clean Water
Act and the Endangered Species Act, and the state Fish and Game Code). The City’s
land use plans have been designed to protect sensitive areas from development, and to
protect public safety by avoiding development in hazardous areas. While these policies
constrain residential development to some extent, they are necessary to support other
public policies and to protect the public health and safety.
         2.      Infrastructure Constraints
Infrastructure and public facilities are important in evaluating the potential of developing
additional residential units. While Thousand Oaks has the major infrastructure
components “in place” (i.e. wastewater treatment plants, water system, etc.), the
significant issue is the continued maintenance of these facilities. The City has utilized a
“pay as you go” system in which land developers must pay the costs of utility line
extensions and a pro rata share of the cost of expansion of system capacities
necessitated by new development. However, because the City is reaching build-out,
funding for infrastructure has shifted from new development users.
Water Supply
Other than a few well water systems, water for City residents is supplied by a
combination of public and private suppliers, including the City’s Public Works
Department, the California Water Service Company, the California-American Water
Company, and the Camrosa Water District. All of these suppliers to some degree
depend on imported water from the Metropolitan Water District (MWD) through the
Calleguas Municipal Water District.
The water supply available to the Calleguas Municipal Water District is more than
adequate to accommodate projected growth, including the City’s share of the regional
housing need. The 2020 supply is estimated to be 207,370 acre-feet per average year
and the water demand in 2020 is projected to be 188,687 acre-feet per average year
(Source: Calleguas Municipal Water District’s Urban Water Management Plan, 2010).
Water and sewer system extension to individual projects is the responsibility of the
developer with fees paid to cover major capital expenditures. Water services areas
lying within the City’s or public water district’s jurisdiction are required to pay fees “up
front” to finance construction of facilities needed to serve new development. Private
water companies serving parts of Thousand Oaks collect contributions to aid
construction of new facilities or require the construction of capital facilities necessary to
provide service to new development.
                                                                                          75

Chapter 4                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Constraints                                          Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
Wastewater Treatment
Current wastewater treatment capacity is more than adequate to accommodate
projected growth, including the City’s share of the regional housing need. The City is
divided into two wastewater service areas based on topography, each with a different
service provider. The City’s Public Works Department/Wastewater Division provides
wastewater treatment at the Hill Canyon Wastewater Treatment Plant, which serves
about 80% of the City and 95% of the City’s wastewater customers. The Hill Canyon
Wastewater Treatment Plant has a capacity of 14 million gallons per day (mgd) and the
plant treats an average of 11 mgd. Sufficient capacity is available to accommodate
growth through 2014 and beyond, including the City’s share of regional housing needs
(Source: City of Thousand Oaks Public Works Department, 2008). The Triunfo
Sanitation District serves the southeastern portion of the City and treats wastewater
flows at its Tapia Treatment Plant, which is located outside the City. The Tapia
Treatment plant has the capacity to treat 16 million gallons per day. It currently treats an
average of 9 million gallons per day. (Source: Triunfo Sanitation District).
Stormwater and Drainage
Locally, storm water runoff is handled by a flood control collection system maintained by
the City’s Public Works Department. The local storm water collection system feeds into
a regional system owned and maintained by the Ventura County Watershed Protection
District.
The City is experiencing some localized deficiencies in the storm water drainage system
due to an undersized County drainage channel. However, the County’s 5-Year Capital
Improvement Program has programmed an increase in the channel’s capacity.
Other Utilities
Gas, electricity and telephone services are provided by Southern California Gas
Company, Southern California Edison and Verizon Communications, respectively.
Cable services are provided by Time Warner Cable, Verizon, AT&T and Charter
Communications. All systems are adequate and are upgraded as demand increases.
          3.     Land and Construction Costs
Land represents one of the most significant components of the cost of new housing.
Land values fluctuate with market conditions, and have increased substantially since
2000. The recent downturn in the housing market is expected to affect land values
negatively, however. Some developable land is available but purchase costs can range
dramatically. Per-unit land cost is directly affected by density – higher density allows
the cost to be spread across more units, reducing the total per-unit price.
Construction cost is affected by the price of materials, labor, development standards
and general market conditions. The City has no influence over materials and labor
costs, and the building codes and development standards in Thousand Oaks are not
substantially different from most other cities in Ventura County.
76

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                      Chapter 4
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                              Constraints
A study prepared by Bay Area Economics in 2007 estimated land and construction
costs per dwelling unit in Thousand Oaks for five prototype projects. Construction costs
include the cost of constructing homes, garages, parking spaces, and on-site and off-
site improvements. Off-site improvements include, but are not limited to, streets, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, drainage facilities, street lights, traffic signals and utility lines. The
estimates are shown below in Table IV-7.
                                                       TABLE IV-7
                                  LAND AND CONSTRUCTION COSTS (2007)
                     Type of Units                               Land                     Construction
            Single Family, Large Lot                           $511,830                      $470,400
            Single Family, Small Lot                           $266,805                      $260,000
            Townhomes                                          $158,683                      $214,000
            Condominiums                                       $123,420                      $184,000
            Apartments (Podium style)                          $ 76,956                      $194,580
            The large lot single-family prototype consists of 10,000 square foot lots and 3,700 square foot
            homes with three-car garages. The small-lot single-family prototype involves 5,000 square foot lots
            and 2,000 square foot homes with two-car garages.
            Source: “Housing Analysis: Inclusionary Housing; Commercial/Industrial Linkage Fee; Housing
            Trust Fund, Bay Area Economics, November 15, 2007.
The land and construction costs described above in the Bay Area Economics report are
a snapshot of conditions at the time the report was prepared. These costs will shift over
time with changes in land value and the cost of labor and materials.
         4.        Cost and Availability of Financing
The City continues to participate in a mortgage credit certificate program that offers
homebuyers a tax credit equivalent to 20% of the annual mortgage interest paid and
assists in qualifying for a home loan. The City administers this program as a member of
a County-wide consortium with the County of Ventura and other local cities.
The recent crisis in the mortgage industry will affect the availability and cost of real
estate loans, although the long-term effects are unpredictable. As of September of
2012, the interest rate for a 30-year fixed rate mortgage in California was 3.25%, which
is extremely low by historical standards. For example, national 30-year fixed mortgage
rates ranged from around 7% to 9% in the 1990’s. Rates were less than 9% in 2000,
less than 8% in 2001 and less than 7% in 2003 (Source: “History of mortgage interest
rates” by Marcie Geffner, Bankrate.com, Sept. 22, 2010).
C.      Fair Housing
Federal and State law prohibit discrimination in the development process or in real
property transactions, and it is the City’s policy to uphold the law in this regard. The
City of Thousand Oaks collaborates with the County of Ventura and eight other local
cities in Ventura County in the Fair Housing Consortium, funded through the City’s
                                                                                                                       77

Chapter 4                                                Thousand Oaks General Plan
Constraints                                       Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
CDBG program. The Consortium contracts with the Housing Rights Center of Los
Angeles to provide a fair housing program, including landlord-tenant counseling and
public education and outreach, to City residents on fair housing and discrimination
issues. The City also posts State and Federal fair housing posters and brochures in the
Community Development/Public Works Department lobby at City Hall.
78
                     Chapter V
Evaluation of the 2006-2014
            Housing Element

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                      Chapter 5
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                               Evaluation
CHAPTER 5: EVALUATION OF THE 2006-2014 HOUSING ELEMENT
Section 65588(a) of the Government Code requires that jurisdictions evaluate the effectiveness of the existing Housing Element,
the appropriateness of goals, objectives and policies, and the progress in implementing programs for the previous planning
period. This chapter contains a review the housing goals, policies, and programs of the previous Housing Element and
evaluates the degree to which these programs have been implemented during the previous planning period. This analysis also
includes an assessment of the appropriateness of continuing these programs, objectives and policies. The findings from this
evaluation have been instrumental in determining the Housing Action Plan described in Chapter VI.
Table V-1, entitled “Housing Element Program Evaluation: 2006-2014”, summarizes the programs contained in the previous
Housing Element along with the source of funding, program objectives, accomplishments, and the appropriateness of continuing
with the previous programs and policies for this Housing Element Update.
Table V-2 presents the City’s progress in meeting the quantified objectives from the previous Housing Element.
                                                                                                                            79

Chapter 5                                           Thousand Oaks General Plan
Evaluation                                     Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
           This page intentionally left blank.
80
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                             Chapter 5
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                                      Evaluation
                                                                TABLE V-1
                                          HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAM EVALUATION: 2006-2014
                                                                Objective and                                   Appropriateness to
Goal              Program                                        Time Frame         Accomplishments              Continue Program
1. Provide a      1. a. Amend General Plan land use and         Rezone site by 1a. Site 104 has not been   1a: Not appropriate to
wide range of     specific plan/zoning designations for Site    2011           rezoned.                    continue program. Rezoning
housing           104 (Table A-6) or a portion thereof, as                                                 is not needed to satisfy the
opportunities for needed to accommodate the identified                         1b. Accomplished:           City’s RHNA allocation.
persons of all    shortfall of 63 units to accommodate the                     Rezoning status was
income levels     City’s RHNA allocation not accommodated                      reported in annual progress 1b: Not appropriate to
                  by the City’s existing land inventory.                       reports.                    continue program. Rezoning
                  Pursuant to State law, rezoning will allow                                               is not needed to meet the
                  the development of multifamily housing by                                                City’s RHNA allocation.
                  right on sites which can accommodate at
                  least 16 units per site with a minimum
                  density of at least 20 units per acre. At a
                  maximum allowable density of 30 units per
                  acre, the City will rezone at least 2.1 acres
                  to accommodate the RHNA shortfall in
                  Table III-2.
                     b. The City will monitor the
                  implementation of the rezone program and
                  report on status through its annual
                  progress reports required pursuant to
                  Government Code Sec. 65400.
                                                                                                                                        81

Chapter 5                                                                                                     Thousand Oaks General Plan
Evaluation                                                                                            Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                                  TABLE V-1
                                           HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAM EVALUATION: 2006-2014
                                                                  Objective and                                      Appropriateness to
Goal              Program                                          Time Frame           Accomplishments               Continue Program
1. Provide a         1c. If, after the public review process,     Rezone           1c. Partially accomplished:  1c: Not appropriate to
wide range of     pending affordable housing projects on          alternative site Affordable housing projects  continue program. Rezoning
housing           Sites 18 and 87 are not approved or Site                         were approved On sites 18    is not needed to satisfy the
opportunities for 104 is not rezoned as planned, an                                and 87. Site 104 has not     City’s RHNA allocation.
persons of all    alternative site(s) will be re-zoned or                          been rezoned.
income levels     committed assistance will be provided (per                                                    1d: Continue to implement
(continued)       Government Code Section 65583.1) as                              1d. Accomplished: No         State law.
                  needed to satisfy the City’s RHNA                                project approval reduced
                  allocation. Any alternative site identified for                  residential capacity below
                  rezoning to accommodate the City’s RHNA                                                       1e: Program completed. Not
                                                                                   the level needed to          appropriate to continue
                  shortfall will be analyzed for suitability and                   accommodate the remaining
                  availability in the planning period pursuant                                                  program.
                                                                                   need for lower-income
                  to Government Code Section 65583.2.                              households.
                     d. Pursuant to Government Code
                  Section 65863, should an approval of
                                                                                   1e. Accomplished: The
                  development result in a reduction of
                                                                                   Shadows Apartment
                  capacity below the residential capacity
                                                                                   conversion was completed
                  needed to accommodate the remaining
                                                                                   in 2007.
                  need for lower-income households, the
                  City will identify and zone sufficient sites to
                  accommodate the shortfall.
                     e. Convert 102 units in the Shadows
                  Apartments from non-affordable to
                  affordable to very low- and low-income
                  households by purchasing affordability
                  covenants.
82

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                             Chapter 5
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                                     Evaluation
                                                                 TABLE V-1
                                         HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAM EVALUATION: 2006-2014
                                                                Objective and                                   Appropriateness to
Goal              Program                                         Time Frame        Accomplishments             Continue Program
1. Provide a      2. Promote the development of                 2a. Adopt      2a. Accomplished:           2a. Program completed. Not
wide range of     underutilized and small lots for affordable   incentive      Ordinance 1568-NS           appropriate to continue
housing           housing through the following actions:        ordinance by   granting incentives for     program.
opportunities for    a. Adopting an ordinance granting          2011           developing small and
persons of all    incentives for developing underutilized                      underutilized lots was      2b. Not appropriate to
income levels     sites and small lots for affordable housing   2b. Adopt      introduced in 2011 and      continue program.
(continued)       by considering modifying requirements         policy by 2011 adopted on February 7,
                  concerning setbacks, common open                             2012.
                  space, private yards, building separation
                  and building coverage.                                       2b. Program not feasible
                     b. Adopting a City policy to give priority                due to dissolution of RDA
                  funding to acquire and consolidate small                     and loss of funding through
                  and underutilized parcels where feasible                     Redevelopment Agency
                  for future affordable housing development.                   Set-Aside Funds.
                  3. Amend the Municipal Code to explicitly     Adopt          Accomplished: Ordinance     Program completed. Not
                  allow Single Room Occupancy housing in        ordinance in   1547-NS allowing SRO        appropriate to continue
                  the R-3 zone and in R-P-D zones that          2010           housing in R-3 and other    program.
                  allow multiple family housing.                               multiple-family zones was
                                                                               adopted December 14,
                                                                               2010.
                                                                                                                                    83
Chapter 5                                                                                               Thousand Oaks General Plan
Evaluation                                                                                       Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                              TABLE V-1
                                           HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAM EVALUATION: 2006-2014
                                                             Objective and                                       Appropriateness to
Goal              Program                                      Time Frame        Accomplishments                 Continue Program
1. Provide a      4. Make existing housing affordable to, or Assist an      Accomplished: Financial         Appropriate to continue
wide range of     preserve for, lower income households      additional 9   assistance was provided to program, subject to
housing           through financial assistance.              low, 15 very   the Shadows Apartment           availability of funds
opportunities for                                            low and 15     project to obtain affordability
persons of all    Assistance committed after 6/30/2010 is    extremely low- covenants for 15 very low-
income levels     not eligible for credit against RHNA       income         income and 87 low-income
(continued)       allocation per Government Code Section     households by  households and extend
                  65583.1(c).                                2012           affordability of an additional
                                                                            44 units.
                  5. Adopt an affordable housing ordinance Adopted          Accomplished: Ordinance Program completed. Not
                  including an inclusionary housing program, ordinance in   adopted September 9, 2008 appropriate to continue
                  nonresidential development linkage fee     2008                                           program.
                  program, housing trust fund and an
                  affordable housing density bonus program.
                  6. Develop guidelines and procedures for   Adopt          Accomplished: Guidelines Program completed. Not
                  implementation of affordable housing       guidelines in  and procedures adopted in appropriate to continue
                  ordinance                                  2008           October of 2008                 program.
                  7. Work with local non-profits, such as    2006-2014:     Partially accomplished:         Appropriate to continue
                  Habitat for Humanity, by identifying       3 low-income   Habitat for Humanity built 1    program, subject to
                  potential development sites and financial  units          low-income residence at         availability of funds
                  assistance if appropriate to provide                      200 Houston Street
                  additional affordable homeownership
                  opportunities.
84
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                             Chapter 5
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                                     Evaluation
                                                                TABLE V-1
                                          HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAM EVALUATION: 2006-2014
                                                               Objective and                                   Appropriateness to
Goal              Program                                       Time Frame           Accomplishments            Continue Program
1. Provide a      8. Continue to allocate 20% of tax           On-going        Accomplished: Funds         Not appropriate to continue
wide range of     increment funds to the Redevelopment                         allocated until             program.
housing           Housing Fund for affordable housing                          Redevelopment Agency
opportunities for opportunities. Ensure that a portion of the                  was dissolved by the State.
persons of all    housing is affordable to extremely low                       Funds were used to create
income levels     income housing.                                              30 units of housing for
(continued)                                                                    extremely low income
                                                                               persons in the Hillcrest
                                                                               Apartment project.
                  9. Continue to cooperate with agencies       On-going        Accomplished: Participated  Appropriate to continue
                  that gather information concerning housing                   in the 2010 Census Local    program.
                  needs, including the Census Bureau.                          Update of Census Addresses
                                                                               (LUCA) Program.
                  10. a. Review existing development           Evaluate and    a. Accomplished.            Program completed. Not
                  regulations concerning parking structures    revise          Ordinance 1569-NS,          appropriate to continue
                  and building height limits and recommend     regulations, if adopted February 7, 2012    program.
                  revisions, if necessary, to ensure that they necessary       changed City’s regulations
                  do not unreasonably constrain the            2011            to allow parking structures
                  development of affordable housing.                           and reduce setbacks for
                     b. City will monitor the impacts of the                   buildings over 25 feet in
                  RPD process on multifamily housing                           height to accommodate
                  development, including consultation with                     affordable housing.
                  for- and non-profit developers on process,                   b. Accomplished.
                  timing and required typical findings of                      Ordinance 1555-NS,
                  approval. If the process is found to be a                    adopted on April 12, 2011,
                  significant constraint to the development of                 revised the findings for
                  multifamily housing, City will evaluate and                  approval of a residential
                  amend the process as appropriate to                          planned development permit
                  mitigate any identified constraints.                         to avoid any constraint on
                                                                               the development of housing
                                                                                                                                       85

Chapter 5                                                                                                 Thousand Oaks General Plan
Evaluation                                                                                       Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                                TABLE V-1
                                          HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAM EVALUATION: 2006-2014
                                                                Objective and                                    Appropriateness to
Goal              Program                                        Time Frame        Accomplishments               Continue Program
1. Provide a      11. Adopt ordinance amending the              Adopt         Accomplished:                 Program completed. Not
wide range of     Municipal Code to allow parking reductions ordinance by     Ordinance 1569-NS,            appropriate to continue
housing           for housing types with a demonstrated         2011          adopted on February 7,        program.
opportunities for lower need for parking, including housing                   2012, changed the
persons of all    for the elderly and persons with disabilities               Municipal Code parking
income levels     and clarify that parking standards may be                   regulations as called for in
(continued)       reduced for affordable housing that meets                   the program.
                  the criteria for a density bonus per
                  Government Code Section 65915 (p).
                  12. City to apply when Program Notice of      30 households Accomplished: 141             Funding is set to end May
                  Funding Availability is released for the      annually from tenants received rental       2013. Not appropriate to
                  Tenant Based Rental Assistance Program        2009          assistance. The program       continue program due to
                  administered by Housing and Community                       expended $1,443,782 from      programs intensive
                  Development.                                                January 2006 to September     administration procedures
                                                                              2012.                         and lack of continuous
                                                                                                            funding stream.
                  13. Modify and restart the Ownership          5-10          No loans were made during Not appropriate to continue
                  Assistance Program to assist low and          households    evaluation period.            program. Funding for the
                  moderate income homebuyers in                 annually from                               program discontinued with
                  purchasing existing homes. Market             2009                                        the dissolution of RDA.
                  program through press releases and City
                  web page.
86
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                            Chapter 5
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                                    Evaluation
                                                              TABLE V-1
                                         HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAM EVALUATION: 2006-2014
                                                              Objective and                                   Appropriateness to
Goal              Program                                      Time Frame         Accomplishments              Continue Program
2. Provide        14. Amend the Municipal Code pursuant to Adopt            Accomplished: Ordinance Program completed. Not
housing           Government Code Section 65583(a)(4) to ordinance by       1547-NS, adopted on           appropriate to continue
opportunities for identify at least one zone, such as M-1, M- 2010          December 14, 2010,            program.
persons with      2 and P-L and similar specific plan                       amended the Municipal
special needs     designations with capacity to meet the                    Code to allow emergency
                  need for emergency shelter, that can                      shelters without
                  accommodate at least one year-round                       discretionary review in the
                  emergency shelter for homeless persons                    349-acre Specific Plan 15
                  without a discretionary permit and consider               and with a special use
                  additional zones, such as the C-2 zone,                   permit in the P-L (Public,
                  where emergency shelters may be                           Quasi-Public and
                  permitted with a special use permit. Adopt                Institutional Lands), M-1
                  objective standards for regulating                        (Industrial Park), M-2 (Light
                  emergency shelters that comply with                       Manufacturing), and C-2
                  Senate Bill 2.                                            (Highway and Arterial
                                                                            Business) Zones.
                  15. Amend the Municipal Code to define      Adopt         Accomplished: Ordinance       Program completed. Not
                  transitional housing and supportive         ordinance by  1547-NS, adopted on           appropriate to continue
                  housing such that they are permitted        2010          December 14, 2010,            program.
                  subject to same standards as conventional                 amended the Municipal
                  residential uses of the same type in the                  Code as proposed by this
                  same zones.                                               program.
                                                                                                                                  87
Chapter 5                                                                                               Thousand Oaks General Plan
Evaluation                                                                                       Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                              TABLE V-1
                                           HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAM EVALUATION: 2006-2014
                                                              Objective and                                    Appropriateness to
Goal              Program                                      Time Frame         Accomplishments               Continue Program
2. Provide        16. Amend the Municipal Code to define      Adopt         Accomplished: Ordinance Program completed. Not
housing           residential care facilities for 7 or more   ordinance:    1547-NS, adopted on            appropriate to continue
opportunities for persons and adopt regulations for their     2010          December 14, 2010,             program.
persons with      establishment.                                            amended the Municipal
special needs                                                               Code to allow residential
(continued)                                                                 care facilities with 7 or more
                                                                            persons in the P-L (Public,
                                                                            Quasi-Public and
                                                                            Institutional Lands) and C-O
                                                                            (Commercial Office) Zones.
                  17. Amend the Municipal Code to remove Adopt              Accomplished: Ordinance        Program completed. Not
                  constraints on housing for persons with     ordinance:    1547-NS, adopted on            appropriate to continue
                  disabilities by (a) establishing procedures 2010          December 14, 2010,             program.
                  for making reasonable accommodations for                  amended the Municipal
                  persons with disabilities, and (b) removing               Code as proposed by this
                  the limit on the number of unrelated                      program.
                  persons living together from the definition
                  of the term family.
88
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                             Chapter 5
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                                      Evaluation
                                                               TABLE V-1
                                          HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAM EVALUATION: 2006-2014
                                                               Objective and                                   Appropriateness to
Goal              Program                                       Time Frame        Accomplishments              Continue Program
2. Provide        18. Assist efforts of local agencies and     On-going      Accomplished: As             Continue program: As a
housing           non-profits to implement the 10-Year Plan                  recommended by the Social    CDBG-program entitlement
opportunities for (2008-2017) to End Homelessness in                         Services Ad Hoc Committee    grantee, the City is required
persons with      Ventura County. Continue to provide funds                  and approved by City         by the US Dept. of HUD to
special needs     to social service agencies that help prevent               Council, the City continues  support activities targeted to
(continued)       homelessness and assist the homeless.                      to dedicate 15% of its       end homelessness in Ventura
                  City to continue to collaborate with Ventura               annual Federal Community     County. These activities
                  County and participate with Conejo                         Development Block Grant      include collaboration with the
                  Affordable Housing Workgroup on                            (CDBG) entitlement funding,  County of Ventura on
                  homeless prevention strategies.                            plus at least $100,000       implementation of the 10-
                                                                             annually from the City’s     Year Strategy (2008-2017) to
                                                                             Social Services Endowment    End Homelessness in
                                                                             Fund (SSEF), for grants to   Ventura County, and
                                                                             local social services        collaboration with (1) the
                                                                             providers including those    regional Ventura County
                                                                             that help prevent            Homeless and Housing
                                                                             homelessness and assist      Coalition; and (2) the local
                                                                             the homeless. The City       Conejo Valley Affordable
                                                                             continues to support the     Housing Workgroup.
                                                                             Conejo Valley Affordable
                                                                             Housing Workgroup that is
                                                                             working to establish a year-
                                                                             round emergency shelter for
                                                                             homeless persons and
                                                                             families in Thousand Oaks.
                                                                                                                                        89

    Chapter 5                                                                                             Thousand Oaks General Plan
    Evaluation                                                                                    Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                                TABLE V-1
                                              HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAM EVALUATION: 2006-2014
                                                                Objective and                                    Appropriateness to
    Goal              Program                                    Time Frame        Accomplishments                Continue Program
    2. Provide        19. Continue allocating funding to local 2008: $37,993  Accomplished: As a            Continue program: As a
    housing           non-profit groups who provide housing    2009: $37,993  component of the City’s       CDBG-entitlement grantee,
    opportunities for assistance to special needs households   2010-2014:     annual Social Services        the City is required by the US
    persons with      including disabled, overcrowded and      Subject to     budget, including Federal     Dept. of HUD to support
    special needs     elderly households. Funding allocations  available      Community Development         activities that further the
    (continued)       are made by City via recommendations     funding        Block Grant (CDBG) funds      provision of housing to
                      from a City Council appointed Citizen                   and local Social Services     special needs households.
                      Advisory Committee.                                     Endowment Funds (SSEF),
                                                                              the City supports the efforts
                                                                              of local non-profit groups to
                                                                              provide housing assistance
                                                                              to special needs households
                                                                              including disabled,
                                                                              overcrowded and elderly
                                                                              households.
    3. Maintain and   20. Update and reactivate housing        2008-2014:     Accomplished: $334,000        Appropriate to continue
    improve the       rehabilitation program which encourages  12-20 units    was used for repairs and      program, subject to
    existing housing  the rehabilitation of housing units by   rehabilitated  improvements at Many          availability of funds
    stock of the City providing subsidies or incentives.       annually       Mansions’ Bella Vista,
    by reducing                                                               Richmond Terrace              Funding for the Rehabilitation
    housing                                                                   Apartments, and Area          Program discontinued with
    deterioration.                                                            Housing Authority’s Glenn     the dissolution of RDA.
The                                                                           Oaks Senior Apartments.
                                                                              RDA provided assistance to
                                                                              rehabilitate 24 units and
                                                                              expended $155,740 from
                                                                              January 2006 to February 1,
                                                                              2012.
    90

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                            Chapter 5
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                                     Evaluation
                                                               TABLE V-1
                                        HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAM EVALUATION: 2006-2014
                                                              Objective and                                   Appropriateness to
Goal              Program                                      Time Frame           Accomplishments           Continue Program
3. Maintain and   21. Create outreach program to foster       On-going        Accomplished: Program      Not appropriate to continue
improve the       public awareness of the City’s housing                      was reactivated and public program. Funding for the
existing housing  rehabilitation program with press releases,                 notice was displayed in    Rehabilitation Program
stock of the City and posting on City’s website and at fair                   2009 which created a wait  discontinued with the
by reducing       housing seminars. When code violations                      list for the program.      dissolution of RDA.
housing           are noted, advise property owners of
deterioration     programs available to assist with needed
(continued)       repairs.
                  22. Survey housing conditions for the 2008 Survey           Accomplished: Code         Not appropriate to continue
                  Housing Element Update and the next         conducted in    Compliance Division        program. The problem is
                  Housing Element Update.                     2007. Second    recorded 1,345 building    minor and ongoing Code
                                                              survey in       code and property          Compliance Division activities
                                                              2013/2014       maintenance cases from     are sufficient.
                                                              before the next 2009-2011. Only 176 (13%)
                                                              Housing         of these cases were still
                                                              Element         active as October of 2012.
                                                              Update
                                                                                                                                     91

Chapter 5                                                                                               Thousand Oaks General Plan
Evaluation                                                                                       Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                                 TABLE V-1
                                         HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAM EVALUATION: 2006-2014
                                                                 Objective and                                   Appropriateness to
Goal              Program                                         Time Frame        Accomplishments              Continue Program
3. Maintain and   23. Assist housing groups in securing local On-going         Accomplished: For the       Due to the demise of the
improve the       and other sources of funds for the                           period 2007-2011, the City  Thousand Oaks
existing housing  acquisition and rehabilitation of multi-family               used $760,392 in Federal    Redevelopment Agency
stock of the City structures for affordable housing.                           CDBG and CDBG-R funds       (RDA) and the loss of $4
by reducing       Coordinate with non-profit housing                           for improvements at 3       million in annual RDA funding
housing           developers to identify opportunities and                     affordable housing          for affordable housing
deterioration     provide support with applications as                         complexes in Thousand       activities, the City should
(continued)       necessary.                                                   Oaks. The multi-family      consider prioritizing the future
                                                                               housing units improved      use of CDBG funds for
                                                                               included Many Mansions-     affordable housing-related
                                                                               owned Bella Vista           priority improvements
                                                                               Apartments and Richmond
                                                                               Terrace Apartments and
                                                                               Area Housing Authority-
                                                                               owned Glenn Oaks Senior
                                                                               Apartments.
                  24. Continue to require inspection of resale On-going        Accomplished: A total of    Appropriate to continue
                  housing as a method to encourage                             5,990 record searches and program.
                  maintenance of the housing stock.                            837 inspections were
                                                                               performed from July 1, 2008
                                                                               through September of 2012.
92
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                                 Chapter 5
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                                         Evaluation
                                                                   TABLE V-1
                                           HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAM EVALUATION: 2006-2014
                                                                  Objective and                                    Appropriateness to
Goal             Program                                           Time Frame         Accomplishments               Continue Program
4. Preserve      25. Continue to apply the condominium            On-going       Accomplished: No              Appropriate continue
existing         conversion ordinance.                                           residential conversions took  program.
affordable                                                                       place during the planning
housing                                                                          period.
opportunities in 26. Develop a strategy for preserving the        Develop        Accomplished: 90 units        Appropriate to continue
the City         Conejo Future Apartments as affordable           strategy by    conserved. Owners of          program
                 housing. Strategy shall include contacting       2011           Conejo Futures Apartments
                 property management company or property Contact owner were contacted. Owners
                 owner annually to evaluate threat of             annually 2008- expressed their long-term
                 conversion to market rate. If threatened with 2104:             interest in continuing to
                 conversion to market rate: 1) help property 90 Units            accept Section 8 vouchers
                 owner find alternate sources of funding to       Conserved      for all of the units in the
                 preserve affordable units; 2) facilitate sale of                complex.
                 property to an affordable housing developer/
                 operator to preserve affordable units; 3)
                 work with Area Housing Authority to obtain
                 project based rental assistance (Section 8)
                 certificates for qualified residents and 4)
                 consider funding assistance from City and/or
                 Redevelopment Agency to prevent
                 conversion to market rate.
                 27. Adopt ordinance to increase                  Adopt          Accomplished: Ordinance       Program completed. Not
                 protections for mobile home park tenants         Ordinance:     adopted on July 15, 2008.     appropriate to continue
                 by discouraging closures and ensuring            Ordinance      Ventura Superior Court set    program
                 adequate relocation assistance is provided       adopted        aside part of the ordinance
                 if closure occurs.                               July15, 2008.  concerning relocation
                                                                                 assistance. City also
                                                                                 mediated an agreement with
                                                                                 most park owners in 2011 that
                                                                                 avoids closures for 10 years.
                                                                                                                                       93
Chapter 5                                                                                               Thousand Oaks General Plan
Evaluation                                                                                        Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                               TABLE V-1
                                         HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAM EVALUATION: 2006-2014
                                                              Objective and                                     Appropriateness to
Goal             Program                                       Time Frame         Accomplishments                Continue Program
4. Preserve      28. Monitor affordable housing units in the On-going        Accomplished: City            Regulated by State and
existing         City’s affordable housing program to                        currently monitors 751        Federal law to continue
affordable       ensure ongoing affordability for the period                 rental units and 166          monitoring units.
housing          of time required by State and Federal law.                  ownership units.
opportunities in 29. Assist housing groups in securing local  2007: 147-unit Accomplished: Extension Appropriate to continue
the City         and other sources of funds to extend         Shadows        of 147 affordability          program subject to availability
(continued)      existing affordability covenants to existing Apartments.    covenants related to the      of funding.
                 multi-family housing.                        Affordability  Shadows Apartment project.
                                                              covenants
                                                              extended for
                                                              47 units. On-
                                                              going as
                                                              opportunities
                                                              arise
5. Provide equal 30. Continue to contract with appropriate    On-going       Accomplished: The City        As a CDBG entitlement
access to        outside agencies such as Housing Rights                     continues to use a portion of grantee, the City is required
housing          Center in collaboration with Ventura                        its CDBG program              by the US Dept. of HUD to
regardless of    County and other local jurisdictions to                     administration budget to      affirmatively support fair
race, color,     provide fair housing services.                              support a collaboration with  housing through the provision
religion, sex,                                                               the County of Ventura and     of education, information and
marital status,                                                              the Housing Rights Center     guidance to City residents.
age, or                                                                      of Los Angeles to provide all
disability.                                                                  City households with access
                                                                             to information on fair
                                                                             housing laws, landlord-
                                                                             tenant dispute resolution
                                                                             and other services via a 1-
                                                                             800 telephone line.
94

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                            Chapter 5
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                                     Evaluation
                                                                TABLE V-1
                                            HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAM EVALUATION: 2006-2014
                                                               Objective and                                  Appropriateness to
Goal               Program                                      Time Frame         Accomplishments             Continue Program
5. Provide equal   31. Provide fair housing information        2008-2014     Accomplished: As part of    As a CDBG entitlement
access to          throughout the City via the City’s website,               the City’s Fair Housing     grantee, the City is required
housing            city hall, libraries and community centers.               Counseling program, as      by the US Dept. of HUD to
regardless of      Host an annual fair housing seminar to                    described in item 30 above, affirmatively support fair
race, color,       increase public awareness of fair housing                 the City continued to offer housing through the provision
religion, sex,     laws and services.                                        fair housing related        of education, information and
marital status,                                                              information on the City’s   guidance to City residents.
age, or disability                                                           website, at city hall and
(continued)                                                                  other public buildings and
                                                                             community centers. The
                                                                             City will also continue to
                                                                             sponsor and publicize an
                                                                             annual informational
                                                                             seminar/workshop in
                                                                             Thousand Oaks for all
                                                                             interested parties.
6. Promote         32. Allow housing rehabilitation program to 30 households Accomplished: RDA           Not appropriate to continue
energy             provide financial assistance for energy     annually from provided assistance to      program. Funding for the
conservation in    conservation measures.                      2009          rehabilitate 24 units and   Rehabilitation Program
housing                                                                      expended $155,740 from      discontinued with dissolution
                                                                             January 2006 to February 1, of RDA.
                                                                             2012.
                                                                                                                                       95

Chapter 5                                                                                        Thousand Oaks General Plan
Evaluation                                                                                Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                       TABLE V-2
                              PROGRESS IN ACHIEVING QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES: 2006-2012
 Program Category Unit Objective  Progress                                           Project
New Construction
Extremely Low           206          30     Many Mansions Hillcrest Apartments (30 units)
Very Low                205          36     Conversion of Shadows Apartments from market rate to affordable (15 units); Many
                                            Mansions Hillcrest Apartments (21 units)
Low                     333          97     Conversion of Shadows Apartments from market rate to affordable (87 units); Many
                                            Mansions Hillcrest Apartments (9 units); Habitat for Humanity (1 unit)
Moderate                385          18     3006 Los Robles (2 units), 2824 Crescent Way (2 uits), 3248 Los Robles (3 units),
                                            3250 Foothill (5 units), 1769 Los Feliz (6 units)
Above Moderate          718         488     Many locations
Subtotal               1847         669
Rehabilitation
Extremely Low            15          9      Rehabilitation Program (9 units)
Very Low                 0           50     Shadow Apts. (45 units), Habitat for Humanity (1 unit), Rehab Program (4 units).
Low                      0          113     Shadow Apts. (102 units) and Rehabilitation Program (11 units)
Moderate                 50          0      Housing rehabilitation units
Above Moderate           0           1      Shadow Apts. (1 manager’s unit)
Subtotal                 65         173     Shadows Apts. (148 units), Habitat for Humanity (1 unit), and Rehabilitation Program
                                            (24 units).
Conservation
Extremely Low            20          20     Monitored Conejo Futures Apts (20 units)
Very Low                 20          20     Monitored Conejo Futures Apts (20 units)
Low                      50          50     Monitored Conejo Futures Apts (50 units)
Moderate                 30          0       Ownership assistance program units
Above Moderate           0           0
Subtotal                120          90
Total                  2,032        923
96

      Chapter VI
Housing Action
          Plan

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                 Chapter 6
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                Housing Action Plan
CHAPTER 6: HOUSING ACTION PLAN
Table VI-1 describes the Housing Action Plan which outlines the housing goals and
programs for the 2014-2021 planning period. Each housing program includes a
description of the objective to be achieved, the time frame for completion, the party
responsible for implementation and source(s) of funding.
                                                                                  97
Chapter 6                                         Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Action Plan                       Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                    This page intentionally left blank.
98
   Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                                   Chapter 6
   Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                                Housing Action Plan
                                                                   TABLE VI-1
                                                      HOUSING ACTION PLAN: 2014-2021
                                                                                                Objective and       Responsible
          Goal                                        Program                                    Time Frame            Party1       Funding
1. Provide a wide      1. Work with local non-profits, such as Habitat for Humanity, by     1 Low income unit      CDD             GF
range of housing       identifying potential development sites and financial assistance
opportunities for      if appropriate to provide additional affordable homeownership
persons of all income  opportunities.
levels.                2. Manage the Affordable Housing Trust Fund to finance the           Identify and fund      CDD             GF
                       creation, preservation or rehabilitation of affordable housing.      project(s) based on                    HTF
                       Where feasible, give priority to housing projects that address the   available funding. On-
                       needs of extremely low income households.                            going
                       3. Update the inclusionary housing in-lieu fee and non-              Monitor and update     CDD             GF
                       residential development linkage fee based on changes in              fees when warranted.                   HTF
                       economic conditions.
                       4. Continue to cooperate with agencies that gather information       On-going               CDD             GF
                       concerning housing needs, including the Census Bureau.
2. Provide housing     5. Assist efforts of local agencies and non-profits to implement the On-going               CDD             CDBG,
opportunities for      10-Year Plan (2008-2017) to End Homelessness in Ventura County.                                             SSEF
persons with special Continue to provide funds to social service agencies that help
needs.                 prevent homelessness and assist the homeless. City to continue to
                       collaborate with Ventura County and participate with Conejo
                       Affordable Housing Workgroup on homeless prevention strategies.
                       6. Continue allocating funding to local non-profit groups who        Subject to available   CDD             CDBG,
                       address the housing needs of special needs households,               funding                                SSEF
                       including disabled and elderly households.                                                                  HTF
3. Maintain and        7. Assist housing groups in securing local and other sources of       On-going as           CDD             State/
improve the existing   funds for the acquisition and rehabilitation of multi-family         opportunities arise                    Federal
housing stock of the   structures for affordable housing. Coordinate with non-profit                                               Funds,
City by reducing       housing developers to identify opportunities and provide support                                            HTF
housing deterioration. with applications as necessary.
                       8. Continue to require inspection of resale housing as a method      On-going               City Building Fee
                       to encourage maintenance of the housing stock.                                              Dept. & Private Supported
                                                                                                                   Inspectors      Program
                                                                                                                                         99
   Chapter 6                                                                                                         Thousand Oaks General Plan
   Housing Action Plan                                                                                     Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                                            TABLE VI-1
                                                             HOUSING ACTION PLAN: 2014-2021
                                                                                                          Objective and          Responsible
           Goal                                               Program                                      Time Frame               Party1    Funding
4. Preserve existing         9. Contact the property management company or property owner             Contact Conejo            CDD          Federal/
affordable housing           annually to evaluate threat of conversion to market rate. If             Futures owner                          State
opportunities.               threatened with conversion to market rate: 1) help property owner        annually:                              Funds, HTF
                             find alternate sources of funding to preserve the affordable units; 2)   90 Units Conserved
                             facilitate sale of property to an affordable housing developer/
                             operator to preserve affordable units; 3) work with Area Housing
                             Authority to obtain project based rental assistance (Section 8)
                             certificates for qualified residents and 4) consider funding
                             assistance from City to prevent conversion to market rate.
                             10. Monitor affordable housing units in the City’s affordable            On-going                  CDD          Housing
                             housing program to ensure ongoing affordability for the period of                                               Program
                             time required by State and Federal law.                                                                         Income
                             11. Assist housing groups in securing local and other sources of         On-going as               CDD          Federal/
                             funds to extend existing affordability covenants to existing multi-      opportunities arise                    State
                             family housing.                                                                                                 Funds, HTF
                             12. Encourage affordable housing providers to give priority              On-going                  CDD          HTF
                             to the housing needs of persons with disabilities, including, but
                             not limited to, persons with developmental disabilities.
5. Provide equal             13. Continue to contract with appropriate outside agencies such          On-going                  CDD          CDBG
access to housing            as Housing Rights Center in collaboration with Ventura County
regardless of race,          and other local jurisdictions to provide fair housing services.
color, religion, sex,        14. Provide fair housing information throughout the City via the         On-going                  CDD          CDBG
marital status, age, or City’s website, city hall, libraries and community centers. Host
disability.                  an annual fair housing seminar to increase public awareness of
                             fair housing laws and services.
CDD: City of Thousand Oaks Community Development Department                      HTF: Housing Trust Fund
GF: General Fund
CDBG: Community Development Block Grant                                          SSEF: City of Thousand Oaks Social Service Endowment Fund
1
  Agency, department or division responsible for implementing a given program
   100

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                           Chapter 6
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                        Housing Action Plan
Table VI-2 sets forth the City’s quantified objectives for new construction, rehabilitation and conservation for the 2014-
2021 planning period. The objective for rehabilitation is set at zero because dissolution of the Thousand Oaks
Redevelopment Agency eliminated the primary funding source for housing rehabilitation.
                                                           TABLE VI-2
                                               QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES: 2014-2021
                                                 New Construction         Rehabilitation        Conservation
                  Extremely Low-Income                          23                      0                 201
                  Very Low-Income                               24                      0                 201
                  Low-Income                                    32                      0                 501
                  Moderate-Income                               36                      0                   0
                  Above Moderate-Income                         77                      0                   0
                                        Totals                 192                      0                 901
                     1
                       Conejo Futures Apartments
                                                                                                                           101

Chapter 6                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Action Plan                                     Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                    This page intentionally left blank.
102
  Chapter VII
Appendices

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 7
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                               Appendices
The detailed assumptions and methodology for the residential land inventory presented in
Chapter III (Resources) are provided below and summarized in Tables A-1 through A-6.
A.     Units Approved and Not Built
Projects that were approved but not yet completed are shown in Table A-1. These
projects include 56 lower income units (Area Housing Authority project), 10 moderate
income units, and 213 above moderate units (279 units total). Assigned income
categories are based on specific project requirements.
B.     Vacant Land
Table A-2 summarizes vacant parcels with the potential for residential development.
These parcels can accommodate 314 lower income units, 83 moderate income units
and 307 above moderate income units (704 units total). Development capacity was
estimated based on environmental constraints, land use controls and availability of
water and other public utilities. The locations of these sites are shown in Figure A-1.
Vacant land in the “Skyline” area south of the 101 Freeway (east of Conejo Ridge Drive
and west of Foothill Road) was not listed in the inventory. The Skyline area consists of
steep hillsides subdivided in the 1920’s into small lots that lack basic infrastructure.
Most of the parcels have inadequate vehicular access and insufficient water storage to
provide adequate fire flow.
C.     Underutilized Sites/Redevelopment Potential
Table A-3 contains an inventory of underutilized sites with redevelopment potential.
These parcels can accommodate 145 lower income units, 424 moderate income units
and 6 above moderate income units (575 units total). Development capacity was
estimated based on environmental constraints, land use controls and availability of
water and other public infrastructure. The fact that these sites contain older single family
homes is not an impediment to redevelopment. Several such underutilized sites in the
City have been redeveloped in recent years.
D.     Pending Projects with Affordable Housing Partner
Table A-4 describes a pending senior housing project proposed by non-profit affordable
housing developer Many Mansions. The location of this project is shown in Figure A-3.
This project will provide a total 80 units affordable to a mix of extremely low, very low
and low income households.
                                                                                        103

Chapter 6                                         Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Action Plan                       Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                    This page intentionally left blank.
104
Thousand Oaks General Plan                Chapter 7
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update        Appendices
                              CHAPTER 7
                             APPENDICES
                                               105
Chapter 6                                         Thousand Oaks General Plan
Housing Action Plan                       Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                    This page intentionally left blank.
106
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                           Chapter 7
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                                   Appendices
                                                            TABLE A-1
                                    INVENTORY OF PROJECTS APPROVED AND NOT YET BUILT
        Site                                                                                          General Plan     Income
Acres    ID        APN       Type Units                      Description                     Zoning    Land Use         Class
  2.08    1    5250092065     MFD  23   T 5458/RPD 2003-546; condos at 950 Warwick Street.  RPD-15U  Medium Density     Above
  6.92   11    6600030695     SFD  42   13 SFD and 69 Condos; east side of Ventu Park       RPD-20U   High Density      Above
  7.51         6600030675       +       Road.9 SFD and 33 condos to be built (11/2012)
                              MFD
  0.69   19    6710130050     MFD  10   RPD 2011-70370; Oakview apartments at 90 North      RPD-15U  Medium Density      Mod
                                        Oakview Drive.
  0.53   25    6700192100     MFD   7   RPD 2003-548/T5469;TTE 2009-70373 and RPD           RPD-15U   High Density      Above
                                        2009-70374 townhomes at 1735 Los Feliz Drive.
  1.04   27    6710110270     MFD  13   RPD 2003-547/T5468; TTE 2009-70371 and RPD          RPD-15U  Medium Density     Above
                                        2009-70372; NE corner of Chiquita Lane/Conejo
                                        School Road.
  0.49   28    6710110150     MFD   4   RPD 2006-70127; Townhomes on NW corner of           RPD-12U  Medium Density     Above
                                        Oakview Drive/ Chiquita Lane.
  2.24   35    6710311015     SFD   7   T 3532; NE corner of east Hillcrest Drive/ Lone Oak HPD-SFD   Low Density       Above
                   thru                 Drive.
               6710311075
 12.92   41    6670202045     SFD  25   T 5342; Arroyo View Street east of Lawrence Drive.     RPD-   Low Density       Above
                   thru                                                                     0.76U-SP
              6670202155;                                                                     (SP 7)
               6670213015
                   thru
              6670213115;
               6670370015
                   thru
               6670380435
  0.28   44    5210251025     SFD  10   T 2011-70018                                        RPD-4.5U  Low Density       Above
  0.33         5210251015
  1.73         5210080175
2014-2021 Housing Element Update                                 107                                              HCD Review Draft
Chapter 7                                                                                     Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendices                                                                             Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                         TABLE A-1
                                INVENTORY OF PROJECTS APPROVED AND NOT YET BUILT
       Site                                                                                        General Plan      Income
Acres    ID     APN     Type Units                        Description                     Zoning     Land Use         Class
 27.63   46  2360400025 SFD     5   T 4963-4; Via Capote east of Rancho Dos Vientos.       RPD-       Very Low        Above
             2360400065                                                                 1.01U-SP       Density
             2360400095                                                                  (SP 8/9)
             2360400145
             2360420025
 40.85   54  5950060190 SFD     6   T 5363/RPD 2002-540; south side of West Olsen          RPD-      Residential      Above
                                    Road; east of Hwy 23 (Humkar)                         0.22U-    Developable
                                                                                         SFD-PR
 10.80   63  6710030070 SFD     8   T 5440/HPD 2003-82; NE of Hillcrest Road/ Conejo    HPD-SFD-      Very Low        Above
             6710360010             School Road.                                            PR         Density
 24.91   65  5250230145 SFD    20   T 5325/RPD 2001-533; north of Saint Charles Place.     RPD-     Low Density       Above
             5250230155             SWC Mayflower and Warwick.                            2.75U-
                                                                                           SFD
 19.77   73  5210020225 SFD     9   T 5465/HPMJ2007-70289; SFD at SW corner of Olsen       HPD    Low Density and     Above
                                    Road and Morningstar Avenue.                                   Undevelopable
 26.64   77  2360430015 SFD    25   T 5200; Via Bonita, Via Sedona, Via Donte and Via      RPD-   Very low density    Above
                 thru               Arabella as of 11/12                                1.01U-SP
             2360450175                                                                  (SP 8/9)
  0.33  116  6710183010 MFD     4   RPD 2004-71036; Condos at Sunset Drive and Royal    RPD-15U     High Density      Above
                                    Oaks (134 Sunset Dr)
  0.41  120  6690060220 SFD     4   RPD 2004-71048; 590-596 Hodencamp Road; NW          RPD-12U- Medium Density       Above
             6690062740             corner of Hodencamp Road and Wilbur Road.              SFD
             6690062730
             6690062750
  1.49  126  6580052275 SFD     1   PPD 05-70247; 2831 LynnView west of West Kelly       R-E-1AC      Very Low        Above
                                    Road.                                                              Density
   2.2 18   6700280190  MFD    56   RPD 2009-70172; Area Housing Authority affordable   RPD-30U     High Density      Lower
                                    housing project on Los Feliz Drive
                Total         279                                                                                  213 Above
                                                                                                                   10 Mod
                                                                                                                   56 Lower
108
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                     Chapter 7
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                             Appendices
                                                     TABLE A-2
                                           INVENTORY OF VACANT LAND
                                      (SEE FIGURE A-1 FOR SITE LOCATIONS)
          Site                 Estimated                                                      General Plan      Income
  Acres    ID     APN     Type   Units                Description               Zoning          Land Use         Class
   1.04     2  6700220210 SFD       3     Corner of Erbes Road and Hillcrest    R-E-1AC        Low Density       Above
   0.61        6700230360                 Road.                                  R-E-13
   0.29        6700230350                                                        R-E-13
  11.88     3  5950060200 SFD       4     East of Olsen Road across for      RPD-0.22U-SFD-  Res Developable     Above
                                          Olsen station.                           PR
   0.50     6  6700070470 SFD       2     LD 638; South side of Rancho            R-E          Low Density       Above
   0.46        6700070460                 Road. 424 and 418 Rancho Rd.
   0.46
  29.65     7  6680070090 SFD       4     LD 669; End of La Cam Road.        RPD-0.07U-SFD    Very Low and       Above
  31.02        6680070010                                                                     Undevelopable
   0.45     8  5210011285 SFD       1     209 Bainbridge Court.                HPD-SFD       Very Low Density    Above
   0.32
   5.13     9  6580040395 SFD       3     LD 682; South of Lynn Road. 500’      R-E-1AC      Very Low Density    Above
                                          West of Mapleleaf Avenue.
   4.55    12  6580160155 SFD       3     East of Moonridge Avenue.            HPD-SFD       Very Low Density    Above
   2.93        6580160145                                                                   and Undevelopable
   4.28    14  6600030165 SFD      12     APN 6600030165; North of Lynn         R-E-1AC        Low Density       Above
                                          Road.
   5.00    15  6600030285 SFD      10     1617 Susan; West of Blair Court.      R-E-1AC        Low Density       Above
   5.51    16  5920101205 SFD       1     South of Read Road                    R-E-5AC          Reserve         Above
   5.53    16  5920101195 SFD       1     South of Read Road                    R-E-5AC          Reserve         Above
   4.80    16  5920101265 SFD       1     South of Read Road                    R-E-5AC          Reserve         Above
   4.90    16  5920101285 SFD       1     South of Read Road                    R-E-5AC          Reserve         Above
   9.81    16  5920101125 SFD       1     South of Read Road                    R-E-5AC          Reserve         Above
   4.85    16  5920101325 SFD       1     South of Read Road                    R-E-5AC          Reserve         Above
  10.00    16  5920101035 SFD       1     South of Read Road                   R-E-10AC          Reserve         Above
                                                                                                                     109

Chapter 7                                                                               Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendices                                                                       Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                      TABLE A-2
                                           INVENTORY OF VACANT LAND
                                      (SEE FIGURE A-1 FOR SITE LOCATIONS)
          Site                 Estimated                                                    General Plan    Income
  Acres    ID     APN     Type   Units                Description              Zoning         Land Use       Class
   7.02    16  5920101315 SFD      1      North of Moorpark Road              R-E-5AC          Reserve       Above
  11.71    16  5920101455 SFD      2      NE corner Moorpark Road/Hwy 23:     R-E-5AC          Reserve       Above
                                          4898 Moorpark
   0.18    17  6760124040 SFD      4      South of Willow Lane                  R-1          Low Density     Above
   0.42        6760124240                 North of Foothill Drive
   0.18        6760124280                 West of Fairview Lane
   1.59    36  680033023  SFD      5      RPD2007-70193/TTM2007-70422,       RPD-1.5-SP    Very Low Density  Above
   2.02        680033024                  NWC of Kanan Rd and Rayburn St
   6.47        680033025
   1.44        680033026
   1.62        680033027
   0.46        6760130120 SFD      3      3010 Foothill Dr; PPD2007-70294;     R-E-13        Low Density     Above
   0.79        6760130130                 PPD2007-700295; PPD2007-70296
   0.37        6760130140
   3.01    32  6800281125 SFD      3      T 4185 Lot s 19, 27,47            RPD-1.5U-SP    Very Low Density  Above
   1.69        6800272075
   2.69        6800262135
   1.04    32  6900222075 SFD      1      T 2778 Lot 18; north of Sunnyhill RPD-1.5U-SP    Very Low Density  Above
                                          Street.
   1.60    32  6800281025 SFD      1      T 4256, lot 2; 487 N. Lakeview    RPD-1.5U-SP    Very Low Density  Above
   0.90        6800281015                 Canyon
   0.34    33  6890060165 SFD      1      T 3507-2; 5381 Long Shadow        RPD-1.5U-SP    Very Low Density  Above
   0.33    33  6890060025 SFD      1      T 3507-2; 5382 Long Shadow        RPD-1.5U-SP    Very Low Density  Above
   0.88    33  6890320075 SFD      1      T 3826; 5216 Island Forest        RPD-1.5U-SP    Very Low Density  Above
   0.52    33  6890030285 SFD      1      T 3507-2; 5127 Lakeview Canyon    RPD-1.5U-SP    Very Low Density  Above
   6.34    33  6800263025 SFD      1      T 4185; 1280 Woodland Grove       RPD-1.5U-SP    Very Low Density  Above
   0.50    34  6890081145 SFD      1      T 3507-4; 5685 White Cloud        RPD-1.5U-SP    Very Low Density  Above
110
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                    Chapter 7
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                            Appendices
                                                      TABLE A-2
                                           INVENTORY OF VACANT LAND
                                      (SEE FIGURE A-1 FOR SITE LOCATIONS)
          Site                 Estimated                                                     General Plan      Income
  Acres    ID     APN     Type   Units                Description                 Zoning       Land Use         Class
   0.56    34  6890083155 SFD      1      T 3507-4; 1300 Falling Star Avenue    RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   0.97    34  6890081235 SFD      1      T 3507-4; 5714 White Cloud            RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   2.60    36  6800320065 SFD      1      T 4119-2; 1893 Dawn Meadow Court      RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   1.93    36  6800320295 SFD      1      T 4119-2; 4756 Golf Course Drive      RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   1.38    36  6800320045 SFD      1      T 4119-2; 1874 Dawn Meadow Court      RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   1.84    36  6800320135 SFD      1      T 4119-2; 4702 Golf Course Drive.     RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   3.10    36  6800320265 SFD      1      T 4119-2;1838 Dawn Meadow Court       RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   1.97    36  6800320275 SFD      1      T 4119-2; 1820 Dawn Meadow Court.     RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   5.17    36  6800330215 SFD      1      T 4119-3; 4372 Rayburn Street.        RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   1.80    36  6800330195 SFD      1      T 4119-3; 4371 Rayburn Street.        RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   2.16    37  6800310165 SFD      1      T 4119-4; 1879 Collingswood Court.    RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   3.73    37  6800310025 SFD      1      T 4119-1; 1648 Crown Ridge Court.     RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   3.10    37  6800310015 SFD      1      T 4119-1; 1600 Crown Ridge Court      RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   2.25    37  6800340165 SFD      1      T 4119-4; 1547 Berryhill Circle       RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   2.33    37  6800340155 SFD      1      T 4119-4: 1530 Berryhill Circle       RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   2.18    38  6800273045 SFD      1      T4256, lot 35; 1137 Oak Mirage        RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   2.66    38  6800273265 SFD      1      T4185, lot 9; 1100 Oak Mirage.        RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   1.84    38  6800273135 SFD      1      T4256; 4683 Middle Fork Circle        RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   0.57    39  6800271045 SFD      1      T4185, Lot 15; SE corner Lakeview     RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   2.23        6800271035                 Canyon Road/ Windhaven Drive
  41.09    39  6800290055 SFD      1      T4256, lot 58847 Country Valley Road  RPD-1.5U-SP Very Low Density    Above
   6.77    39  6800290035 SFD      1      T 4256, lot 127; 4994 Lakeview       RPD-1.5U-SP  Very Low Density    Above
                                          Canyon Rd.
                                                                                                                    111
Chapter 7                                                                              Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendices                                                                       Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                       TABLE A-2
                                           INVENTORY OF VACANT LAND
                                      (SEE FIGURE A-1 FOR SITE LOCATIONS)
          Site                 Estimated                                                   General Plan    Income
  Acres    ID     APN     Type   Units                  Description            Zoning        Land Use       Class
   1.29    39  6800290215 SFD       1     T4256; 781 Spruce Meadow Place    RPD-1.5U-SP   Very Low Density  Above
   1.33    40  6900360115 SFD       1     T 4297;1757 Classic Rose Court    RPD-1.5U-SP   Very Low Density  Above
  30.13    45  6900350085 SFD      10     T 05-70105 proposed; behind      RPD-0.55U-SFD  Very Low Density  Above
                                          existing house on Featherwood                  and Undevelopable
                                          Street
   2.16    47  6780313175 SFD       7     Former T 5106; T2001-5106 M1          R-E         Low Density     Above
               6780313225                 (Weldon Flier); NE corner Erbes
               6780313165                 Rd/Falmouth St
               6780313195
               6780313215
               6780313205
               6780313185
  23.74    49  6640050165 SFD       6     T 5262 (former) West of Highgate RPD-0.4U-SFD   Very Low Density  Above
                                          Rd. Site constrained by access,
                                          steep slopes, and endangered
                                          plants
   0.34    50  6700080270 SFD       7     Thousand Oaks Tra–t - Rancho          R-E         Low Density     Above
   0.48        6700080390                 Hillcrest including 1350 Rancho
   0.44        6700080250                 Lane; South of Rancho Lane
   0.36        6700080260
   2.07        6700080030
  29.73    51  5920110320 SFD       3     North of Olsen Road, West of the    HPD-PR         Residential    Above
                                          23 Freeway; North end of Zocalo                   Developable
                                          Circle
  16.28    52  6760180210 SFD       5     End of Skyline Drive              R-E-20AV-PR   Very Low Density  Above
   0.94    53  6700210400 MFD      17     West side of Erbes Road               R-3         High Density    Lower
   0.19        6700210410
   0.22        6700210350
112

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                    Chapter 7
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                            Appendices
                                                      TABLE A-2
                                           INVENTORY OF VACANT LAND
                                      (SEE FIGURE A-1 FOR SITE LOCATIONS)
          Site                 Estimated                                                     General Plan      Income
  Acres    ID     APN     Type   Units                Description                 Zoning       Land Use         Class
   1.08    56  6580210295 MFD      15     SW corner of Borchard and              RPD-15U    Medium Density       Mod
                                          Deerpath; RPD 89-421
  36.66    57  6620010030 SFD      20     Capacity reduced 20du due to             R-1-8      Low Density       Above
                                          floodplain constraint; South of 101
                                          Freeway at Rancho Conejo off-
                                          ramp
  115.49   58  6640030055 SFD      19     Vacant land; 3000’ south of          HPD-SFD-PR       Reserve         Above
                                          Hillsborough
   2.47    59  6700260010 SFD       9     2080 East Hillcrest                       R-E       Low Density       Above
   0.74    60  6700250230 MFD       8     RPD 2006-70582; East of Erbes           RPD-20      High Density       Mod
                                          Road, 750’ N of TO Blvd
   5.06    61  6790181115 SFD       1     Vacant parcel between Morrow             HPD        Low Density       Above
                                          Circle and Wilder Street; 1625
                                          Wilder
  35.65    62  6790010265 SFD       3     North terminus of Wilder Street          HPD      Low Density and     Above
                                                                                             Undevelopable
   1.84    64  5180060040 SFD       0     SUP 04-71541; Z 01-724 to P-L          R-E-1AC      Low Density       Above
                                          (expansion of existing facility);
                                          Northwest corner of Olsen Road
                                          and Moorpark Road
   3.19    66  6600121010 SFD       9     Former T 3645; northeast of Lynn    RPD-4.5U-SFD    Low Density       Above
                                          Road and E. Kelley
  19.88    69  2340080300 SFD       1     R-ª-1A-PR and R-ª-5A-PR               R-E-1A-PR   Very Low Density    Above
                                          west side of Old Conejo Road                     and Undevelopable
   1.97    70  6790102165 SFD       3     End of Bascom Court; No street            R-E       Low Density       Above
   1.99        6790102155                 access                                            Low Density and
                                                                                             Undevelopable
   8.12    72  6580051275 SFD       6     Vacant land; North of Lynn Road;      R-1-30AV    Very Low Density    Above
   1.88        6580012540                 PAR2001-70202                       RPD-0.5U-SFD and Undevelopable
                                                                                                                    113

Chapter 7                                                                                Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendices                                                                         Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                     TABLE A-2
                                           INVENTORY OF VACANT LAND
                                      (SEE FIGURE A-1 FOR SITE LOCATIONS)
          Site                 Estimated                                                      General Plan    Income
  Acres    ID     APN     Type   Units                Description               Zoning         Land Use        Class
  80.66    74  6790010310 SFD      16     Rust Property; East of Erbes Road    RPD-0.2U     Very Low Density,  Above
                                          across from El Monte Drive                          Developable
                                                                                             Residential and
                                                                                             Undevelopable
   0.95    80  6700110220 SFD       1     1649 Hauser Circle                      R-O         Low Density      Above
   1.51    80  6700110120 SFD       1     1637 Hauser Circle                      R-O         Low Density      Above
   0.46    80  6700110180 SFD       1     Lots between Rancho Lane and           R-E-20       Low Density      Above
                                          Hauser Circle
   0.51    80  6700110170 SFD       1     Lots between Rancho Lane and           R-E-20       Low Density      Above
                                          Hauser Circle
   0.35    80  6700110160 SFD       1     Lots between Rancho Lane and           R-E-20       Low Density      Above
                                          Hauser Circle
   0.33    80  6700140245 SFD       1     961 North Rancho Road                  R-E-20       Low Density      Above
  19.98    82  5920101165 SFD       3     LD 711; 4920 Read Road                R-E-5AC         Reserve        Above
  11.18    83  6900350015 SFD       2     End of Peacock Court, Brunston Ct.  RPD-1.5U-SP   Very Low Density   Above
   4.00   100  5250053115 MFD      60     Northeast corner of Hillcrest &        SP 17       Com/Residential    Mod
               5250060095                 McCloud ; approx. 4 acres usable
                                          due to slope constraints
   5.01   105  6670340185 MFD     141     Southwest corner of Conejo Center    SP-7 High      High Density     Lower
                                          Drive and future street to Specific   Density
                                          Plan 13
   5.52   106  6670340195 MFD     156     Northwest corner of Conejo Center    SP-7 High      High Density     Lower
                                          Drive and future street to Specific   Density
                                          Plan 13
   3.65   117  6580012390 SFD       2     PAR 2004-71195; End of Deerpath       R-E-1AC      Undevelopable     Above
                                          Lane
   0.43   119  6580040685 SFD       1     RPD 2000-529; 120 Regal             RPD-2U-SFD      Low Density      Above
114
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                   Chapter 7
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                           Appendices
                                                       TABLE A-2
                                           INVENTORY OF VACANT LAND
                                      (SEE FIGURE A-1 FOR SITE LOCATIONS)
          Site                 Estimated                                                    General Plan      Income
  Acres    ID     APN     Type   Units                  Description              Zoning       Land Use         Class
   0.61   119  6580040675 SFD       1     RPD 2000-528; 130 Regal              RPD-2U-SFD    Low Density       Above
   0.82   119  6580040665 SFD       1     RPD 2000-527; 140 Regal              RPD-2U-SFD    Low Density       Above
   0.17   123  6710211120 MFD       2     North of Los Robles Road              RPD-12U    Medium Density      Above
   0.21   124  6690241315 SFD       1     885 Masterson                       RPD-6.3U-SFD Medium Density      Above
   0.26   124  6690271530 SFD       1     SE corner Hillcrest/Houston         RPD-6.3U-SFD Medium Density      Above
   0.14   124  6690271400 SFD       1     Greenwich Village south; east of    RPD-6.3U-SFD Medium Density      Above
                                          Houston; 230 Houston
   0.15   124  6690142470 SFD       1     Greenwich Village south: north of   RPD-12U-SFD  Medium Density      Above
                                          Flittner.
   0.05   125  6690131020 SFD       3     Greenwich Village south                 R-O      Medium Density      Above
   0.14        6690131110                 524 Wilbur                              R-O
   0.47        6690062775                 720 Beall                           RPD-12U-SFD
   0.48   126  6580060195 SFD       1     Kelley Estates west of West Kelley;   R-E-1AC     Undevelopable      Above
                                          adjacent to 400 Helga
   0.50   126  6580052235 SFD       1     Kelley Estates west of West           R-E-1AC    Very Low Density    Above
                                          Kelley;south of Lynnview Street
   1.66   126  6580052265 SFD       1     Kelley Estates west of West Kelley;   R-E-1AC    Very Low Density    Above
                                          SW corner Lynn/ Lynnview Street
  15.78   166  6670051105 SFD       1     Hillside lot on Grande Vista Drive     H-P-D      Undevelopable      Above
   4.28   172  6600010445 MFD      55     1200 Newbury Road                     RPD-15U    Medium Density      Above
                                                                                                             314 Lower
                  Total           704                                                                         83 Mod
                                                                                                             307 Above
                                                                                                                   115
Chapter 7                                           Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendices                                     Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
           This page intentionally left blank.
116
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                   Chapter 7
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                          Appendices
                                                       TABLE A-3
                        INVENTORY OF UNDERUTILIZED SITES WITH REDEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
                                      (SEE FIGURE A-2 FOR SITE LOCATIONS)
       Site                 Estimated                                      Existing            General Plan    Income
 Acres  ID     APN     Type   Units               Site Project               Use     Zoning     Land Use        Class
  2.38  10  6710030060 MFD       6    LU 95-212; north side of Hillcrest    SFD     R-E-20-PR Medium Density    Above
  2.38      6710030050                Drive, Condos
  0.34  22  6700192120 MFD       3    Dorriz Property RPD-15U; Los Feliz    SFD     RPD-15U    High Density      Mod
                                      Drive
  0.29  22  6700192110 MFD       2    Cameron Property RPD-15U; Los         SFD     RPD-15U    High Density      Mod
                                      Feliz Drive
  0.34  22  6700192030 MFD      20    SFD1816, 1818 and 1892 Los Feliz      SFD     RPD-30U    High Density     Lower
  0.22      6700192020                Drive next to Leggett Court
  0.22      6700192060                Apartments
  1.18  23  6700250220 MFD      20    Church site; .80ac (RPD30) & .38ac   Church   RPD-30U    High Density     Lower
                                      (R-1); Los Feliz Dr east of Erbes Rd            &R-1
  0.47  43  6700290420 MFD      53    135, 71(Former T 4564), 143, 147,     SFD     RPD-30U    High Density     Lower
  0.55      6700290400                151, 155, 159 and 163 Conejo          MFD
  0.22      6700290210                School Road                           MFD
  0.16      6700290150                                                      MFD
  0.19      6700290240                                                      MFD
  0.18      6700290230                                                      MFD
  0.20      6700290360                                                      MFD
  0.18      6700290350                                                      MFD
  0.92  53  6700210080 MFD      11    West side of Erbes Rd between         SFD        R-3     High Density     Lower
                                      Thousand Oaks Bl and Hillcrest Dr
  0.49  53  6700210060 MFD       6    West side of Erbes Rd between         SFD        R-3     High Density     Lower
                                      Thousand Oaks Bl and Hillcrest Dr
  1.43  95  6700200120 MFD      35    West side of Erbes Rd                 COM        R-3     High Density     Lower
  0.34 113  6710182070 MFD      12    RPD 1986-368 M36 (Model               SFD     RPD-15U   Medium Density     Mod
  0.30      6710182125                Neighborhood Area); SWC Royal
                                      Oaks Dr and Sunset Dr
                                                                                                                    117
Chapter 7                                                                          Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendices                                                                   Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                      TABLE A-3
                        INVENTORY OF UNDERUTILIZED SITES WITH REDEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
                                      (SEE FIGURE A-2 FOR SITE LOCATIONS)
       Site                 Estimated                               Existing             General Plan  Income
 Acres  ID     APN     Type   Units               Site Project        Use      Zoning     Land Use      Class
  0.18 118  6710174190 MFD      12    RPD 1986-368; 3150,3160, 3170   SFD     RPD-15U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.18 114  6710174030                and 3190 Los Robles Rd
  0.18      6710174040
  0.18      6710174050
  0.21 123  6710221100 MFD       3    2685 Los Robles Rd              SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.22 123  6710221090 MFD       3    2699 Los Robles Rd              SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.27 123  6710221080 MFD       3    2717 Los Robles Rd              SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.20 123  6710221320 MFD       3    2743 Los Robles Rd              SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.14 123  6710221240 MFD       2    2826 Crescent Way               SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.19 123  6710221370 MFD       3    2775 Los Robles Rd              SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.28 123  6710221250 MFD       4    2848 Crescent Way               SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.18 123  6710221380 MFD       3    2769 Los Robles Rd              SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.18 123  6710221360 MFD       3    2779 Los Robles Rd              SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.16 123  6710221260 MFD       2    2862 Crescent Way               SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.16 123  6710221270 MFD       2    2874 Crescent Way               SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.17 123  6710221020 MFD       3    2797 Los Robles Road            SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.32 123  6710221010 MFD       6    2821 Los Robles Road            SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.23 123  6710211210 MFD       4    2926 Crescent Way               SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.11 123  6710211190 MFD       2    2938 Crescent Way               SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.30 123  6710211030 MFD       4    2947 Los Robles Road            SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.11 123  6710211200 MFD       2    2948 Crescent Way               SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.14 123  6710211110 MFD       2    2949 Los Robles Road            SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.19 123  6710211220 MFD       3    2964 Crescent Way               SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
  0.38 123  6710211100 MFD       4    73 Fairview Road                SFD     RPD-12U   Medium Density   Mod
118
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                           Chapter 7
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                  Appendices
                                                     TABLE A-3
                        INVENTORY OF UNDERUTILIZED SITES WITH REDEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
                                      (SEE FIGURE A-2 FOR SITE LOCATIONS)
       Site                 Estimated                               Existing           General Plan    Income
 Acres  ID     APN     Type   Units              Site Project         Use     Zoning    Land Use        Class
  0.26 123  6710193040 MFD      4     3008 Crescent Way               SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.13 123  6710193190 MFD      2     3096 Crescent Way               SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.13 123  6710193340 MFD      2     3046 Crescent Way               SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.39 123  6710193070 MFD      5     3056 Crescent Way               SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.47 123  6710211090 MFD      5     2967 Los Robles Road            SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.20 123  6710193310 MFD      2     3051 Los Robles Road            SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.20 123  6710193320 MFD      2     3059 Los Robles Road            SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.20 123  6710193140 MFD      2     3061 Los Robles Road            SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.20 123  6710193130 MFD      2     3071 Los Robles Road            SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.20 123  6710193120 MFD      2     3081 Los Robles Road            SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.25 123  6710192030 MFD      3     3030 Los Robles Road            SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.21 123  6710192040 MFD      3     3040 Los Robles Road            SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.19 123  6710192050 MFD      2     3058 Los Robles Road            SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.16 123  6710192060 MFD      2     3076 Los Robles Road            SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.16 123  6710192070 MFD      2     3088 Los Robles Road            SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.57 123  6710192010 MFD      7     3105 Royal Oaks Drive           SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.23 123  6710192140 MFD      2     3113 Royal Oaks Drive           SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.26 123  6710192130 MFD      3     3121 Royal Oaks Drive           SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.18 123  6710192120 MFD      2     3127 Royal Oaks Drive           SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.19 123  6710193360 MFD      2     3025 Los Robles Road            SFD    RPD-12U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.26 139  6710171180 MFD      4     3163 Los Robles Road            SFD    RPD-15U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.26 139  6710171190 MFD      2     3173 and 3175 Los Robles Road   SFD    RPD-15U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.50 139  6710181030 MFD      8     3169 Royal Oaks Drive           SFD    RPD-15U  Medium Density     Mod
  0.25 139  6710181040 MFD      3     3193 Royal Oaks Drive           SFD    RPD-15U  Medium Density     Mod
                                                                                                            119
Chapter 7                                                                                     Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendices                                                                           Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                                                     TABLE A-3
                        INVENTORY OF UNDERUTILIZED SITES WITH REDEVELOPMENT POTENTIAL
                                      (SEE FIGURE A-2 FOR SITE LOCATIONS)
       Site                 Estimated                                       Existing                 General Plan   Income
 Acres  ID     APN     Type   Units              Site Project                 Use      Zoning          Land Use      Class
  0.25 139  6710181080 MFD       3    3257 Royal Oaks Drive                  SFD      RPD-15U       Medium Density    Mod
  0.18 139  6710174170 MFD       3    3248 Los Robles Road                   SFD      RPD-15U       Medium Density    Mod
  0.22 139  6710174180 MFD       3    3260 Los Robles Road                   SFD      RPD-15U       Medium Density    Mod
  0.18 139  6710174090 MFD       3    3224 Los Robles Road                   SFD      RPD-15U       Medium Density    Mod
  0.18 139  6710174070 MFD       3    3198 Los Robles Road                   SFD      RPD-15U       Medium Density    Mod
  0.18 139  6710174060 MFD       3    3190 Los Robles Road                   SFD      RPD-15U       Medium Density    Mod
  0.18 139  6710182130 MFD       3    3192 Royal Oaks Drive                  SFD      RPD-15U       Medium Density    Mod
  0.41 139  6710182140 MFD       6    3236 Royal Oaks Drive                  SFD      RPD-15U       Medium Density    Mod
  0.24 139  6710182170 MFD       3    3250 Royal Oaks Drive                  SFD      RPD-15U       Medium Density    Mod
  0.28 139  6710173020 MFD       4    3346 Los Robles Road                   SFD      RPD-15U       Medium Density    Mod
 11.65 164  6810180250 MFD      13    Los Robles Apts Infill 300 E. Rolling   APT        R-3         High Density     Mod
                                      Oaks Drive as shown in
                                      RPMJ 2008-70009
  345  171   numerous  MFD            Thousand Oaks Blvd Specific Plan      MIXED-   Specific Plan-   Residential/    Mod
              parcels           71     Moorpark Rd to Conejo School Rd       USE          20         Commercial
                                72    Conejo School Rd to Rancho Rd
                                71    Rancho Rd to Duesenberg Dr
               Total           575                                                                                 145 Low
                                                                                                                   424 Mod
                                                                                                                   6 Above
120
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                                 Chapter 7
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                                                        Appendices
                                                       TABLE A-4
                             PENDING PROJECT WITH AFFORDABLE HOUSING PARTNER
                                        (SEE FIGURE A-3 FOR SITE LOCATION)
                                                                                        Proposed
                                                                             Existing
     Site                                             Existing   Existing                General    Estimated Income
 Ac          APN     Type        Description                              General Plan
      ID                                                Use      Zoning                   Plan/       Units    Class
                                                                            Land Use
                                                                                         Zoning
2.47 173  6700260010 MFD  Proposed Many Mansions       SFD         R-E     Low Density High Density     80     Lower
                          General Plan amendment,                                       RPD-20U
                          zone change and senior
                          apartment project.
                          Location: 2080 Hillcrest Dr
                                                                                                                121
Chapter 7                                           Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendices                                     Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
           This page intentionally left blank.
122
Thousand Oaks General Plan         Chapter 7
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update Appendices
                                        123
Chapter 7       Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendices Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
124
Thousand Oaks General Plan         Chapter 7
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update Appendices
                                        125
Chapter 7                                           Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendices                                     Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
           This page intentionally left blank.
126
Thousand Oaks General Plan                   Chapter 7
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update           Appendices
                               APPENDIX B
                              CONTACT LIST
                                                  127
Chapter 7                                Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendices                       Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
           This page intentionally left blank.
128
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                     Chapter 7
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                            Appendices
CONTACT LIST
                  Name                                  Organization
Leslie Orth                          Lutheran Social Services of So. California
Margarete Preusser                   United Cerebral Palsy Los Angeles
Maureen Symonds                      Conejo Valley Senior Concerns
Ellen Johnson                        Livingston Memorial Visiting Nurse Association
Robert Pellino                       St. Vincent de Paul
Leslie Orth, Area Director           Lutheran Social Services of So. California.
                                     University of S. California, Andrus Gerontology
Fall Prevention Center of Excellence
                                     Center
Charles Bloomquist                   Villa Esperanza Services
Jeff Blum                            Conejo/Las Virgenes Futures Foundation
Andrea Gallagher, President          Conejo Valley Senior Concerns
Amy Simons                           United Cerebral Palsy Los Angeles
Linda Braunschweiger                 Ventura Co. Housing Trust Fund
Sylvia Taylor Stein                  Long Term Care Services of Ventura County, Inc.
Kristy Pollard                       Food Share
Clyde B. Reynolds                    Turning Point Foundation
Amy Balchum                          Ventura County Jewish Family Service
Terra Donlon                         Building Industry Association
Jon Friedman                         Jemstreet Properties
Doug Tapking                         Area Housing Authority
Steve Bird, Administrator            United Cerebral Palsy Los Angeles
Mary Ann Kearns                      Assistance League Conejo Valley
Jennifer Schwabauer                  Manna Conejo Valley Food Bank
Rick Schroeder                       Many Mansions
Terry Miller                         Big Brothers Big Sisters of Ventura County, Inc.
Erin Pierik                          Southeast Ventura County YMCA – Conejo Valley
Tanya Kellam                         Interface Children and Family Services
                                                                                      129

Chapter 7                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendices                           Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
                   Name                      Organization
Jeff Landis              Ventura County Human Services Agency
Teresa Sousa             Shapell Industries
Christy Madden           County of Ventura
Mary Harris              Individual
Remy De La Peza          Public Counsel Law Center
Betty Alvarez Ham        Betty Alvarez Ham
--                       Action Foundation
Ratan Bhavnani           NAMI- Ventura County
Mark Belfortti           Tri-Counties Comm. Housing Corp
Debbie Weinkart          Tri-Counties Regional Center
Suhel Siddiqui           Hydam Development
Allen Reznick            Conejo Valley Assoc. of Realtors
                         Haverim B’nai B’rith and City of Thousand Oaks
Mel Silberberg
                         Senior Adult Master Plan/ Housing Team
Robert Hogan             ARC Ventura County
Timothy Hockett          Community Action Ventura County
Sandy Smith              Ventura County Civil Alliance
Lynn Thompson            The Salvation Army
--                       VC-CLUE
--                       Ventura County Rescue Mission
Cathy Brudnicki          Individual
Hoa Tran                 Ventura County Community Fdn.
David Rodriguez          Cabrillo Economic Dev. Corp.
Patrice Esseff           Catholic Charities
Caroline Prijatel-Sutton Coalition to End Family Violence
Stacy Swanson            Habitat for Humanity Ventura Co
                         Unitarian Universalist Fellowship of the Conejo
Howard Bierman
                         Valley Faith in Action Committee
--                       Ventura Behavioral Health Dept.
130

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                         Chapter 7
Housing Element 2014-2021 Update                                 Appendices
                 Name                             Organization
Kasey Burke                      Meta Housing Corporation
Douglas Nickles                  Individual
Jim Wolf                         S.A.F.E./Ranch Mobile Home Park
Victor Abrunzo                   S.A.F.E./Ranch Mobile Home Park
Kathryn Goodspeed                S.A.F.E./Ranch Mobile Home Park
Brian Trushinski                 Individual
Jerry Lewi                       Individual
                                                                        131
Chapter 7                                Thousand Oaks General Plan
Appendices                       Housing Element 2014-2021 Update
           This page intentionally left blank.
132






















































































Open Space Element
Thousand Oaks General Plan
           CITY OF THOUSAND OAKS
                       City Council
              Mayor Claudia Bill-de la Peña
             Mayor Pro-Tem Andrew P. Fox
             Councilmember Jacqui V. Irwin
              Councilmember Joel R. Price
                Councilmember Al Adam
                 Planning Commission
                   Peter Turpel, Chair
              Daniel Roundtree, Vice-Chair
              Michael Farris, Commissioner
            Douglas Nickles, Commissioner
             Daryl Reynolds, Commissioner
                City of Thousand Oaks
        Community Development Department
John C. Prescott, AICP, Community Development Director
   Mark A. Towne, AICP, Deputy Director/City Planner
          Richard A. Burgess, Senior Planner
        Shelly Austin, Associate Planner-COSCA
                      October, 2013

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                                                        Table of Contents
                                          Table of Contents
PREFACE ....................................................................................................................... v
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................... 1
  A. Purpose of the Open Space Element ................................................................... 1
  B. Definitions and Terminology ................................................................................. 1
  C. Relationship of the Open Space Element to other General Plan Elements .......... 3
CHAPTER 2: BENEFITS OF OPEN SPACE .................................................................. 5
  A. Wildlife .................................................................................................................. 5
  B. Vegetation ............................................................................................................ 5
  C. Archaeology.......................................................................................................... 5
  D. Education ............................................................................................................. 6
  E. Trails ..................................................................................................................... 6
  F. Scenic Resources................................................................................................. 6
  G. Wetlands and Riparian Lands............................................................................... 6
  H. Orderly Growth and Maintenance of the Economy ............................................... 6
  I. Public Health and Safety ...................................................................................... 7
  J. Paleontology ......................................................................................................... 7
CHAPTER 3: OPEN SPACE ISSUES ............................................................................ 9
  A. Open Space for Preservation of Natural Resources ............................................. 9
  B. Open Space for the Managed Production of Resources .................................... 10
  C. Open Space for Outdoor Recreation and Education .......................................... 10
  D. Open Space for Public Health and Safety .......................................................... 11
  E. Open Space and Urban Form............................................................................. 11
  F. Open Space Preservation and Stewardship ....................................................... 12
  G. Open Space Management .................................................................................. 14
CHAPTER 4: THE OPEN SPACE SYSTEM ................................................................. 17
  A. Delineation of the Open Space System .............................................................. 17
  B. Open Space Inventory ........................................................................................ 18
  C. Areas with Important Open Space Resources .................................................... 41
CHAPTER 5: POLICIES ............................................................................................... 49
  A. Open Space for Preservation of Natural Resources ........................................... 49
  B. Open Space for the Managed Production of Resources .................................... 49
  C. Open Space for Outdoor Recreation and Education .......................................... 50
  D. Open Space for Public Health and Safety .......................................................... 51
  E. Open Space and Urban Form............................................................................. 52
  F. Open Space Preservation and Stewardship ....................................................... 53
  G. Open Space Management .................................................................................. 55
                                                                                                                                   i
                                                                                 Thousand Oaks General Plan
Table of Contents                                                        Open Space Element 2013 Update
CHAPTER 6: ACTION PLAN TO IMPLEMENT THE OPEN SPACE ELEMENT ......... 59
   A.  Open Space Zone .............................................................................................. 59
   B.  Restriction on Disposition or Lease of City Open Space .................................... 59
   C.  Hillside Planned Development Zone................................................................... 59
   D.  Protected Ridgeline Overlay Zone ...................................................................... 60
   E.  Urban Restriction Boundary................................................................................ 60
   F.  COSCA Ordinance No. 01-2009......................................................................... 60
CHAPTER 7: FINANCIAL PLAN TO ACQUIRE AND MANAGE OPEN SPACE ......... 63
   A. Community Recreation Facilities and Open Space Endowment Fund ............... 63
   B. Open Space, Conservation, and Scenic Easements; Acquisition of
       Development Rights ........................................................................................... 63
   C. “Bedroom Tax”.................................................................................................... 64
   D. General Fund Revenue ...................................................................................... 64
   E. Golf Course Fees ............................................................................................... 64
   F. Tax Foreclosure Sales ........................................................................................ 64
   G. Open Space Acquisition Bond Issue .................................................................. 64
   H. Open Space Maintenance Districts .................................................................... 65
   I. Grants ................................................................................................................. 65
   J. Donations and Bargain Sales ............................................................................. 65
   K. COSCA Trust Fund ............................................................................................ 65
CHAPTER 8: THOUSAND OAKS CITY URBAN RESTRICTION BOUNDARY .......... 67
LIST OF TABLES
Table 1: Thousand Oaks Planning Area Open Space Inventory (2013) ........................ 20
Table 2: Areas with Important Open Space Resources ................................................. 42
LIST OF FIGURES
Figure 1:  Open Space System Map.............................................................................. 21
Figure 2:  Natural Open Space Inventory ...................................................................... 23
Figure 3:  Regional Open Space Map ........................................................................... 25
Figure 4:  Areas with Important Open Space Resources ............................................... 43
LIST OF PHOTOGRAPHS
Photo 1: Wildwood Mesa, Wildwood Park ....................................................................... v
Photo 2: Coast Live Oak Woodland ................................................................................ 9
Photo 3: Conejo Canyons Open Space ......................................................................... 11
Photo 4: Rancho Potrero Open Space (foreground) and Vista Del Mar (flowering
           area behind) .................................................................................................. 12
Photo 5: Lang Ranch Open Space ................................................................................ 15
Photo 6: Mountain Bikers, Lang Ranch Open Space .................................................... 18
Photo 7: Arroyo Conejo Creek ....................................................................................... 27
ii

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                                                  Table of Contents
Photo 8: Conejo Canyons Open Space ......................................................................... 28
Photo 9: Lake Eleanor ................................................................................................... 31
Photo 10: Lang Ranch Open Space .............................................................................. 32
Photo 11: Trailhead at South Moorpark Road................................................................ 33
Photo 12: Lynnmere Open Space ................................................................................. 33
Photo 13: Rancho Potrero Open Space (foreground) and Santa Monica Mountains
          National Recreation Area (background) ........................................................ 36
Photo 15: South Ranch Open Space............................................................................. 37
Photo 14: Vista Del Mar (area behind Lynn Road). Looking southwest......................... 39
Photo 16: Wildwood Park .............................................................................................. 40
Photo 17: Woodridge Open Space ................................................................................ 41
Photo 18: Wildwood Mesa............................................................................................. 49
Photo 19: Conejo Canyons Open Space ....................................................................... 58
Photo 20: Equestrians on the Los Robles Trail ............................................................. 61
                                                                                                                           iii
                                                Thousand Oaks General Plan
Table of Contents                          Open Space Element 2013 Update
                  This page intentionally left blank.
iv
Thousand Oaks General Plan
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                                 Preface
                                         PREFACE
The Thousand Oaks Planning Area encompasses the distinctive and picturesque City of
Thousand Oaks, a community nestled in the Conejo Valley, a small coastal valley in the
foothills at the northwest end of the Santa Monica Mountains. Thousand Oaks is
surrounded by mountains, traversed by creeks and dotted with knolls, hillsides, oak
woodlands, and native grasslands. This environment supports diverse wildlife and
vegetation habitats, including large mammals, as well as rare and endangered species
unique to the local area. In addition, the natural open space system provides important
linkages with the surrounding geography. A comprehensive open space plan is vital to
assure the conservation of these resources, to protect the integrity of the natural
ecosystem, to preserve the natural beauty of the community's natural open space, and
to enhance the City's visual character, which also provides a significant economic
resource.
                           Photo 1: Wildwood Mesa, Wildwood Park
                                                                                      v
                                      Thousand Oaks General Plan
Preface                          Open Space Element 2013 Update
        This page intentionally left blank.
vi
     Chapter I
Introduction
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                    Chapter 1
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                             Introduction
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
State law mandates that cities and counties adopt an Open Space Element and an
Action Plan to implement the City's goals to preserve open space for the health, safety
and welfare of the public. Open space preservation is necessary to maintain the
economy of the State, to assure the continued availability of agricultural and mineral
resources, for the enjoyment of scenic beauty, and the use and conservation of natural
resources and recreational opportunities.
The State Legislature in 1970 realized that rapid growth in the state would put extreme
development pressures on cities and counties, and acknowledged that resource
conservation must be an active part of a City's General Plan to direct growth away from
sensitive ecological areas. Therefore, the legislature adopted Government Code
Section 65563 mandating that every city and county prepare and adopt a local open
space plan.
The Open Space Element is a tool to carry forth the Thousand Oaks vision to protect
open space, direct growth and maintain the community's character and enviable quality
of life. This Element identifies the open space resources that should be protected and
specific methods to protect them.
Preservation of designated open space areas requires strong controls and a concerted
effort to protect them in perpetuity. Only through consistent implementation of a
comprehensive Open Space Element, supported by ordinances and other protective
measures, can its preservation for future generations of Conejo Valley residents be
assured.
Under State law, local government cannot issue any building permit, or approve any
subdivision map unless the proposed construction or subdivision is consistent with the
local government's Open Space action program. This Element satisfies a State
planning law requirement calling for an Open Space Element in all county and city
general plans.
A. Purpose of the Open Space Element
The purpose of the Open Space Element is to state the local planning policies for the
use of unimproved land or water for: (1) the preservation of natural resources, (2) the
managed production of resources, (3) outdoor recreation, and (4) the enhancement of
public health and safety. By law, the Open Space Element must also include an
inventory of those lands and resources, as well as an "action program." This program
must contain specific techniques to protect from the development of both public and
private open space lands which are identified as prominent and necessary to achieve
the open space policy goals.
B. Definitions and Terminology
State law defines "open space land" as any parcel or area of land or water which is
essentially unimproved and devoted to an open space use.
                                                                                      1
Chapter 1                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Introduction                                           Open Space Element 2013 Update
Open Space
Consistent with this intent, the term" open space" shall mean any area designated by
the City to preserve the City's natural resources and open space character. Such lands
include scenic ridgelines and steeply sloping hillside terrain, arroyos and barrancas,
lakes, creeks, riparian vegetation, floodplains, ecologically diverse native plant and
animal communities that include rare and endangered species, critical habitat linkages
and movement corridors that are necessary for the local and regional linkages and
movement corridors important to the dispersal of wildlife populations, farming and
grazing, historic and archaeological resources, and passive recreation areas.
Within the local government context, Section 9-13.102(b) of the City's Municipal Code
defines City-owned "open space." The following definition, which is hereby incorporated
in the Open Space Element as a definition of open space, is patterned after the
Municipal Code's definition cited above.
"Open space" land shall mean land which has been designated for the preservation of
the surface of that land in essentially an open, natural, and undeveloped state. Open
space may contain limited improvements and uses which are compatible and consistent
with open space use.
For purposes of applying the policies and implementation programs of this Element,
specific land is considered to be "open space" if any one or more of the following apply:
(1)    The deed, recorded tract map, or other instrument transferring the property
       designates the property as open space, or some document appurtenant to the
       transfer stipulates that the purpose of the transfer is to maintain the property as
       open space;
(2)    The City Council declares by resolution that the property is open space. Said
       resolution may be adopted before, concurrent with, or after the acquisition of the
       property by a public agency;
(3)    The City Council has placed the property in the Open Space (OS) Zone, as
       defined by Article 36 of Chapter 4 of this Title.
(4)    The property is to be retained in a natural condition through deed restrictions,
       conservation easement or other instrument.
Open space is considered a permanent classification which is intended to continue as
such in perpetuity without fundamental change. Policy OS-18 provides limitations on
changes to open space.
Open Space Element
This section of the City's General Plan is the "Open Space Element." Like other parts of
the General Plan, it articulates the City's policies and programs regarding its long-term
physical development, in this case pertaining to the topic of open space. State law
requires all cities to have General Plans, with specific "elements" to address topics such
as land use, circulation, housing, open space, conservation, safety and noise. Cities
2
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 1
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                                 Introduction
may include other elements in their General Plans to address other important local
topics related to the long-term physical development of the community.
Open Space Zone
The Open Space (OS) Zone is a specific City zoning district. Like other City zones (e.g.
R-1, R-P-D, C-2, M-1), it is defined by a specific Article in the Zoning Ordinance of the
Municipal Code, which sets forth regulations regarding permitted uses and development
standards for properties located within the zone. Property located within this zone is
"zoned Open Space." Properties can be placed in the OS Zone through a zone change,
which requires City Council adoption of an ordinance following a public hearing, and
consideration and recommendation by the Planning Commission.
Open Space Zoning Ordinance
This is a specific term used in the State law. All cities and counties are required to adopt
an "open space zoning ordinance consistent with the [Open Space Element]." As
described in Chapter 6, the City's open space zoning ordinance includes the OS Zone,
and other regulations which require the preservation of open space in land
development, preserve hillsides (Hillside Planned Development (H-P-D) Zone), protect
ridgelines (Protected Ridgeline (PR) Overlay Zone), and establish procedural
requirements relative to City-owned open space.
Open Space System
The Open Space System is land within the City's Planning Area, comprised of both
existing and future natural open space lands and lands which are improved for outdoor
recreation purposes, including parks and golf courses. The improvements consist
primarily of introduced landscaping for recreational use, with limited structural coverage
of the land. Figure 1 depicts the open space system.
Care must be taken not to confuse undeveloped property (whether privately- or publicly-
held) with open space. Designations of the Land Use Element of the General Plan and
zoning for such property may permit development at some subsequent point in time.
The open space system presently includes approximately 15,155 acres of natural open
space and 1,658 acres of active open space (e.g., parks and golf courses). Another
1,137 acres possess important open space resources and could potentially be added to
the system in the future. At buildout of the General Plan, the open space system will
comprise about 47% of the Planning Area's total acreage.
C. Relationship of the Open Space Element to other General Plan Elements
A General Plan must be internally consistent, meaning that none of its parts (principally
the various elements) should conflict with any other part. Each Element must have
equal status with other elements, and the policies and measures designed to implement
one or more elements must mutually support those of the other elements in achieving
the overall goals and policies of the General Plan.
                                                                                           3
Chapter 1                                                 Thousand Oaks General Plan
Introduction                                          Open Space Element 2013 Update
For example, while the Land Use Element describes the City's desired character and
size and its allocation of land to specific purposes or uses. The Open Space Element
describes natural resources that should be protected within and around the City. The
Recreation Element's main purpose is to plan for indoor and outdoor recreational
facilities (such as parks, playfields, and community centers). The Open Space Element's
main goal is to protect resources such as wildlife habitat, scenic, and agricultural land,
with a secondary goal of providing recreation where it will not harm the environment or
interfere with agricultural operations. Significant open space and ecological resources
should be appropriately designated in the Land Use Element, to facilitate compliance
with the policies identified in the Open Space Element.
The following text is included within the Open Space Element of the General Plan, as
required by Ordinance 1265-NS, adopted by the City Council on June 18, 1996. The
term "Land Use Map" refers to the Land Use Element map of the General Plan. "Parks,
Golf Courses, Open Space" is a land use category in that Element.
         The "Parks, Golf Courses, Open Space" category (not to be reconsidered
         until after the Year 2030) identifies those lands that are designated for
         Parks, Golf Courses, Open Space on the Land Use Map.
         The target date of 2030 associated with the Parks, Golf Courses, Open
         Space designation indicates a review date after which "Parks, Golf
         Courses, Open Space" designated lands may be reconsidered for urban
         uses. However, during the life of this plan as amended by initiative, it is
         intended that only parks, golf courses, open space uses are permitted on
         these lands. Furthermore, any updates to this plan are not intended to
         imply that development would necessarily be appropriate at that time.
This ordinance requires a vote of the people prior to changing any land designated as
“Parks, Golf Courses, Open Space” (as of June 18, 1996), to any other land use
category through December 31, 2030, subject to very limited exceptions.
4

    Chapter 2
 Benefits of
Open Space
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 2
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                     Benefits of Open Space
CHAPTER 2: BENEFITS OF OPEN SPACE
Open space areas serve a variety of critical functions in maintaining the balance of
nature and the well-being of man, not the least of which are serving as habitat for
wildlife, preventing soil erosion, maintaining air quality, controlling water runoff, serving
as the subject for art and educational study, and providing opportunities for hiking,
fishing, biking, horseback riding, and bird watching. Open space also plays an
invaluable role in community development by delineating the urban edge where
development ends and natural land begins, thus preventing the sprawl of urbanization.
A. Wildlife
Preserving wildlife resources requires preserving land in open space because any form
of wildlife must have a habitat. Loss or alteration of habitat is a major cause of various
forms of extinction.
Another critical function of open space is to provide wildlife movement corridors.
Movement corridors are habitat linkages utilized by wildlife species to gain access to
preferred foraging, water sources, nesting, and breeding areas. In order to maintain
their populations in a healthy condition, animals must have access to these critical
areas. In the Conejo Valley, these corridors also function as important access routes
around developed areas to undeveloped parcels.
B. Vegetation
Plant and vegetative resources should be carefully conserved because of their
importance for wildlife habitat, watershed protection, climate moderation, erosion
control, and their scenic beauty. Open space affords permanent protection to
biologically diverse native plant communities including rare and endangered species.
Vegetation prevents erosion and flooding which, in turn, enhances both the quality and
quantity of groundwater and surface water resources. It also improves and maintains
air quality within the surrounding community by producing oxygen and filtering air
pollution.    More direct benefits of preservation of plant resources include the
development of valuable medicines (some of which have been derived from rare plants)
and improved agricultural productivity (resulting from successful cross-breeding of wild
and domestic plants).
C. Archaeology
Knowledge of the past is a part of everyone's basic heritage. Open space in Thousand
Oaks preserves archaeological and historic resources including significant prehistoric
inland Chumash archaeological sites and historic structures. Safeguarding such
resources links the community with its history, addresses community concerns over
development growth and ensures the City is examining the interplay between nature
and culture.
                                                                                            5
Chapter 2                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Benefits of Open Space                                Open Space Element 2013 Update
D. Education
Open space is a valuable educational tool. Certain states, such as California, require
environmental education as a component of elementary school curriculum. Scientific
research, including biological studies of habitats and species diversity, provides
invaluable knowledge.
E. Trails
While modern society offers many types of recreation which can occur outdoors, open
space provides natural dirt trails for residents who seek quiet solitude in the beauty of
nature as well as varied levels of difficulty for hiking, mountain biking and horseback
riding.
F. Scenic Resources
The City of Thousand Oaks is rich in its scenic beauty. Open space is essential to
preserve the spaciousness and attractiveness of the Conejo Valley. The scenic qualities
of the Conejo Valley give our City its unique natural attributes. These are acknowledged
and incorporated throughout the General Plan elements and in ordinances to protect
and enhance the area's scenic resources which contribute significantly to our quality of
life.
G. Wetlands and Riparian Lands
Wetlands and the riparian lands which border them are one of the most biologically
productive habitats. They provide important breeding grounds for waterfowl and are an
essential water source for wildlife. In addition to valuable habitat, these lands protect
water quality by reducing runoff, allow groundwater recharge, and help control flooding.
Loss of over 90% of Southern California's wetlands has dramatically reduced the natural
ability of water bodies to filter impurities and has been a major factor in the decline of
water quality.
H. Orderly Growth and Maintenance of the Economy
By directing where urban development should occur, Thousand Oaks is also defining
areas that should remain as open space. Preservation of historic, scenic, social,
cultural, and hazardous areas in permanent open space provides for the well-being of
the community. Areas which are to remain in open space include major ridgelines,
steeply sloping hillside terrain, oak groves, sensitive ecological systems, major
barrancas and watercourses. Additionally, one of the goals of the General Plan calls for
the completion of a ring of open space surrounding the City. The benefits of excluding
development from these identified areas of open space are the creation of a more
livable city and the preservation of the beauty of the Conejo Valley.
In recent years, cities experiencing the strongest economic growth are those judged to
be most livable, a definition that includes environmental quality and open space.
6
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 2
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                   Benefits of Open Space
I. Public Health and Safety
An important function of open space is land which is set aside as a buffer to separate
people and buildings from intermittent or persistent hazards which could cause injury,
damage, or death. Such lands also have potential for other uses. Lands along fault
lines, for instance, can be retained in their natural condition as wildlife corridors; lands
within pipeline rights of way or other utility easements can be used as trail easements;
flood control facilities may be suitable for use as natural open space or recreation. For
an in-depth discussion of these areas, please refer to the Safety Element of the General
Plan.
J. Paleontology
Many significant paleontological resources are preserved in fossil-bearing rocks within
the open space system. These fossil remains of plants and animals provide an
important record of previous life forms from past geologic ages and aid in our
understanding of how the Conejo Valley has changed over time.
                                                                                           7
Chapter 2                                            Thousand Oaks General Plan
Benefits of Open Space                          Open Space Element 2013 Update
                       This page intentionally left blank.
8
   Chapter 3
Open Space
     Issues
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 3
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                       Open Space Issues
CHAPTER 3: OPEN SPACE ISSUES
This chapter addresses the State-required topics of an Open Space Element, as well as
important local open space issues.
A. Open Space for Preservation of Natural Resources
One of the guiding principles of the General Plan, specifically amplified in the Open
Space and Conservation Elements, is to accommodate urban development within the
Planning Area in such a way that valuable and important natural resources are
preserved.
The location and extent of specific natural resources of importance to the community
are identified in the Conservation Element, along with applicable policies and
implementation measures pertaining to each. These resources include streams and
creeks, wetlands and riparian habitat, wildlife corridors and key habitat areas, significant
biological resources, such as oak woodland, rare and endangered species, cultural and
historic resources, and certain topographic features such as steeply sloping land and
ridgelines, and scenic resources. Where the Conservation Element identifies resources
of particular importance and sensitivity requiring the preservation of an area in an
essentially undisturbed state to successfully conserve the resources, then incorporation
into the open space system is recommended.
                             Photo 2: Coast Live Oak Woodland
                                                                                          9
Chapter 3                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Open Space Issues                                     Open Space Element 2013 Update
B. Open Space for the Managed Production of Resources
The Thousand Oaks Planning Area was historically used for sheep grazing, cattle
grazing and agricultural purposes. Today, this area contains very limited land where
natural resources of economic or other significance are suitable for extraction or
harvesting purposes. Examples of such resources within a state-wide context include
timber, agricultural lands important for the production of food and fiber, groundwater
recharge areas, commercial fisheries, mineral deposits, oil and gas reserves, and sand
and gravel deposits. There are presently no locations within the Planning Area where
such resources are produced in an economically viable way.
Because of soil conditions and other factors, the Planning Area is not particularly suited
to large-scale agricultural operations which could be characterized as the production of
food and fiber. While there is no need to set aside open space within the Planning Area
for the production of any of these resources, it is appropriate to establish policies related
to the potential use of open space for such purposes in the future. These policies deal
with the issue of whether and under what circumstances land within the open space
system should be considered for the managed production of natural resources.
C. Open Space for Outdoor Recreation and Education
Outdoor recreation within natural open space areas provides opportunities for
enjoyment of the scenic beauty present in many components of the open space system,
as well as opportunities for healthful exercise and learning about nature. Hiking and
riding, limited camping, and picnicking are examples of outdoor recreation opportunities
available in the open space system. One of the key purposes of the open space system
is to enable the development of a trail system within and extending beyond the Planning
Area, which will permit enjoyment of the system by hikers, equestrians and bicyclists.
In addition, the Conservation Element establishes policies and implementation
programs for the protection of cultural and historic resources. Where appropriate,
inclusion within the open space system is a means to assure on-going preservation of
such resources and to reflect their value in providing outdoor recreation and educational
opportunities. Important examples of open space for this type of outdoor recreation
include the Stagecoach Inn historic site, Satwiwa Native American Indian Culture
Center, and the Oakbrook Chumash Interpretative Center in Oakbrook Regional Park.
These types of outdoor recreation activities are for the most part associated with large
tracts of natural open space, and the focus of this section of the Open Space Element is
on appropriate recreational use of natural open space lands.
Policies related to other types of recreational open space, such as parks, playfields, and
golf courses are not contained in the Open Space Element. In these areas, recreation is
the primary purpose, rather than the use and enjoyment of essentially undeveloped
open space land. The community's goals, policies, and standards for the recreational
use of these facilities are contained in the Recreation Element of the General Plan and
the Conejo Recreation and Park District's Master Plan.
10
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                     Chapter 3
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                      Open Space Issues
                           Photo 3: Conejo Canyons Open Space
D. Open Space for Public Health and Safety
Open space includes land which should be set aside in order to protect life and property
from natural hazards. A description of the types of hazards which are present within the
Planning Area, and the types of activities necessary to protect life and property from
them is presented in the Safety Element.
Where protection from a hazard requires that land be maintained in basically an open
undisturbed state, then the affected land is included within the Open Space Element.
Incorporation of such lands in the open space system typically also serves other open
space purposes, such as habitat protection or preservation of scenic resources.
Examples of components within open space which protect public health and safety
include stream channels and barrancas, flood plains, slide-prone areas, and fuel
management zones.
E. Open Space and Urban Form
The natural setting of the Conejo Valley provides an opportunity to use open space to
shape the urban form of the City, to define relationships with neighboring cities, and to
support regional planning. The City has embraced this opportunity, through the general
development policies of the General Plan, and through inter-governmental efforts.
Under the General Plan, the basic form of the community is one of development
clustered in lower-lying areas within the Valley, while the hills and mountains
surrounding the community are set aside in a ring of natural open space. Furthermore,
the City supports greenbelts and other buffers beyond the Planning Area boundary,
                                                                                      11
Chapter 3                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Open Space Issues                                       Open Space Element 2013 Update
separating Thousand Oaks from the nearby cities of Camarillo, Moorpark, and Simi
Valley, and from the unincorporated areas of Lake Sherwood and Hidden Valley.
The City's Planning Area is bounded in many instances by mountains or hills which
naturally divide it from other areas. These topographic features are generally less
tolerant of development and have therefore been allocated to open space or to very low
intensity development. An important exception to this condition is the easterly Planning
Area boundary, which follows a jurisdictional line (Ventura/Los Angeles County line)
rather than a natural topographic boundary.
This natural setting lends itself to coordinated planning not only because of the
opportunity to define urban form through natural boundaries, but also because the
setting defines a logical area for infrastructure planning (e.g., water supply, wastewater,
drainage, roads) and reinforces a sense of community.
Through the dynamic open space programs of the City and other public agencies, the
City is able to take advantage of this opportunity to shape urban form. In addition, the
"ring" of open space at the periphery of the Planning Area supports goals and policies of
the Conservation Element relating to habitat protection and wildlife movement corridors.
               Photo 4: Rancho Potrero Open Space (foreground) and Vista Del Mar
                                    (flowering area behind)
F. Open Space Preservation and Stewardship
Chapter 4 provides an inventory of natural open space within the Planning Area. As that
chapter shows, many public and private entities are responsible for stewardship of open
space.      Private entities consist primarily of homeowners or property owners
12
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                      Chapter 3
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                       Open Space Issues
associations, managing common lots which are restricted to open space by
development regulations and deed restrictions. Public agencies include the following:
          City of Thousand Oaks
          Conejo Recreation and Park District
          Conejo Open Space Conservation Agency
          County of Ventura
          Mountains Recreations and Conservation Authority
          Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy
          National Park Service
          California Department of Fish and Wildlife
          California Department of Parks and Recreation
          United States Fish and Wildlife Service
          United States Army Corps of Engineers
          Water districts
Historically, the City's policy towards open space ownership and management provided
that most of the open space system would remain in private hands. The bulk of the
system identified in the original Open Space Element adopted in 1972 was deemed to
be subject to development constraints which would preserve the land in essentially its
natural state.
In addition, at that time the City already had in place several regulatory tools designed
to protect sensitive natural features, enabling the preservation of open space in private
ownership. These include the Hillside Planned Development (HPD) zone with its
slope/density and slope/open space restrictions and special development standards, the
cluster development provisions of the Residential Planned Development (RPD)
ordinance, as well as General Plan and Municipal Code policies discouraging grading in
slopes over 25% natural grade and providing for oak tree protection.
In 1977, the City and the Conejo Recreation and Park District entered a joint powers
agreement to form the Conejo Open Space Conservation Agency (COSCA) for the
purpose of conserving open space lands, coordinating local land use and resource
management decisions, and providing a community focal point for achieving open
space and conservation goals. Since both component agencies had significant interest
and responsibilities for open space management, it was logical to combine resources
for the overall benefit of the community. The formation of COSCA preceded the
establishment of the Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area and the Santa
Monica Mountains Conservancy. It occupies a unique place in the larger regional
system of open space management, and is a model for other agencies.
Over time, the open space ownership policy has evolved to one generally favoring
public ownership. The reasons for this shift include the following:
      As more interest in open space as a recreational resource developed, it became
       clear that public ownership and control was desirable to provide recreational
       opportunities that are properly regulated to preserve sensitive resources.
                                                                                       13

Chapter 3                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Open Space Issues                                    Open Space Element 2013 Update
      An agency was in place to provide coordinated planning and management of
       open space areas, including regular patrols to ensure that only allowable uses
       were occurring in the open space.
      The core of publicly-owned open space in 1972 (Wildwood Park and Oakbrook
       Regional Park) began to expand rapidly with the acquisition of the Los Robles
       Open Space by the City in 1973 and the Hope Open Space by CRPD in 1974. In
       the mid-1980's, COSCA received gifts of open space land from the Prudential
       Insurance Company totaling several thousand acres, which solidly established a
       major public ownership presence, and provided a critical base for future planning
       and expansion. Subsequently, large tracts of open space required to be set
       aside in major land developments were transferred to public ownership.
      Transfer to public ownership has advantages to the private property owner by
       shifting management responsibilities.
When the Open Space Element was adopted in 1972, the City's "open space zoning
ordinance" comprised a variety of zoning regulations, principal among which were (1)
the Hillside Planned Development (HPD) zone, which required certain lands to be set
aside as open space, and (2) the Public Lands (P-L) zone, which provided a "home"
zoning district for lands which were dedicated to a public agency as open space. These
zoning tools were consistent with the policies of that time, which favored retention of
open space in private hands.
In 1991, the City adopted a more refined and specific open space zoning ordinance
(Section 9- 4.3600 et. seq. of the Municipal Code), entitled "Open Space Zone (OS)."
This zoning district is tailored specifically to natural open space lands, and its
regulations are restrictive as to the permitted improvements and uses which may be
implemented for such lands.
Since then, the City has processed several City-wide zone change cases (Z 91-660, Z
91-661, and Z 2009-70020 are examples) to re-zone publicly-owned and privately-
owned natural open space parcels into the OS zone. At this writing, approximately
11,100 acres of land within the City are zoned OS.
Irrespective of the ownership of land classified as natural open space, such properties
should be considered for OS (Open Space) zoning.
G. Open Space Management
Open space must be managed wisely to protect and conserve its natural features, while
providing recreational and educational opportunities to the community.               Proper
management includes the establishment of policies and procedures which guarantee
that the land that is set aside as natural open space is so maintained for the long term.
The nature and type of public access which can be accommodated in open space will
vary depending upon the sensitivity of the resources and the possibility of external
impacts. Protecting the quality of the open space itself should be the paramount factor
in management decisions pertaining to natural open space areas. Land which is set
14

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                 Chapter 3
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                    Open Space Issues
aside as natural open space, whether in public or private ownership, should be
managed in accordance with the policies contained in Chapter 5. Where appropriate,
the agency having jurisdiction over the open space should prepare and adopt a
management plan consistent with these policies.
COSCA adopted Management Policies and Guidelines in May, 1989 for open space
resources under its care, which are incorporated in the Open Space Element by
reference. These policies and guidelines are refined and updated as necessary, the
most recent being COSCA Ordinance No. 01-2009 in May, 2009.
In addition, COSCA adopted the Conejo Canyons Management Plan in July, 2010. This
management plan addresses a number of open space resources in northwest Thousand
Oaks which total approximately 3,600 acres, including Hill Canyon, Wildwood Park and
the Western Plateau.
In May, 2013, the COSCA Board of Directors adopted a Strategic Plan for the ongoing
management of open space resources throughout its jurisdiction, which includes land
within the boundaries of either the City of Thousand Oaks or Conejo Recreation and
Park District.
                             Photo 5: Lang Ranch Open Space
                                                                                  15
Chapter 3                                       Thousand Oaks General Plan
Open Space Issues                          Open Space Element 2013 Update
                  This page intentionally left blank.
16
      Chapter 4
   The Open
Space System
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 4
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                  The Open Space System
CHAPTER 4: THE OPEN SPACE SYSTEM
This chapter defines the Open Space System of the General Plan and inventories land
which is, or is expected to be, set aside as open space as the community develops.
A. Delineation of the Open Space System
The open space system delineated by the General Plan includes natural open space
lands, existing parks, future parks for both active and passive recreation, golf courses,
and a system of equestrian, hiking, and bicycle trails linking sections of the Planning
Area with each other, and with regional trails systems, such as the National Scenic Trail
System.
Open space land is critically important to preserve and enhance the Conejo Valley's
unique beauty and spaciousness. The great majority of natural open space land has
been, and will continue to be, set aside within development projects in compliance with
local land use policies and regulations, or donated by property owners. In this regard,
the City has adopted several amendments to the Municipal Code to assure appropriate
control over intensity of use and to establish suitable standards for hillside development.
A financial plan to acquire and manage open space is included in Chapter 7 of this
Element.
The Open Space System was designed at the onset of the General Plan process to
address the common goals of the citizenry to have adequate open space and
recreational facilities to meet the long-term needs of the community. The adopted goals
and policies of the General Plan include three goals directly related to the Open Space
System. These are:
1.      To enhance and preserve the spaciousness and attractiveness of the Conejo
        Valley;
2.      To provide and maintain a permanent park and recreational system of sufficient
        size and quality to serve current and future needs consonant with community
        expectations; and
3.      To provide a high quality environment, healthful and pleasing to the senses,
        which values the relationship between maintenance of ecological systems and
        the people’s general welfare.
The policies of the General Plan and the designations of the Land Use Element define
the Open Space System to include natural open space as well as existing and future
parks and golf courses. This Open Space System is intended to be a continuous and
contiguous "ring" concept, providing a greenbelt around the perimeter of the City,
surrounding areas of development rather than just areas of open space within
developments, and extending into the community, preserving lower slopes and meadow
areas as buffers from adjacent developments, adjoining parks and school sites. In
addition to contiguous large open spaces, linkages between open space encompass a
system of trails and corridors that allow for the movement of wildlife and people within
the ring of open space. This open space network encourages land use patterns which
                                                                                        17

Chapter 4                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
The Open Space System                                  Open Space Element 2013 Update
stimulate necessary development while protecting environmental quality and curbing
urban sprawl.
In considering the "ring" concept, planning should extend beyond the City's planning
boundary to provide a buffer zone with adjacent communities and encourage compatible
land use with other jurisdictions.
The Open Space Element is designed to augment the Open Space System incorporated
in the Land Use Element of the General Plan by analyzing the functions of open space,
further delineating desirable open space areas and, together with the Conservation
Element, setting forth a comprehensive and realistic implementation program to
preserve sensitive biological habitats and the spacious quality of the Conejo Valley. The
Recreation Element of this General Plan, prepared in cooperation with the Conejo
Recreation and Park District, outlines specific goals, policies and proposals for active
recreation facilities within the Conejo Valley. The Recreation Element augments the
Open Space Element in guiding the effectuation of the Open Space System.
The Open Space System is depicted in Figure 1.
                       Photo 6: Mountain Bikers, Lang Ranch Open Space
B. Open Space Inventory
Thousand Oaks' permanent open space has grown steadily since the General Plan was
adopted in 1970. Land classified as natural open space within the Planning Area in
2013 totals about 15,155 acres, or about 40% of the land within the Planning Area.
18
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                    Chapter 4
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                 The Open Space System
Other active elements of the open space system, including parks (1,126 acres) and golf
courses (532 acres), account for another 1,658 acres, bringing the total for the open
space system as a whole to about 16,813 acres, or 44% of the Planning Area.
This sub-chapter inventories the existing natural open space, including lands which
have been or are required to be set aside for this purpose, both in public ownership and
in private ownership. For purposes of identification and description, open space parcels
within close proximity to each other have been grouped into open space "areas." The
descriptions below summarize open space resources, natural features, size, ownership,
location, trails and access points. Table 1, on the next page, summarizes and tabulates
open space acreage for these areas, and Figure 2, the Open Space Inventory, shows
their location within the Planning Area. The relationship between local and regional
natural open space is shown in Figure 3, “Regional Natural Open Space”.
                                                                                      19

Chapter 4                                             Thousand Oaks General Plan
The Open Space System                           Open Space Element 2013 Update
Table 1: Thousand Oaks Planning Area Open Space Inventory (2013)
                                                Acres by Ownership
   No. Open Space Area                                     Other
                                 COSCA   City     CRPD     Public   Private TOTAL
     1 Alta Vista                     11                                 32     43
     2 Arroyo Conejo                 320      6                           2    328
     3 Conejo Canyons                303   945                          380  1,628
     4 Conejo Ridge                  146     34                224             404
     5 Deer Ridge                    117      3                          68    188
     6 Dos Vientos                   158   743                 150      179  1,230
     7 Fireworks Hill                        33                                 33
     8 Glider Hill                                                       57     57
     9 Hope Nature Preserve          348                                       348
    10 Knoll                          21                                        21
    11 La Jolla                              15                                 15
    12 Labisco Hill                          24                                 24
    13 Lake Eleanor                  516                                       516
    14 Lang Ranch                     79   525                 250        9    863
    15 Los Padres                    160      8                          19    187
    16 Los Robles                    357                                       357
    17 Los Vientos                    28                                        28
    18 Lynnmere                      107                                       107
    19 McCrea                         74     55       33                 12    174
    20 Mt. Clef Ridge                 84     23       11        11       83    212
    21 North Ranch                 2,304   100                          191  2,595
    22 Oakbrook Regional Park                        422                  3    425
    23 Old Conejo                     38                                        38
    24 Old Meadows                           28       20                        48
    25 Potrero Ridge                 188      1                   8      13    210
    26 Rancho Potrero                306                                       306
    27 Santa Monica Mtns. NRA                                  964             964
    28 Skyline                        43     16                                662
    29 South Ranch                   621     24       17                        13
    30 Southshore Hills               13                                        34
    31 Summit House                   32      2                                410
    32 Sunset Hills                  326      2                 50       32     47
    33 Tarantula Hill                 47                                        67
    34 Vallecito                             67                                 67
    35 Ventu Park                    141                                       141
    36 Vista Del Mar                          9                                 59
    37 Walnut                          9                                         9
    38 Wildwood                      621           1,111                         9
    39 Woodridge                     441   181                               1,732
    40 Zuniga Ridge                           1                                622
                           Total   7,959 2,845     1,614     1,657    1,080 15,221
                        Percent     52%   18%       12%       11%       7%   100%
20
Thousand Oaks General Plan                  Chapter 4
Open Space Element 2013 Update The Open Space System
     Insert Figure 1
                                                   21
Chapter 4                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
The Open Space System                                     Open Space Element 2013 Update
                      This page intentionally left blank.
22
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                  Chapter 4
Open Space Element 2013 Update                 The Open Space System
                               insert figure 2
                                                                   23
Chapter 4                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
The Open Space System                                     Open Space Element 2013 Update
                      This page intentionally left blank.
24
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                       Chapter 4
Open Space Element 2013 Update                      The Open Space System
                               Insert Figure 3 here
                                                                        25
Chapter 4                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
The Open Space System                                     Open Space Element 2013 Update
                      This page intentionally left blank.
26
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                   Chapter 4
Open Space Element 2013 Update                               The Open Space System
1    Alta Vista
     The Alta Vista Open Space is located adjacent to the Dos Vientos Open Space in
     Newbury Park. Most of this 43-acre area is owned by a homeowners association,
     although about 11 acres, located on the south side of Calle Alta Vista, is owned
     by COSCA. The predominant habitat on-site is coastal sage scrub.
2    Arroyo Conejo
     The 328-acre Arroyo Conejo Open Space is located northeast of the intersection
     of Hillcrest Drive and Ventu Park Road. This area includes the Arroyo Conejo
     Nature Preserve, which is often referred to as the “barranca”, and was
     highlighted in the City’s original Conservation Element of the General Plan (1972)
     and the Conejo Canyons Study (1976) as an area with particularly important and
     sensitive resources. Resources include steep-sided canyons, oak woodlands, a
     perennial stream, and riparian vegetation which provide ideal habitat for nesting,
     foraging and wildlife movements. Most of this preserve is owned by COSCA,
     with limited access to protect the area's resources. Trail access to this area is
     provided from the Rancho Conejo Playfield, which is on the east side of Ventu
     Park Road just north of Hillcrest Drive.
                               Photo 7: Arroyo Conejo Creek
                                                                                     27

Chapter 4                                                 Thousand Oaks General Plan
The Open Space System                               Open Space Element 2013 Update
3    Conejo Canyons
     The Conejo Canyons Open Space is a system of deeply eroded canyons,
     plateaus and ridgelines in the northwest portion of the Conejo Valley. This area,
     which totals 1,628 acres, includes the Western Plateau, northern Arroyo Conejo,
     Western Canyon, Seventh Day Adventist property, and the Calleguas Ridgeline.
     On clear days, trails in this area afford dramatic views of Ventura and the
     coastline, as well as inland to the Topa Topa Mountains north of Ojai. This area
     also conserves a variety of habitats, including coast live oak woodlands, riparian
     habitats, interior sage scrub/chaparral, and coastal sage scrub. Most of this area
     is owned by the City, although almost 400 acres are in private ownership subject
     to a Specific Plan condition requiring an offer of dedication to the City.
     A 154-acre golf course was originally envisioned along the north branch of the
     Arroyo Conejo in the canyon bottom as part of Specific Plan No.7; however in
     2000 the City Council designated this area as natural open space.
     The Western Plateau area (184 acres) section of this Open Space area was
     originally planned for development of 147 homes by Specific Plan No.7, but was
     acquired as natural public open space by the City in 2002.
     In 2010 the COSCA Board approved a management plan for this and nearby
     areas. In 2011 a bridge was constructed over the Arroyo Conejo Creek near
     Santa Rosa County Park, in cooperation with the County of Ventura. The bridge
     is accessed from the intersection of Hill Canyon Road and Santa Rosa Road.
                           Photo 8: Conejo Canyons Open Space
28
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                     Chapter 4
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                The Open Space System
4    Conejo Ridge
     This 404-acre area includes the open space immediately south of the
     interchange of the Ventura (101) and Thousand Oaks (23) Freeways, as well as
     a secluded valley south of Rimrock Road. This area includes relatively
     undisturbed chaparral, oak woodlands and coastal sage scrub, and provides
     important habitat for deer, mountain lions, bobcats and other wildlife. The trail in
     this area links the southerly terminus of Rimrock Road with the Los Robles Trail.
     This area is adjacent to other open space units.
5    Deer Ridge
     Located in the southwest portion of the City, the Deer Ridge Open Space is
     owned by COSCA and is dominated by a series of north-facing ridges and
     canyons that support chaparral with scattered oaks. This 188-acre area shares a
     common border with the Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area, and
     is a prominent visual feature in the Newbury Park area. The Los Robles Trail
     traverses the length of the Deer Ridge Open Space, with access points at the
     southern end of Felton Street, and at a trailhead on Potrero Road.
6    Dos Vientos
     This large open space area (1,230 acres) is located in the southwest corner of
     the Conejo Valley at Dos Vientos Ranch. Dominated by chaparral and coastal
     sage scrub habitats, this area provides habitat for a wide variety of wildlife as well
     as rare and endangered plants. An extensive trail system provides internal and
     regional trail connections, as well as views of the Pacific Ocean and the Channel
     Islands. Principal trail access points for this area are park sites within Dos
     Vientos Ranch. To the south of the Dos Vientos Open Space is Rancho Potrero,
     Rancho Sierra Vista/Satwiwa and Point Mugu State Park. Contiguous open
     space areas to the east include the Alta Vista Open Space, Potrero Open Space,
     and Los Vientos Open Space.
7    Fireworks Hill
     In 1997, the City Council approved a Specific Plan for the former Civic Center
     site at 401 West Hillcrest Drive, and the adjacent "Fireworks Hill," comprising a
     total of 62 acres of land. The Specific Plan designates 33 acres as open space.
8    Glider Hill
     This area consists of 57 acres of private open space that encircles two prominent
     knolls. Public trails connect equestrians and other residents in the Hauser
     Circle/Rancho Road area to the North Ranch Open Space through this open
     space. The dominant vegetation is non-native grassland.
                                                                                        29
Chapter 4                                               Thousand Oaks General Plan
The Open Space System                               Open Space Element 2013 Update
9    Hope Nature Preserve
     This 348-acre parcel was a gift from the actor and comedian Bob Hope to CRPD.
     Located on the south side of the valley, this open space contains extensive
     stands of chaparral and oak woodland that provide ideal habitat for deer, coyotes,
     mountain lions, bobcats, gray fox, rabbits, and many other animals. In the
     springtime many wildflowers can be seen along the trails in this area. The Los
     Robles Trail provides the principal access through this open space, including
     connections to Lynn Oaks Park.
10   Knoll
     The 21-acre Knoll Open Space is located next to Pepper Tree Playfield in
     Newbury Park. This area, which is owned by COSCA, is covered in a mosaic of
     non-native grasslands and coastal sage scrub. A gently sloping trail leads to the
     top of the hill, which offers views of Newbury Park and the surrounding area.
11   La Jolla
     This City-owned property was originally subdivided for housing. In 1998,
     however, the City Council voted to designate the property as open space. Since
     then, volunteers have planted hundreds of oak trees on-site, restoring the
     property to a coast live oak woodland. The property is visible on the east side of
     the Thousand Oaks (23) Freeway, just north of the Ventura (101) Freeway.
12   Labisco Hill
     The Labisco Hill Open Space is located in the heart of Thousand Oaks, near the
     northwest corner of Janss Road and Moorpark Road. Although relatively small
     (24 acres), this grassland-covered knoll provides a visual contrast to the urban
     landscape and creates a sense of spaciousness in the area.
13   Lake Eleanor
     The Lake Eleanor Open Space is named for an 8-acre freshwater lake located
     near the center of this 516-acre area. Acquired by COSCA in 1986, this area
     includes diverse wildlife habitat and scenic resources, rugged hills, prominent
     rocky outcrops, freshwater marsh habitat, oak woodland and coastal sage scrub.
     The rocky outcrops are often used by hawks and other large birds as nesting
     sites, and the area supports several species of rare and endangered plants. Due
     to the rugged terrain and sensitive resources, trails have not been developed in
     this area.
30
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                   Chapter 4
Open Space Element 2013 Update                              The Open Space System
                                  Photo 9: Lake Eleanor
14   Lang Ranch
     The Lang Ranch Open Space is located in the northeast portion of the city and is
     composed of several open space units totaling 863 acres. This is a picturesque
     area that includes rolling grasslands, oak woodlands, and riparian corridors. Trail
     access is provided from the eastern terminus of Westlake Boulevard, and the
     eastern terminus of Lang Ranch Parkway. The Lang Ranch trail system provides
     connections to other public lands, including China Flats, Cheeseboro Canyon,
     Palo Comado Canyon, Sunset Hills Open Space, and the North Ranch Open
     Space. Most of this open space area is owned by the City.
15   Los Padres
     This open space unit is located near the southern end of Moorpark Road, and
     encompasses 187 acres of chaparral-covered hillsides and oak woodlands. This
     area includes one of the most beautiful stands of coast live oaks in the City, and
     can be easily accessed from the Los Padres Trail on the west side of Los Padres
     Drive. This trail also provides a direct link to the Los Robles Trail near the
     ridgeline. This area is frequented by deer, rabbits, California quail, California
     thrashers and many other animals. In the spring and fall, the oak woodlands are
     an excellent place to observe migrating birds such as warblers and vireos. Most
     of this open space area is owned by COSCA.
                                                                                     31
Chapter 4                                                Thousand Oaks General Plan
The Open Space System                               Open Space Element 2013 Update
                             Photo 10: Lang Ranch Open Space
16   Los Robles
     The Los Robles Open Space contains 357 acres located on the southerly edge of
     the Conejo Valley. It includes a nearly mile-long stretch of the prominent ridge
     line flanking the Valley, along with dense chaparral-covered slopes and some
     relatively flat, grassy potreros near the ridgeline where one can often see deer
     browsing in the early morning and late afternoon. There are several miles of
     trails within this open space area, and the ridgeline trails provide some of the
     most scenic vistas in the Valley, with panoramic views of Thousand Oaks. The
     principal trailhead is at the southern terminus of Moorpark Road, but secondary
     access is provided from trailheads at the Whole Access Trail on the west side of
     Greenmeadow Avenue and on Los Padres Drive. The City owns this open space
     area, along with the adjacent Los Robles Golf Course.
17   Los Vientos
     This open space area is located at the southern terminus of Los Vientos Drive in
     Newbury Park. Covering 28 acres, this area includes non-native grassland and
     coastal sage scrub habitat. The area is contiguous to the Dos Vientos Open
     Space and is owned by COSCA.
32
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                  Chapter 4
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                 The Open Space System
                       Photo 11: Trailhead at South Moorpark Road
18   Lynnmere
     The Lynnmere Open Space protects 107 acres of coastal sage scrub-covered
     slopes and ridge lines. This area, connects to Wildwood Park, is frequented by
     deer and other wildlife that move freely between these open space areas. Trails
     in this area provide views of Wildwood Park, Mount Clef Ridge, and the Conejo
     Canyons Open Space. This area is owned by COSCA.
                            Photo 12: Lynnmere Open Space
                                                                                   33
Chapter 4                                               Thousand Oaks General Plan
The Open Space System                               Open Space Element 2013 Update
19   McCrea Open Space
     This area encompasses 172 acres around the McCrea Ranch. In 1981, a 74-acre
     preserve was donated as a gift to COSCA from the actor Joel McCrea and his
     family. This area includes rocky outcrops that are favorite roosting and nesting
     sites for birds of prey, as well as a deep canyon that provides a year-round water
     source for local wildlife and riparian vegetation. The area also supports several
     species of rare and endangered plants and the locally unique Conejo rock plant
     association. Under terms of an agreement with the McCrea family, public access
     to this preserve is restricted to protect sensitive resources. Later, the Conejo
     Recreation and Park District acquired a 37-acre lot comprising hillside grassland
     area in the vicinity. In 2011, the Conejo Recreation and Park District built an
     interpretive center that describes the ranching history of the property and the
     McCrea family. In 2000, the City approved Tract 5142, a residential subdivision
     just east of the McCrea Ranch. That included a 55-acre open space lot consisting
     of steep hillsides and ridgeline terrain, which was transferred to COSCA, and 12
     acres of privately-owned (HOA) internal open space within the Tract.
20   Mount Clef Ridge
     The Mt. Clef Ridge Open Space totals 212 acres, and extends from the
     Norwegian Grade (Moorpark Road) west to Wildwood Park. This area protects
     ridgelines that afford sweeping views of both the Conejo Valley and the Santa
     Rosa Valley. Plant communities include coastal sage scrub and chaparral. Two
     sensitive plants- Lyon's Pentachaeta and Conejo Dudleya- are found in this area,
     and the area also supports many wildlife species such as deer, coyote, and gray
     fox. The trail in this area connects to trails in Wildwood Park. Open space is
     owned by COSCA and CRPD, and a conservation easement on private property
     protects additional habitat.
21   North Ranch
     The North Ranch Open Space includes an extensive system of protected areas
     that conserve diverse habitats, plants, and animals. This area, which totals 2,595
     acres, is primarily owned by COSCA, with a few smaller areas in private
     ownership. Among the most outstanding resources in this area are the
     sandstone cliffs of the Simi Hills, spacious mosaics of coastal sage scrub and
     grassland, pockets of Southern California black walnut groves, and coast live oak
     woodlands along the area's creeks. Wildlife is abundant, and includes most
     mammals and birds likely to be seen in the Conejo Valley. A number of sensitive
     plants also occur in these areas. Access to the North Ranch Open Space is
     provided at the North Ranch Playfield, and through numerous neighborhood trail
     access points. North Ranch Open Space trails connect with the Lang Ranch
     Open Space.
22   Oakbrook Regional Park
     This 425-acre park is owned by the Conejo Recreation and Park District, and
     features a Chumash Interpretive Center. The Park is adjacent to the Lang Ranch
34
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                  Chapter 4
Open Space Element 2013 Update                              The Open Space System
     Open Space in the northeast corner of the City, and was established to protect
     cultural resources, chaparral habitat and an outstanding coast live oak woodland
     along Lang Creek. Most of the park consists of steep, north-facing slopes with
     very dense chaparral and occasional sandstone outcrops.
23   Old Conejo
     This small hill is located immediately north of the Pepper Tree Playfield in
     Newbury Park. Encompassing 38 acres, it contains a short hiking trail and
     provides panoramic views of Boney Mountain and other parts of the Santa
     Monica Mountains National Recreation Area to the south.
24   Old Meadows
     This 48-acre open space area is owned by the City and CRPD, and located
     adjacent to Old Meadows Park just east of Conejo Creek Park. This area
     supports non-native grassland, coastal sage scrub, valley oak woodland, and
     scattered coast live oaks, and includes a knoll with views of the Conejo Valley.
     Access is provided from either Church Road/El Monte Drive, or from Shadow
     Oaks Place and Marview Road.
25   Potrero Ridge
     The Potrero Ridge Open Space encompasses a low-lying ridge that runs east-
     west in Newbury Park. This area, which totals 210 acres, includes grassy
     hillsides, coastal sage scrub, and oak woodlands, and is accessed from a
     trailhead on Wendy Drive. A trailhead on Reino Road provides additional access
     to this area and to the Dos Vientos Open Space to the west. Most of this area is
     owned by COSCA.
26   Rancho Potrero
     In 1993, the City, CRPD and the Mountains Recreation and Conservation
     Authority cooperated to acquire a 326-acre area located south of Potrero Road in
     the southwest corner of the Conejo Valley. This area, which is bordered on the
     east by the National Park Service's Rancho Sierra Vista/Satwiwa Native
     American Indian Culture Center, includes grasslands, coastal sage scrub with the
     Conejo rock plant association, and riparian habitats. A Specific Plan was
     approved for the property in 2010 by the City, which identified most of the
     property as natural open space, with 20 acres next to Lynn Road set aside for
     public equestrian center use. Trails at Rancho Potrero connect to the Dos
     Vientos Open Space and the Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area.
     On clear days, the coastline and Channel Islands can be seen from the “Olympia
     Farms” site, which is located mid-elevation on the property and still has graded
     pad areas from the previous use.
                                                                                   35

Chapter 4                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
The Open Space System                                Open Space Element 2013 Update
                  Photo 13: Rancho Potrero Open Space (foreground) and
               Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area (background)
27   Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area
     The Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area (SMMNRA) was
     established in 1978. About 964 acres of the SMMNRA is within the Thousand
     Oaks Planning Area, located at the southern edge of Newbury Park. Within this
     area is the National Park Service-owned Rancho Sierra Vista and the Satwiwa
     Native American Indian Culture Center. Trails from Rancho Sierra Vista connect
     to the Pacific Ocean, through Point Mugu State Park. In 1993, the National Park
     Service acquired a 315-acre portion of the Broome Ranch, of which 109 acres is
     within the City's Planning Area and included in the total acreage above. Access
     to these areas is from the southern terminus of Wendy Road at Potrero Road and
     on the south side of Lynn Road opposite Via Andrea.
28   Skyline
     This area is located south of Skyline Drive, and includes a series of small north-
     facing ridges and valleys. This 59-acre preserve is covered in dense chaparral,
     with occasional stands of coast live oaks. Most of this open space area is owned
     by COSCA, some of which was acquired by gift, some by direct purchase from
     property owners, and some that was purchased at a tax foreclosure sale. It is
     likely that more parcels will be added in the future. The best access to this area
     is from Foothill Drive.
29   South Ranch
     The Westlake South Ranch Open Space was donated to COSCA in 1986 by the
     Prudential Insurance Company, and includes 662 acres. This area protects a
     significant portion of the ridgeline south of the Ventura (101) Freeway, extending
36
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                   Chapter 4
Open Space Element 2013 Update                               The Open Space System
     toward Lake Eleanor. A variety of habitats occur in this area, including chaparral,
     coastal sage scrub, and coast live oak woodlands, as well as a significant portion
     of the Los Robles Trail. Principal access points include Triunfo Community Park,
     and East Potrero Road on the west side of Vista Oaks Way. Deer, bobcat, and
     rabbits are commonly seen in this area.
                          Photo 15: South Ranch Open Space
30   Southshore Hills
     This 13-acre area is located between Southshore Hills Park and the Lake
     Eleanor Open Space. This area serves principally as wildlife habitat and to
     protect visual resources. This preserve is owned by COSCA and supports
     coastal sage scrub and chaparral.
31   Summit House
     The 34-acre Summit House Open Space is located near the northeast corner of
     Avenida de los Arboles and Lynn Road, and includes non-native grassland and
     coastal sage scrub. The Summit House Open Space is owned by COSCA.
32   Sunset Hills
     This area includes 410 acres of open space distributed throughout the Sunset
     Hills community in northern Thousand Oaks. The largest of these areas is a key
     component of the "ring" of open space, located on Erbes Road, east of the
     Thousand Oaks (23) Freeway and south of Olsen Road. This 238-acre area
     protects oak woodlands, coastal sage scrub, non-native grasslands and coastal
                                                                                     37
Chapter 4                                               Thousand Oaks General Plan
The Open Space System                               Open Space Element 2013 Update
     sage scrub. It also contains areas of steeply sloping land and a prominent
     ridgeline. Trails in this area provide views of Bard Reservoir, and on clear days
     the Pacific Ocean can be seen. This area supports many species of wildlife,
     including birds of prey such as black-shouldered kites, northern harriers and red-
     tailed hawks. Spring blooms of bladderpod attract many hummingbirds to this
     area. Access is provided from a trailhead on Erbes Road. COSCA owns the
     majority of the Sunset Hills Open Space.
33   Tarantula Hill
     This area, named for the spiders which frequent its grassy slopes, is located in
     the heart of Thousand Oaks near the Conejo Valley Botanic Gardens. Rising
     sharply from the valley floor, this 47-acre area provides panoramic views of
     Thousand Oaks. Parking is available on Gainsborough Road, with a paved
     service road providing access to the top of the hill. Tarantula Hill is owned by
     COSCA.
34   Vallecito
     This 67–acre area consists of steep slopes and a ridgeline above and to the
     south and west of Vallecito Mobile Home Park, west of Old Conejo Road. It is an
     important link in the ring of open space in this area, and abuts the Dos Vientos
     Open Space to the south. The land is owned by the City.
35   Ventu Park
     This 141-acre open space area is located adjacent to the community of Ventu
     Park. Covered in dense chaparral with occasional coast live oaks, this area
     provides important wildlife habitat and protects scenic, north-facing slopes and a
     portion of the southern ridgeline. A trail provides access to the Los Robles Trail
     from Lynn Road. This area is owned by COSCA.
36   Vista Del Mar
     This 9-acre property was originally approved for homes pursuant to the Dos
     Vientos Ranch Specific Plan (8/9), and is located on the southwest side of Lynn
     Road opposite Via Acosta. In 2008, the City purchased the land as public open
     space in order to delineate the urban/open space edge and to preserve views of
     the coastline.
38

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                     Chapter 4
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                  The Open Space System
           Photo 14: Vista Del Mar (area behind Lynn Road). Looking southwest.
37   Walnut
     This small, 9-acre area is located next to Walnut Park, near the intersection of
     Lynn Road and the Ventura (101) Freeway. It is a critical scenic resource at an
     important gateway to the community. The area includes coastal sage scrub and
     a few coast live oaks. A trail from Walnut Park provides access to this area.
     COSCA owns the Walnut Open Space.
38   Wildwood Park
     Wildwood Park comprises the largest contiguous open space unit in Thousand
     Oaks. Covering 1,732 acres, Wildwood Park protects many important wildlife
     habitats as well as provides many opportunities for passive recreation. Trails
     provide access to most parts of Wildwood Park, and several picnic areas are
     located near Wildwood Creek. Almost all of the plant communities found in
     Thousand Oaks can be located in Wildwood Park, and the park supports several
     species of rare and endangered plants. Wildlife includes deer, bobcat, raccoon,
     coyote, opossum, gray fox, and mountain lion. Access is provided at the western
     terminus of Avenida de los Arboles, and at several neighborhood access points.
     Most of Wildwood Park is owned by the Conejo Recreation and Park District, with
     lesser amounts owned by COSCA.
                                                                                     39
Chapter 4                                              Thousand Oaks General Plan
The Open Space System                             Open Space Element 2013 Update
                               Photo 16: Wildwood Park
39   Woodridge
     This 622-acre area protects a diverse mosaic of natural habitats in northeastern
     Thousand Oaks, including coastal sage scrub, chaparral, and coast live oak
     woodlands. This open space connects to the Sunset Hills Open Space to the
     west, and to the Lang Ranch Open Space to the south. Access to this area is by
     trails from the Lang Ranch Open Space, which begin at the east end of Lang
     Ranch Parkway. The Woodridge Open Space trails also connect to the Wood
     Ranch area of Simi Valley.
40   Zuniga Ridge
     This 1-acre open space area was donated to the City by the Zuniga family. It
     serves to protect a highly visible area on the north side of the Ventura (101)
     Freeway, just west of the Civic Arts Plaza.
40
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 4
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                    The Open Space System
                              Photo 17: Woodridge Open Space
C. Areas with Important Open Space Resources
The preceding sub-chapter inventoried natural open space which is owned by public
agencies or is privately-owned but subject to City-imposed restrictions.
This sub-chapter identifies areas with important open space resources, which should be
considered as priorities for future additions to the open space system in line with the
policies of this Element. The areas identified and described in this sub-chapter
comprise the most significant future open space resources only. From time to time,
other areas with important open space resources may be identified and the City may
determine to preserve such areas.
This discussion is not intended to limit the City's efforts in open space acquisition to only
those areas described below.
As Figures 1 and 2 show, most of the ring of open space within the City's Planning Area
has been set aside as open space. Supporting elements of the ring, such as Greenbelt
Agreement areas, open space within adjacent jurisdictions, and undeveloped land with
significant development constraints, are also in place as shown on Figure 1.
Completion of the ring of open space should be the first priority for future open space
preservation efforts. Specific areas of focus are shown on Figure 4, and are briefly
described in this section. Table 2, below, identifies these areas and their acreage.
                                                                                          41
Chapter 4                                        Thousand Oaks General Plan
The Open Space System                        Open Space Element 2013 Update
            Table 2: Areas with Important Open Space Resources
                                                 Size in Acres
               Area                                  (Approx.)
             A      Adventist Hill                          16
             B      Broome Addition                         22
             C      Canyon West                             24
             D      Conejo Ridge                             4
             E      Erbes Road                             152
             F      Freeway Corridor                         8
             G      Lake Eleanor Addition                   18
             H      McCrea                                 137
             I      Rockwell                                45
             J      Simi Hills                              11
             K      Skyline Addition                        19
             L      Southern Ridge                         350
             M      Southshore Hills                        23
             N      Sunset North                            30
             O      Sunset Northeast                        53
             P      Vallecito                               33
             Q      Westlake South                         192
               TOTAL                                     1,137
42
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                  Chapter 4
Open Space Element 2013 Update                 The Open Space System
                               Insert Figure 4
                                                                   43
Chapter 4                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
The Open Space System                                     Open Space Element 2013 Update
                      This page intentionally left blank.
44
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 4
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                  The Open Space System
The discussion of each area notes the degree to which land with resource or open
space value within the area is likely to be set aside through the normal development
review process, based upon the General Plan designation and zoning of the property in
2013, and the application of adopted General Plan policies.
A     Adventist Hill
      This area consists of 16 acres of steep slopes and ridgelines located within the
      upper portions of undeveloped lots fronting on Grande Vista Drive. It includes
      significant open space areas that would be protected due to topography.
      Adequate land use controls exist to conserve this open space.
B     Broome Addition
      This includes a 22-acre portion of a large parcel at the southwestern periphery of
      the Planning Area adjacent to Rancho Potrero, the balance of which is outside
      the City's Planning Area. The property would reinforce the wildlife movement
      corridor in this area with some terrain which is relatively easy to traverse and has
      exceptional scenic qualities. This site is designated for "very low density
      residential" development by the Land Use Element of the General Plan.
C     Canyon West
      This site is surrounded on three sides by the Lake Eleanor Open Space, and
      contains scrub oak woodland, chaparral, and sensitive species such as the
      endangered Lyon’s Pentachaeta (Pentachaeta lyonii), which is an annual plant
      found only in the Conejo Valley. The property consists of 24 acres.
D     Conejo Ridge
      This area is located south of the 101/23 Freeway interchange and has largely
      been preserved. It consists of two small parcels on the south side of the Ventura
      (101) Freeway. Purchase or donation of these parcels is appropriate for
      protection of these parcels.
E     Erbes Road
      The majority of this 152-acre area is zoned RPD-0.2U (Residential Planned
      Development, 0.2 dwelling units per acre), with Hillside Planned Development
      (HPD) zoned for the remainder. Most of the open space in this area will be
      preserved through the development process.
F     Freeway Corridor
      This approximately 8-acre strip along the west side of the Thousand Oaks
      Freeway (Route 23) is part of the Freeway right-of-way and is owned by
      CalTrans. The Conejo Recreation and Park District leases this area for trail
      purposes. It contains southern oak woodland, riparian, and wetland habitat, and
      is also a scenic open space amenity for travelers, obscuring the view of a
      concrete-lined flood control channel.
                                                                                        45

Chapter 4                                              Thousand Oaks General Plan
The Open Space System                             Open Space Element 2013 Update
G    Lake Eleanor Addition
     This is a remnant 18-acre site zoned RPD-0.1U-SFD on the south side of the
     Lake Eleanor Open Space. Existing zoning should be adequate for significant
     open space protection.
H    McCrea
     This 137-acre area consists of hillside areas within the McCrea Ranch, and a
     portion of the YMCA property on Olsen Road. The McCrea Ranch is adjacent to
     open space at the former Cornell Ranch at the easterly terminus of Read Road.
     Hillside areas at the YMCA will be protected through the development review
     process.
I    Rockwell
     This area is contiguous to the Arroyo Conejo Open Space and includes oak
     woodlands and coastal sage habitats. It encompasses approximately 45 acres. It
     is located in the unincorporated Lynn Ranch area. Most of open space resources
     in this area can be preserved through the development review process.
J    Simi Hills
     This 11-acre parcel in the North Ranch area is owned by the California Water
     Service Company and is the site of a water reservoir. Most of the property is
     open mountainous land. It is surrounded on three sides by COSCA open space.
     Protection of the majority of the parcel (excluding the water reservoir) could
     augment the North Ranch Open space.
K    Skyline Addition
     This 19-acre area is located adjacent to the South Ranch and Conejo Ridge
     Open Space areas, and comprises an antiquated subdivision with numerous
     small lots primarily zoned RE-13 (Rural Exclusive, 13,000 square foot minimum
     lot size). The City has acquired many parcels in this area over the years through
     donation, market rate purchases, and tax sales.
L    Southern Ridge
     This area is within unincorporated area and is zoned OS-20 (Open Space, 20
     acre minimum lot size). Some of the resources in this area will be protected
     under the provisions of the Thousand Oaks Area Plan, but other approaches may
     be necessary to conserve open space resources.
M    Southshore Hills
     This is a remnant 23-acre site zoned RPD-0.1U-SFD-PR adjacent to the Lake
     Eleanor Open Space. Existing zoning should be adequate for significant open
     space protection.
46
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                    Chapter 4
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                 The Open Space System
N    Sunset North
     This area consists of a 30-acre ridgeline parcel that is zoned for residential
     development. Development controls under the Protected Ridgeline Overlay
     Zone will protect the majority of this parcel, but purchase may be appropriate.
O    Sunset Northeast
     This 53-acre site is located on hillside and ridgeline terrain adjacent to Olsen
     Road and the Calleguas Municipal Water District facility. Development under the
     existing RPD-0.22-SFD zoning can be expected to substantially preserve open
     space resources.
P    Vallecito
     This area is located on the upper slopes on the west side of the Vallecito Mobile
     Home Park. It consists of approximately 33 acres. Development controls should
     be adequate to protect this area.
Q    Westlake South
     This 192-acre area was re-zoned by the City Council to Hillside Planned
     Development with the Protected Ridgeline overlay, which will preserve most of the
     site as natural open space. Still, the area is surrounded on the north and south by
     open space areas, and may merit additional measures to protect open space.
                                                                                      47
Chapter 4                                           Thousand Oaks General Plan
The Open Space System                         Open Space Element 2013 Update
                    This page is intentionally left blank.
48
Chapter 5
Policies
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                     Chapter 5
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                                  Policies
CHAPTER 5: POLICIES
The purpose of this chapter is to identify policies and implementation measures for the
conservation and use of open space resources. The responsibility for carrying out the
programs falls with City staff in carrying out activities related to development project
review, capital program planning interaction with County, State, and Federal agencies,
and through participation in COSCA.
                                 Photo 18: Wildwood Mesa
A. Open Space for Preservation of Natural Resources
Policy
OS-1     Open space shall include those areas which contain resources and/or
         characteristics as described by the Conservation Element as necessary to
         preserve in an essentially undisturbed state, except for restoration and
         enhancement activities which may be desirable to improve the site's resource
         value, for purposes of natural resource protection.
Implementation Measures
1.  Review new projects to place particularly sensitive resources, as identified by the
    Conservation Element, in open space areas.
2.  Continue to apply the City’s Oak Tree Ordinance and Landmark Tree Preservation
    and Protection Ordinance.
B. Open Space for the Managed Production of Resources
Policies
OS-2     Generally, land within the Planning Area is not suitable for the managed
         production of natural resources which are present on or under the surface,
         including timber, mineral, sand and gravel, and oil and gas resources.
                                                                                      49

Chapter 5                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Policies                                              Open Space Element 2013 Update
OS-3     Groundwater recharge areas and extraction systems may be permitted within
          open space only if they are beneficial to regional water conservation and
          groundwater replenishment efforts and not detrimental to the function and
          resources of the open space system.
Implementation Measure
1.  Review groundwater extraction or recharge proposals to identify and evaluate all
    potential benefits and detriments to open space.
C. Open Space for Outdoor Recreation and Education
Policies
OS-4     The degree of public access, and the nature, extent, and design of facilities
          necessary to provide access to, and enjoyment of, open space areas, such as
          trails, trailheads, information kiosks, signage, parking, camping areas, and
          other visitor facilities and improvements, shall be dictated by the nature and
          sensitivity of the specific open space area. Such improvements, where
          necessary and warranted, shall blend unobtrusively with the natural setting.
OS-5     Trails are a key component of the Open Space Element. A Trail Master Plan
          providing appropriate controlled access to open space within the Planning
          Area, and connecting to the regional trail system, is incorporated in the Conejo
          Recreation and Park District Master Plan. This Trail Master Plan is hereby
          incorporated as a component of the Open Space Element. In carrying out its
          responsibilities, the City shall support completion of this trail system in a
          manner compatible with the other policies of this Element.
OS-6     Outdoor recreation activities within open space shall be planned to avoid
          adverse impacts to natural and cultural resources and on nearby locations.
Implementation Measures
1.  Conduct field surveys of planned trail routes to avoid sensitive natural features and
    cultural resources.
2.  Design, construct and maintain trails to minimize disturbance of native vegetation.
3.  Use natural building materials, native plant materials, and earth-tone colors to the
    greatest extent possible in all fencing, trailheads, kiosks and other open space
    improvements.
4.  Minimize the use of signs in open space areas, using signs only for visitor
    information, safety, and resource protection.
5.  Locate visitor information signs, kiosks, and related improvements principally at
    trailheads to reduce signage within open space areas.
6.  Install fencing and barrier materials where appropriate to direct public access to
    specific entry points, control off-road vehicle access, and provide for public safety
    and resource protection.
50
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                            Chapter 5
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                                          Policies
7.  Limit the number of visitors and periods of access to areas with particularly
    sensitive resources.
8.  Close, relocate, or construct and maintain barriers alongside trails in areas where
    visitor use has adversely affected natural or cultural resources.
9.  Through development review, secure trail rights-of-way or easements, and on-site
    trail construction, where such trails are designated by the Trails Master Plan.
10. Participate in cooperative regional trail planning with public and private
    organizations to identify and develop regional trail connections.
11. Allow multiple use on all trails, except where infeasible due to topography.
12. Cooperate with the Conejo Recreation and Park District to regularly evaluate and
    update the Trail Master Plan.
13. Maintain an inventory of key trail/street crossings, and upgrade crossings, in
    coordination with the City’s Public Works Department, to facilitate trail use as
    opportunities arise.
14. Continue to foster public involvement in trail system planning, maintenance and
    construction through close coordination with the Conejo Open Space Trails Advisory
    Committee (COSTAC) and trail-related programs.
15. Locate trails in such a manner to minimize visual impacts on adjacent communities,
    including use of existing access roads and paths.
16. Where possible, maintain a buffer area between trails and existing residential
    development, including use of existing plant materials to screen trails from nearby
    homes.
17. Develop and maintain a system of trailheads to provide adequate parking and
    related facilities for trail users, to avoid trail use parking on residential streets.
18. Install signage at principal trail entry points where necessary to direct visitors to use
    only established trails and to follow other open space rules and trail use guidelines.
D. Open Space for Public Health and Safety
Policies
OS-7      Open space shall contain those areas, such as flood plains, areas of unstable
          slopes, and fuel modification zones which are identified by the Safety Element
          of the General Plan as necessary to remain in an undeveloped state for the
          purposes of maintaining public safety.
OS-8      Where fuel modification zones necessary to protect people and structures from
          wildfire hazard are acquired by a public agency as open space, the on-going
          maintenance shall be provided by the original property owner, successor in
                                                                                              51

Chapter 5                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Policies                                              Open Space Element 2013 Update
         interest, or other designated party, with no obligation or liability accruing to a
         public agency.
OS-9     Open space managers should work cooperatively with other public agencies
         including, but not limited to, the Ventura County Fire Protection District to
         implement fuel modification zones and conduct vegetation management
         programs where appropriate, and to accommodate fire protection access,
         including helipads and fire roads, within natural open space areas in a manner
         which provides effective protection to the public and also preserves native
         habitat and protects the natural environment.
OS-10 The City supports regional efforts to designate and preserve large areas of
         open space beneficial to the protection of regional air and water quality.
Implementation Measures
1.  Designate as open space those areas within new development projects necessary
    to remain undeveloped for public health and safety purposes, as identified in the
    Safety Element of the General Plan
2.  When fuel modification zones are accepted as open space by a public agency,
    ensure that an appropriate privately-funded mechanism is in place to guarantee
    maintenance at no cost to the general public.
3.  Continue to accommodate fire roads and helipads in open space areas where such
    improvements are necessary for public health and safety, while minimizing
    disturbance to the resources as much as possible.
4.  Continue to support regional planning efforts which direct new development to
    cities, and preserve large open area buffers between cities.
5.  Cognizant of immediate public health and safety needs during a wildfire, attempt to
    coordinate with other agencies in order to minimize the impact of bulldozer
    firebreaks on natural and cultural resources.
E. Open Space and Urban Form
Policies
OS-11 In its activities to implement the General Plan, the City shall strive to create and
         maintain a connected ring of natural open space surrounding the developed
         portions of the Planning Area, complemented by the preservation as open
         space of significant hillside and ridgeline areas within the Valley. Achievement
         of the policies relating to the ring concept is an important factor to be
         considered in decisions regarding appropriate land use and the acquisition of
         open space.
OS-12 The ring of open space is a planning principle. Where it is depicted on maps,
         its location and extent are conceptual and it is not intended to pre-designate
         specific individual parcels or groups of properties as open space.
52
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                      Chapter 5
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                                    Policies
OS-13 The City shall support implementation of cooperative regional planning efforts,
         such as greenbelt agreements, which reinforce and extend the ring of open
         space, as well as low intensity rural agricultural land use, beyond the Planning
         Area boundaries.
OS-14 To further reinforce the ring of open space planning principle, the City shall
         support efforts by other government agencies or non-profit organizations to
         acquire and beneficially manage open space in the vicinity of the Planning
         Area, and to work to preserve regional wildlife habitat linkages.
OS-15 Both within its Area of Interest, and in the larger regional setting, the City shall
         continue to support policies and programs (e.g., the Guidelines for Orderly
         Development) that encourage urban development to locate within cities and
         that preserve regional open space in order to preserve valuable elements of the
         natural environment, to protect agricultural land, and to guide urban form.
Implementation Measures
1.  Protect open space per the Action Plan to Implement the Open Space Element, and
    acquire open space per the Financial Plan to Acquire and Manage Open Space.
2.  Ensure that General Plan and other publications appropriately describe and depict
    the ring of open space.
3.  Continue support of the Tierra Rejada Greenbelt Agreement.
4.  Continue support of the Thousand Oaks Area Plan.
5.  Support other inter-agency agreements which foster achievement of regional open
    space policies.
6.  Monitor open space acquisition and management activities and express City
    support where appropriate.
7.  Continue to support regional planning efforts which direct new development to
    cities, and preserve large open area buffers between cities.
F. Open Space Preservation and Stewardship
Policies
OS-16 Land set aside as natural open space shall be retained as such in perpetuity for
         the long-term benefit of the community and the environment.
OS-17 Generally, natural open space land should be transferred to public ownership,
         to provide consistent management, linkage with other components of the open
         space system, and appropriate recreational and educational opportunities.
OS-18 Policies of public agencies which own and manage open space should require
         a public hearing by the governing body prior to any proposed sale, exchange,
                                                                                        53
Chapter 5                                                 Thousand Oaks General Plan
Policies                                            Open Space Element 2013 Update
        other disposition, lease, grant of easement, or construction of improvements
        which are inconsistent with passive recreation uses, with respect to such open
        space. Such actions should generally be allowed only in very limited
        circumstances where there is substantial community benefit, and the action
        complies with other policies of the General Plan.
OS-19 Certain natural open space units are appropriate for private ownership and
        management. These principally include smaller, isolated parcels, which will not
        readily be integrated into the larger open space system. Privately-owned open
        space should be subject to appropriate conditions or approval, deed
        restrictions, or easements, with the City or the Conejo Open Space
        Conservation Agency (COSCA) as a beneficiary, to assure its continued
        protection.
OS-20 Continue the transfer of natural open space parcels owned by the City and the
        Conejo Recreation and Park District to the Conejo Open Space Conservation
        Agency (COSCA), as appropriate, to facilitate specialized and consistent
        planning and management of open space resources.
OS-21 Generally, land which is set aside as natural open space land should be zoned
        OS (Open Space), in order to provide appropriate and consistent legislative
        controls on land use and improvements.
Implementation Measures
1.  Continue re-zoning of natural open space lands to the Open Space (OS) Zone.
2.  Retain the majority of natural open space in public ownership.
3.  Where privately-owned natural open space is appropriate, require deed restrictions
    or conservation easements, with the City or the Conejo Open Space Conservation
    Agency as a beneficiary, to protect open space resources in perpetuity.
4.  Continue to require significant natural open space set aside through the
    development process to be dedicated in fee title to a public agency for long term
    stewardship.
5.  Continue to enable public ownership and management of natural open space
    through continued participation in the Conejo Open Space Conservation Agency.
6.  Request the adoption of a policy by the Conejo Open Space Conservation Agency
    and Conejo Recreation and Park District to require a public hearing by its governing
    body prior to disposition or long-term use of natural open space which is
    incompatible with passive recreation uses.
7.  Acquire conservation easements, or apply deed restrictions to private natural open
    space, with the City or the Conejo Open Space Conservation Agency as a
    beneficiary, in order to protect open space resources in perpetuity.
54
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                          Chapter 5
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                                        Policies
8.  Acquire trail easements over private natural open space areas, where necessary in
    order to retain public trail access to and between open space lands.
9.  Periodically review privately-owned natural open space lands to ensure the long-
    term protection of open space resources.
10. Identify and transfer natural open space lands owned by the City and Conejo
    Recreation and Park District to the Conejo Open Space Conservation Agency, as
    appropriate, after concurrence by the governing boards of each agency.
G. Open Space Management
Policies
OS-22 Unimproved or improved roads should only be permitted within or traversing
         natural open space areas where depicted by the Circulation Element of the
         General Plan, or where easements for such purposes are in place when the
         open space land is set aside.
OS-23 In determining the nature and extent of visitor use permitted within natural open
         space, protection of natural resources within the open space shall be the over-
         riding factor. All forms of hunting or trapping shall be prohibited, except hunting
         conducted under the auspices of a public agency for public safety purposes
         and live trapping which is necessary for purposes of scientific study conducted
         by, or under the auspices of, a public agency and which does not result in injury
         or death to the animal. Use of poisonous baits shall be prohibited.
OS-24 Facilities necessary to serve visitors, such as trails, trailheads, access roads
         and parking lots, kiosks, restrooms, signage shall be designed and installed so
         as to have no impact on sensitive natural resources within the open space
         area, and minimal impact on non-sensitive resources. Where emergency
         facilities or public service and utility facilities must be located in a natural open
         space area, they and any necessary access roads shall be located and
         designed to minimize impacts.
OS-25 Significant plant and animal habitats should be identified and prioritized for
         needed enhancements and restoration in a cost-effective manner.
OS-26 Locations where open space resources are vulnerable to degradation due to
         off-road vehicular access, illegal dumping, or other damaging activities should
         be identified and measures to protect the open space developed.
OS-27 Continue efforts to protect water quality of streams located within open space
         areas from adverse effects associated with recreational use; since the streams
         and creeks within open space drain the Conejo Valley in general, continue to
         implement and improve programs and measures to reduce pollution stormwater
         and nuisance water pollution.
OS-28 Accommodate all trail users safely, provide a range of scenic experiences and
         degrees of difficulty, with the larger objective of protecting natural resources
         within open space areas, and minimizing man-made intrusions in open space.
         Exclude motor vehicles from trail use (except for management, research and
                                                                                            55
Chapter 5                                                     Thousand Oaks General Plan
Policies                                                Open Space Element 2013 Update
         maintenance purposes), and appropriately regulate trail use as necessary in
         order to maintain safety and to protect both the natural environment and trail
         improvements.
OS-29 Open space managers should work cooperatively with the utility companies,
         water agencies, and the Ventura County Watershed Protection District to
         assure that facilities subject to their jurisdiction are planned and designed in a
         manner which provides effective public service and also protects the natural
         environment.
OS-30 Natural drainage courses should be protected within open space areas. Use of
         concrete or other flood control improvements in natural drainage courses is
         discouraged, and should occur only when no reasonable alternatives can be
         found that would maintain natural hydrological and ecological functions.
OS-31 Plan new developments to avoid direct and secondary impacts on valuable
         open space resources; including appropriate access control, location and
         maintenance of fuel modification areas.
Implementation Measures
1.  The Circulation Element of the General Plan presently depicts appropriate road
    locations within open space. Review proposed amendments to the Circulation
    Element to avoid negative impacts to open space resources.
2.  Proposed road easements potentially affecting open space lands shall be carefully
    reviewed to avoid or minimize impact on open space resources. Where approved,
    easements should be described and identified on the recorded tract map or land
    division, and in related development permits, at the time of dedication.
3.  Existing road easements across open space land shall be reviewed and may be
    relocated if desirable to avoid or minimize impact on open space resources.
4.  Identify and avoid natural resources of particular importance or sensitivity, and
    cultural resources, during the development of plans to accommodate visitor use.
5.  Emphasize the importance of natural resource protection in educational materials
    related to recreational use of open space.
6.  Encourage research projects by recognized institutions that will contribute to a data
    base on local open space resource characteristics and recreational use patterns
    and require that COSCA be provided with copies of any reports or publications
    resulting from such research.
7. Implementation measures for policies relating to Open Space for Outdoor Recreation
    and Education, above, are applicable.
8.  Inventory significant plant and animal habitats within open space areas for potential
    restoration or enhancement, including an assessment of the costs and benefits of
    such restoration on a site-specific basis.
9.  Seek grants and other special funding sources for prioritized plant and animal
    habitat restoration or enhancement.
56
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                     Chapter 5
Open Space Element 2013 Update                                                   Policies
10. Inventory and prioritize natural open space areas damaged by off-road vehicles,
    dumping or other activities (i.e. firebreaks, unauthorized trails) and develop site-
    specific measures to reduce such activity.
11. Systematically implement a program to construct fencing or other barriers where
    indicated by the inventory.
12. Install appropriate signage and coordinate enforcement of ordinances related to
    illegal dumping and off-road vehicle use in open space with the Ventura County
    Sheriff’s Department.
13. Continue to collaborate with other City departments and responsible agencies to
    develop a monitoring program of water quality in principal creeks and streams
    within open space areas.
14. Install signage and other improvements and regulate use as necessary to avoid
    adverse impacts to water quality from recreational activities in open space.
15. Continue programs to periodically clean streamside areas of trash and other foreign
    debris deposited during stormwater flows.
16. Review new development within the City Planning Area and in adjacent cities and
    unincorporated areas to impose conditions necessary to protect downstream water
    quality.
17. Plan trails collaboratively with the Conejo Recreation and Park District to maximize
    the visitor’s experience and minimize impacts to natural resources.
18. Design and develop trails to be multiple-use wherever such use does not adversely
    affect trail user safety or trail improvements.
19. Continue efforts to communicate responsible trail use concepts to the community
    through a variety of media.
20. If necessary, develop additional regulations regarding trail use in consultation with
    other local agencies and the Conejo Open Space Trails Advisory Committee.
21. Continue to work with utility companies and agencies, and the Ventura County
    Watershed Protection District to accommodate utility lines and flood control facilities
    where such improvements are necessary for public health and safety, while
    minimizing disturbance to open space resources.
22. Manage open space and control adjacent development so as to preclude wherever
    possible the need for flood control and stormwater retention improvements within
    natural drainage courses and open space areas. Where such facilities are
    unavoidable for public safety reasons, use innovative design and construction
    techniques to minimize impact on open space resources.
23. Inventory and avoid sensitive natural and cultural resources wherever possible in all
    new development.
                                                                                         57

Chapter 5                                                Thousand Oaks General Plan
Policies                                             Open Space Element 2013 Update
24. Where feasible, include transition areas in new development projects between
    natural open space and developed areas.
25. Restore ground disturbances, including roads and trails not part of the trail system,
    and avoid or remove debris or improvements foreign to the natural environment in
    areas to be dedicated as natural open space.
26. Control access to open space from streets and other access ways through fencing
    or other appropriate barriers where needed; preclude residential lot access to open
    space through non-gated fences or walls.
27. Install improvements at all trailhead entry locations to control motorized vehicle
    access to trails while allowing access for people who use assistive mobility devices
    wherever possible.
28. Create separate lots outside natural open space areas to include all fuel modification
    zones as required by the Fire Protection District, with maintenance responsibility
    exercised and controlled by private landowners, according to City policies.
29. Review and provide comments on environmental documents for development
    projects in adjoining cities and unincorporated areas that could impact open space
    within the Planning Area.
                           Photo 19: Conejo Canyons Open Space
58
            Chapter 6
        Action Plan
   to Implement the
Open Space Element
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                     Chapter 6
Open Space Element 2013 Update Action Plan to Implement the Open Space Element
CHAPTER 6: ACTION PLAN TO IMPLEMENT THE OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
This chapter is a statement of the City’s plan to carry out the policies established in
Chapter 5 and complete the open space system described in Chapter 4. Methods to
finance acquisition of open space areas, where necessary, and for maintenance of the
system are discussed in Chapter 7.
The City’s Zoning Ordinance includes a number of sections related to open space
conservation, which are described below These components have all been adopted by
the City Council and are contained in the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code (TOMC).
A. Open Space Zone
The City’s Open Space Zone (TOMC Section 9-4.3600 et seq.) was established in
compliance with California Government Code Sections 65560-70 (Open Space Lands),
and Sections 65910-11 (Open Space Zoning). The regulations of this zone are intended
to be applied to those lands which are set aside as natural open space, whether in
public or private ownership, ensuring that any uses or structures proposed on such land
will have “minimal impact on the natural, undisturbed character of the land.” As noted
earlier in this Element, approximately 11,100 acres of land within the City have been
zoned OS (Open Space), and are subject to its regulations.
B. Restriction on Disposition or Lease of City Open Space
The general policy of the City is that open space shall be retained as such in perpetuity.
From time to time, it may be beneficial to consider sale, exchange, other transfer, lease,
grant of easement, or the construction of improvements which are consistent with
passive recreational uses. This section of the Municipal Code (TOMC Section 9-13.101
et. seq.) establishes procedural safeguards vis-à-vis City-owned open space, which
require the City Council to conduct a public hearing prior to considering a request of the
type enumerated above.
C. Hillside Planned Development Zone
The Hillside Planned Development (HPD) Zone was adopted in 1971 (TOMC Section 9-
4.300 et seq.). It is a residential zoning district, the regulations of which apply to all
properties which have been placed in that zone through the re-zoning process. It is a
“planned development” zone, allowing a limited degree of clustering of density in order
to preserve larger areas of open space.
Under the provisions of this zone, the maximum density of development is regulated in
inverse relationship to the average slope, and the percentage of the site which must
remain as open space or be developed for recreational purposes is regulated in direct
proportion to the average slope. Special design standards suited to hillside terrain are
also incorporated in the ordinance.
The purpose of this zone is to encourage the retention of steep slopes, ridgelines, and
other prominent natural features while permitting limited residential development.
Following development, those portions of the site which have been set aside as natural
                                                                                        59

Chapter 6                                                Thousand Oaks General Plan
Action Plan to Implement the Open Space Element Open Space Element 2013 Update
open space are often transferred to public ownership. Whether they are transferred or
retained by the property owners association, Open Space (OS) zoning is appropriate
once the parcels have been created and restricted to open space by a development
entitlement.
While this ordinance is generally appropriate for regulating hillside development and
insuring the provision of open space, the slope-density table should be reviewed to
consider some downward revisions to the maximum permissible density for the various
slope categories, and also to consider a “sliding scale” rather than “step intervals” for
relating permissible density and required open space to the parcel’s average slope.
D. Protected Ridgeline Overlay Zone
Adopted in 1991, this overlay zone (TOMC Section 9-43500 et seq.) is designed to
protect ridgelines within and surrounding the community, as identified by the City’s
Ridgeline Study (1988 Update), which supplemented the original Ridgeline Study
prepared in 1978. Where applied to a specific property through the re-zoning process,
specific development standards are established to regulate development on the site
in relation to the identified ridgeline.
It should be noted that both the General Plan (General Policies and the Conservation
Element) and Resolution 78-66 define the City’s interest and policy to preserve the
identified ridgelines wherever possible. These policies are implemented through the
specific standards of the Protected Ridgeline overlay zone where applicable, or through
techniques identified in the Ridgeline Study (1988 Update) on a Planning Area-wide
basis.
E. Urban Restriction Boundary
At the Municipal Election held November 3, 1998, the electorate of the City of Thousand
Oaks approved a City Council-sponsored ballot Measure that established a City Urban
Restriction Boundary (CURB) in order to control urban expansion and extension of
urban services, thereby protecting agricultural resources, open space and
environmentally sensitive lands around the City’s periphery.
The Ordinance adopting the Measure provides that the text of the Measure be added to
the Open Space Element of the General Plan. It is included herein as Chapter 8.
F. COSCA Ordinance No. 01-2009
Adopted by the COSCA Board of Directors in May 2009, the purpose of the ordinance is
to provide rules to govern the use of COSCA open space so that all people can enjoy
and use the open space. It ensures that the rights of all concerned are protected while
assuring that the natural resources within COSCA open space and the undeveloped
character of the open space are preserved.
60

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                           Chapter 6
Open Space Element 2013 Update Action Plan to Implement the Open Space Element
                    Photo 20: Equestrians on the Los Robles Trail
                                                                            61
Chapter 6                                              Thousand Oaks General Plan
Action Plan to Implement the Open Space Element Open Space Element 2013 Update
                         This page intentionally left blank.
62
           Chapter 7
 Financial Plan to
Acquire & Manage
     Open Space
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 7
Open Space Element 2013 Update Financial Plan to Acquire and Manage Open Space
CHAPTER 7: FINANCIAL PLAN TO ACQUIRE AND MANAGE OPEN SPACE
Chapter 4 delineated the open space system, including those areas with important open
space resources for future protection. As indicated in the descriptions of those
resources, many areas can be preserved through the development review process, in
cases where those portions of a proposed development that contain protected
resources can be set aside as open space, with the remainder of the parcel developed
in a manner consistent with the General Plan and underlying zoning. In several
instances, however, lands for future open space protection identified in Chapter 4 are
not expected to be preserved as open space during the development review process.
This is principally because the land has already been subdivided and reasonable
development permissible under law and zoning will not provide large continuous open
space areas meeting the objectives of the General Plan. Examples include the
Southern Ridge, Conejo Ridge and Skyline areas.
In these instances, it may be necessary for the City or COSCA to purchase an interest
in the property to preserve its open space character. This chapter identifies financial
strategies and resources which may be available in such cases, or which have already
been used to conserve open space in Thousand Oaks.
Where the City or other public agency is considering the acquisition of an open space
area by purchase, its relative significance for open space purposes should first be
evaluated using the open space evaluation criteria adopted by COSCA.
A. Community Recreation Facilities and Open Space Endowment Fund
The Community Recreation Facilities and Open Space Endowment Fund (CROSEF)
was established in 1999 and receives annual revenue from multiple sources, including
the bedroom tax, golf non-resident fee, general fund unreserved balance transfer,
donations and the Adopt-an-Oak Tree program. Some of these revenue sources are
discussed in more detail below. The current Fund balance is about $1,600,000.
This fund can be used for open space acquisition and maintenance or construction of
open space amenities such as trails or bridges. To date the fund has been used to
purchase land as permanent open space in the Conejo Ridge, Dos Vientos, Mt. Clef,
Skyline, Summit House, and Vallecito Open Space areas.
B. Open Space, Conservation,              and   Scenic    Easements;       Acquisition  of
    Development Rights
An easement is a right granted by a property owner to another, either with or without
monetary consideration, which gives the other party certain rights. An open space,
conservation, or scenic easement is a tool which should be used where outright
acquisition of the open space is not desirable or possible, and where the property owner
is willing to place certain restrictions on the property which limit its use in such a way
that the desirable open space character is preserved. The cost of the easement may be
less than outright acquisition, depending upon the development rights retained by the
                                                                                        63
Chapter 7                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Open Space Element 2013 Update Financial Plan to Acquire and Manage Open Space
owner under the easement agreement. COSCA has entered into one conservation
easement in order to protect land vital to regional wildlife movement.
A similar tool is the acquisition of all development rights. This may be desirable where it
is appropriate that the open space remain in private ownership (e.g., a small parcel
internal to a tract), but it is in the public interest to fully restrict any potential future
development.
C. “Bedroom Tax”
Municipal Code Section 3-16.01 et. seq. (Fees in Connection with the Construction of
Dwelling Units), commonly known as the “Bedroom Tax” levies a charge on new
residential construction, varying from $100 to $200 per dwelling unit, depending upon
the number of bedrooms in the residence. Revenue derived there from is placed in a
Special Capital Outlay Fund for “the acquisition, improvement, and development of open
space, public parks, parkways, and median islands.” Future revenues accruing to this
fund at the present levels are expected to total approximately $400,000 over the next
20-25 years to buildout of the Planning Area. A portion of the Bedroom Tax revenue
collected by the City each year goes into the Community Recreation Facilities and Open
Space Endowment Fund.
D. General Fund Revenue
The City Council has a policy to transfer up to 10% of any annual General Fund net
operating gain, not to exceed $100,000, to the CROSEF. For a number of years, this
transfer did not take place due to budgetary restrictions. However, the transfer was
reinstated in the FY 2011-12 and successive budgets, resulting in transfers of $7,576
and $100,000 respectively in FY 2011-12 and FY 2012-13. The 2013-2014 Budget
does include a projected transfer of $100,000 pursuant to this policy.
E. Golf Course Fees
In years when the Los Robles Golf Course enterprise fund shows a profit, the Golf
Course Fund transfers $2 for every non-resident round of golf, up to $100,000 to the
CROSEF.
F. Tax Foreclosure Sales
Occasionally properties which have been identified as valuable open space acquisitions
become available through tax foreclosure sales. The City has acquired parcels in the
Skyline Open Space area through this method, and should continue to actively monitor
sale announcements. This method may be particularly applicable to smaller parcels in
older subdivisions.
G. Open Space Acquisition Bond Issue
Where a large amount of money is needed to acquire one or more parcels for open
space purposes, and there is substantial community support (2/3 voter approval at an
election is required in order to approve such a measure), this option may be viable.
64

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                     Chapter 7
Open Space Element 2013 Update Financial Plan to Acquire and Manage Open Space
H. Open Space Maintenance Districts
The City has used this technique with large developments where open space is
dedicated pursuant to a specific plan or subdivision map. A special district is
established which levies an annual assessment on the owners of other property within
the Specific Plan or subdivision, to provide funds to maintain the dedicated open space.
The major portion of such maintenance is typically brush clearance.
I. Grants
Although grant funding available from higher levels of government is scarce and subject
to significant competition where it does exist, the City and other local agencies should
continue to monitor and apply for such funding for open space acquisition. Grants have
been successfully obtained for open space acquisition and improvements, such as from
the Federal Land and Water Conservation Fund.
J. Donations and Bargain Sales
Donations and bargain sales, in which the property owner sells the property for less
than appraised value (essentially a partial donation), can provide tax advantages to the
owner, as well as valuable open space which might not otherwise by acquired. Many
open space areas have been acquired through donation, both from individuals and
corporations such as the Prudential Insurance Company which granted several
thousand acres in the North Ranch and South Ranch portions of the Westlake Village
area to COSCA in the mid-1980’s.
K. COSCA Trust Fund
This fund receives revenue principally from license agreements for wireless
communications facilities on COSCA land and has been used for both open space
acquisition and open space maintenance.
                                                                                      65

Chapter 7                                           Thousand Oaks General Plan
Open Space Element 2013 Update Financial Plan to Acquire and Manage Open Space
                      This page intentionally left blank.
66
              Chapter 8
     Thousand Oaks
           City Urban
Restriction Boundary
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 8
Open Space Element 2013 Update           Thousand Oaks City Urban Restriction Boundary
CHAPTER 8: THOUSAND OAKS CITY URBAN RESTRICTION BOUNDARY
Introduction
The electorate of the City of Thousand Oaks has adopted an urban growth boundary
(Thousand Oaks CURB line). Its purpose, principles, implementation procedures, and
methodologies for amendment are set forth in this General Plan amendment.
1. PURPOSE
    The City of Thousand Oaks and surrounding area, with its unique viewsheds,
watershed lands and proximity to unique soils, micro-climate and hydrology, is a gate-
keeper to one of the finest growing regions in the world. Vegetable and fruit production
from County of Ventura and, in particular, the Tierra Rejada Valley and alluvial plains
adjacent to the City have achieved international acclaim, enhancing the City’s economy
and reputation.
    The purpose of this amendment is to ensure that the preservation of agricultural
production, open space, and protection of environmentally sensitive habitat are
inviolable against transitory short-term political decisions, and that agricultural,
viewshed, watershed and open space lands are not prematurely or unnecessarily
converted to other non-agricultural or non-open space uses without public debate and a
vote of the people. As importantly, limiting urban sprawl through the use of an Urban
Restriction Boundary enhances the sense of community, allows for development unique
to the City of Thousand Oaks and promotes the efficient use of the City’s infrastructure.
2. PRINCIPLES
    Continued urban encroachment into open space, viewshed and watershed areas
negatively impacts sensitive environmental areas, intrudes on open space irrevocably
changing its utility, diminishes the quality of life and threatens the public health, safety
and welfare by causing increased traffic congestion, associated air pollution, alteration
of sensitive lands in flood plains and causing potentially serious water problems, such
as pollution, depletion and sedimentation of available water resources not only the City
of Thousand Oaks, but for its jurisdictional neighbors. Such urban encroachment would
eventually result in both the unnecessary, expensive extension of public services and
facilities and inevitable conflicts between urban and Open Space/Agricultural uses.
    The unique character of the City of Thousand Oaks and quality of life of City
residents depend on the protection of a substantial amount of open space, viewshed
and watershed. The protection of such lands through the implementation of this
measure not only ensures the continued viability of agriculture, but also protects the
available water supply and contributes to flood control and the protection of wildlife,
environmentally sensitive areas, and irreplaceable natural resources.
                                                                                         67

Chapter 8                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Thousand Oaks City Urban Restriction Boundary           Open Space Element 2013 Update
3. IMPLEMENTATION
       (a) The City of Thousand Oaks hereby establishes a Thousand Oaks City Urban
Restriction Boundary (Thousand Oaks CURB). The Thousand Oaks CURB is
established coterminous with the Sphere of Influence line established by the Local
Agency Formation Commission for the City of Thousand Oaks, as it exists as of January
1, 1998.
       (b) Until December 31, 2030, the City of Thousand Oaks shall restrict urban
services (except temporary mutual assistance with other jurisdictions) and urbanized
uses of land to within the Thousand Oaks City Urban Restriction Boundary, except as
provided herein and except for the purpose of completing roadways designated in the
Circulation Element of the Thousand Oaks General Plan as of January 1, 1998,
construction of public potable water facilities, public schools, public parks or other
government facilities. Other than for the exceptions provided herein, upon the effective
date of this Urban Restriction Boundary General Plan amendment, the City of Thousand
Oaks and its departments, boards, commission, officers and employees shall not grant,
or by inaction allow to be approved by operation of law, any General Plan amendment,
rezoning, specific plan, subdivision map, conditional use permit, building permit or any
other ministerial or discretionary entitlement, which is inconsistent with the purposes of
this General Plan amendment, unless in accordance with the amendment procedures of
Section 4 of this General Plan amendment.
       (c)    “Urbanized uses of land” shall mean any development which would
require the establishment of new community sewer systems or the significant expansion
of existing community sewer systems; or, would result in the creation of residential
densities greater than one primary residential unit per 10 acres in area; or, would result
in the establishment of commercial or industrial uses which are neither agriculturally-
related nor related to the production of mineral resources.
       (d)    The Land Use Element Map is amended to reflect the existence of the
Thousand Oaks Urban Restriction Boundary which is coterminous with the Sphere of
Influence line as it exists as of January 1, 1998.
       (e)    The City Urban Restriction Boundary, as defined herein, may not be
amended, altered, revoked or otherwise changed prior to December 31, 2030, except
by vote of the people or by the City Council pursuant to the procedures set forth in
Section 4 of this General Plan amendment.
4.     CHANGES TO BOUNDARY; PROCEDURES
       Until December 31, 2030, the foregoing Purposes, Principles and Implementation
provisions of this General Plan amendment, and the CURB may be amended only by a
vote of the people commenced pursuant to the initiative process by the public, or
pursuant to the procedures set forth below.
68

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 8
Open Space Element 2013 Update           Thousand Oaks City Urban Restriction Boundary
        (a)     The City Council may amend the City Urban Restriction Boundary
described herein if it deems it to be in the public interest, provided that the amended
boundary is within the limits of said Urban Restriction Boundary established by this
General Plan amendment.
        (b)     The City Council, following at least one public hearing for presentations by
an applicant and the public, and after compliance with the California Environmental
Quality Act, may amend the Urban Restriction Boundary described herein to comply
with state law regarding the provision of housing for all economic segments of the
community, the City Council may amend the City Urban Restriction Boundary as
described herein in order to accommodate lands to be designated for residential uses,
provided that no more than 10 acres of land may be brought within the Urban
Restriction Boundary for this purpose in any calendar year. Such amendment may be
adopted only if the City Council makes each of the following findings:
                (1) The land is immediately adjacent to existing compatibly developed
areas and the applicant for the inclusion of land within the City of Thousand Oaks Urban
Restriction Boundary has provided to the City evidence that the Fire Department, Police
Department, Public Works Department, the Community Development Department,
applicable water and sewer districts, and the school district, with jurisdiction over such
land, have adequate capacity to accommodate the proposed development and provide
it with adequate public services; and
                (2) That the proposed development will address the highest priority need
identified in the analysis by which the City has determined it is not in compliance with
state law, i.e., low and very low income housing; and
                (3) That there is no existing residentially designated land available within
the City Urban Restriction Boundary to accommodate the proposed development; and
                (4) That it is not reasonably feasible to accommodate the proposed
development by redesignating lands within the City Urban Restriction Boundary.
        (c)     The City Council, following at least one public hearing for presentation by
an applicant and the public, and after compliance with the California Environmental
Quality Act, may amend the City Urban Restriction Boundary described herein, based
on substantial evidence in the record, if the City Council makes each of the following
findings:
                (1) Application of the provisions of subsections (a) or (b) of these
amendment procedures are unworkable and failure to amend the Urban Restriction
Boundary would constitute an unconstitutional taking of a landowner’s property for
which compensation would be required or would deprive the landowner of a vested
right; and
                                                                                          69

Chapter 8                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Thousand Oaks City Urban Restriction Boundary          Open Space Element 2013 Update
              (2) The amendment and associated land use designations will allow
additional land uses only to the minimum extent necessary to avoid said
unconstitutional taking of the landowner’s property or to give effect to the vested right.
       (d)    The City Council, following at least one public hearing for presentations by
an applicant and the public, and after compliance with the California Environmental
Quality Act, may place any amendment to the Urban Restriction Boundary or the
provisions of this General Plan amendment on the ballot pursuant to the mechanisms
provided by state law.
       (e)    The General Plan may be reorganized and individual provisions, including
the provisions of this ordinance, may be renumbered or recorded in the course of
ongoing updates of the General Plan in accordance with the requirements of state law.
70

Safety Element
Thousand Oaks General Plan
              City of Thousand Oaks
                      City Council
                  Mayor Andrew P. Fox
                Mayor Pro-Tem Al Adam
         Councilmember Claudia Bill-de la Peña
             Councilmember Jacqui V. Irwin
              Councilmember Joel R. Price
                 Planning Commission
                 Daniel Roundtree, Chair
              Douglas Nickles, Vice-Chair
             Michael Farris, Commissioner
             Daryl Reynolds, Commissioner
              Peter Turpel, Commissioner
             City of Thousand Oaks Staff
John C. Prescott, AICP, Community Development Director
   Mark A. Towne, AICP, Deputy Director/City Planner
            Jeffrey Specter, Senior Planner
                      March, 2014

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                                           Table of Contents
                                           Table of Contents
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................... 1
   A. Overview .............................................................................................................. 1
   B. Relation to Other Elements of the General Plan ................................................... 2
   C. Relation to City’s Hazard Mitigation Plan .............................................................. 2
   D. Planning Area Setting ........................................................................................... 2
CHAPTER 2: GEOLOGY AND SEISMICITY .................................................................. 5
   A. Faulting and Seismic Hazards .............................................................................. 5
   B. Regional Geology ................................................................................................. 6
   C. Seismic Setting ..................................................................................................... 7
   D. Geologic Hazards ................................................................................................. 9
   E. Slope Stability (Landslides, Debris Flows, Rockfalls, and Mudslides) ................ 27
   F. Soil Related Hazards .......................................................................................... 30
CHAPTER 3: FLOODING ............................................................................................. 35
   A. Dam Inundation .................................................................................................. 35
   B. Historic Flooding ................................................................................................. 35
   C. Flood Hazards .................................................................................................... 37
   D. Flood Control and Prevention ............................................................................. 39
   E. Potential Inundation Due to Dam Failure ............................................................ 40
CHAPTER 4: FIRE HAZARDS ..................................................................................... 45
   A. Urban Fire Hazards ............................................................................................ 45
   B. Existing and Proposed Fire Stations................................................................... 46
   C. Wildfires .............................................................................................................. 48
CHAPTER 5: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ................................................................... 57
CHAPTER 6: TERRORISM .......................................................................................... 61
CHAPTER 7: DISASTER PREPAREDNESS ............................................................... 65
   A. Emergency Operations Plan ............................................................................... 65
CHAPTER 8: CRITICAL AND LIFELINE FACILITIES ................................................. 69
   A. Critical Facilities.................................................................................................. 69
   B. Schools ............................................................................................................... 70
   C. Lifeline Facilities ................................................................................................. 74
                                                                                                                                 i

                                                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Table of Contents                                                                   Safety Element 2014 Update
CHAPTER 9: POLICIES .............................................................................................. 79
   A.  Faulting and Seismic Hazards ............................................................................ 79
   B.  Geologic Hazards ............................................................................................... 80
   C.  Flood Hazards .................................................................................................... 81
   D.  Fire Hazards ....................................................................................................... 82
   E.  Hazardous Materials........................................................................................... 84
   F.  Terrorism ............................................................................................................ 85
   G.  Disaster Preparedness ....................................................................................... 85
GLOSSARY .................................................................................................................. 87
BIBLIOGRAPHY ........................................................................................................... 93
   A.  Planning/Planning for Seismic Hazards .............................................................. 93
   B.  Seismicity and Regional Tectonics ..................................................................... 93
   C.  Area Geology...................................................................................................... 96
   D.  Soils and Slope Stability ..................................................................................... 96
   E.  Groundwater and Flooding ................................................................................. 97
   F.  Plans, Ordinances and Guidelines ..................................................................... 98
   G.  Terrorism ............................................................................................................ 98
   H.  Other .................................................................................................................. 99
TABLES
Table 1: Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale ..................................................................... 11
Table 2: Estimated Ground Accelerations and Intensities ............................................. 12
Table 3: Major Flood Events in Ventura County ............................................................ 36
Table 4: Dams in the Thousand Oaks Area .................................................................. 43
Table 5: Incident Activity for Thousand Oaks Service Area (2011) .............................. 47
Table 6: Fire Station Capabilities .................................................................................. 47
Table 7: Brush Fires Near Thousand Oaks (1952-2013)............................................... 50
Table 8: Critical Facilities in Thousand Oaks ................................................................ 72
FIGURES
Figure 1: Local Faults .................................................................................................... 15
Figure 2: Regional Faults .............................................................................................. 16
Figure 3: Ground Shaking Potential .............................................................................. 21
Figure 4: Liquifaction Areas........................................................................................... 26
Figure 5: Landslide Hazard Area ................................................................................... 29
Figure 6: Expansive Soils .............................................................................................. 32
Figure 7: Groundwater Seepage Areas ......................................................................... 34
Figure 8 : Flood Zones .................................................................................................. 41
Figure 9: Dam Inundation Areas ................................................................................... 44
Figure 10: Very High Fire Severity Zone ....................................................................... 54
Figure 11: Evacuation Routes ....................................................................................... 66
Figure 12: Critical Facilities ........................................................................................... 71
ii
Thousand Oaks General Plan
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                                       Table of Contents
Figure 13: Lifeline Facilities ........................................................................................... 77
PHOTOGRAPHS
Photo 1: Northridge Earthquake, Calif., January 17, 1994 .............................................. 5
Photo 2: Northridge Earthquake, Calif., January 17, 1994 ............................................ 13
Photo 3: 1994 Northridge Earthquake Damage to Thousand Oaks Library .................. 14
Photo 4: Road Displacement Due to Ground Rupture .................................................. 23
Photo 5: Flooding on Newbury Road (1992) ................................................................. 37
Photo 6: Casitas Springs CA, January 15, 2005 ........................................................... 39
Photo 7: Aerial view of Westlake Lake .......................................................................... 42
Photo 8: Structure Fire on Thousand Oaks Boulevard .................................................. 46
Photo 9: Hazardous materials incident on Highway 118 ............................................... 58
Photo 10: A visitor looks at the faces of some of the victims of the Oklahoma City
     bombing at the Oklahoma City National Memorial and Museum........................... 62
Photo 11: Hill Canyon Wastewater Treatment Facility .................................................. 74
                                                                                                                            iii
                                                Thousand Oaks General Plan
Table of Contents                                Safety Element 2014 Update
                  This page intentionally left blank.
iv
     Chapter I
Introduction
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 1
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                    Introduction
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION
A. Overview
The City of Thousand Oaks has prepared this revised Safety Element of the General
Plan in compliance with California State law. This document supersedes the Safety
Element prepared for the City in 1996 by Rincon Consultants. It complements and is
consistent with the goals and policies and other elements that make up the City of
Thousand Oaks General Plan.
The focus of the Safety Element is to adopt policies that will reduce death, injuries,
property damage, and the economic and social dislocation resulting from natural
hazards. Although the emphasis is on fire, flooding, geologic, and seismic hazards,
other relevant issues include emergency preparedness, hazardous materials spills,
terrorism, and critical and lifeline facilities. Section 65302 (g) of the Government Code
specifies that:
The general plan shall include a safety element for the protection of the community from
any unreasonable risks associated with the effects of seismically induced surface
rupture, ground shaking, ground failure, tsunami, seiche, and dam failure; slope
instability leading to mudslides and landslides; subsidence and other geologic hazards
known to the legislative body; flooding; and wildland and urban fires. The safety element
shall include mapping of known seismic and other geologic hazards. It shall also
address evacuation routes, peakload water supply requirements, and minimum road
widths and clearances around structures, as those items relate to identified fire and
geologic hazards.
An updated Safety Element assists the City in planning for hazards and responding to
disasters by serving the following functions:
       Provide an accurate and updated assessment of natural and human-related
        hazards in the City Planning Area;
       Provide a framework by which safety considerations are introduced into the land
        use planning process;
       Provide policies that identify and reduce hazards;
       Strengthen preparedness concerning hazards specific to Thousand Oaks;
       Integrate this Element with the City's Hazard Mitigation Plan to ensure
        consistency with adopted policies and implementation measures.
The Safety Element became a mandatory part of the general plan in 1975 when the
State Legislature adopted SB 271 (Chapter 1104). The initial legislation focused on the
adoption of policies relating to fire safety, flooding, and geologic hazards. In 1984 the
State revised the Legislation (AB 2038; Chapter 1009) expanding the list of safety
element issues and combining the Safety Element and Seismic Safety Element into a
single document. The adoption or amendment of a general plan is a legislative act.
                                                                                         1

Chapter 1                                                 Thousand Oaks General Plan
Introduction                                               Safety Element 2014 Update
B. Relation to Other Elements of the General Plan
The Safety Element and all elements of the General Plan have equal legal status. The
Safety Element must also be consistent with the other elements of the General Plan,
supporting and complementing the goals and policies of the related elements. For
example, the Land Use Element establishes use and density designations, and controls
zoning for all land citywide. Therefore, the Safety Element informs questions of use and
density based on the degree of hazard that may be present. Open space designations
are commonly linked to areas of geologic or flood hazard. The Circulation Element
emphasizes transportation, which relates to the provision of emergency response in the
event of a disaster.
This Safety Element is designed to provide the input necessary to assist the City of
Thousand Oaks in achieving balanced planning decisions. It recognizes the importance
of public safety, and the need to integrate safety concerns with other local issues.
C. Relation to City’s Hazard Mitigation Plan
On October 12, 2004, the City adopted a Hazard Mitigation Plan. The Hazard Mitigation
Plan is required by the Federal Mitigation Act of 2000 in order to prepare for and reduce
the potential impacts of natural hazards, and is a pre-requisite to Federal hazard
mitigation funding. The City’s Hazard Mitigation Plan (HMP) was prepared according to
Federal guidelines, and has been approved by the State Office of Emergency Services
and the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
The HMP was based in part on the 1996 version of the Safety Element. It updated maps
and data from the previous Safety Element, and provided additional background
information. Both documents address the same type of natural and man-made hazards,
and both identify goals and policies to reduce these hazards.
All of the policies from the 1996 Safety Element were included in the 2004 HMP. The
HMP, however, incorporates policies from other General Plan Elements that relate to
hazard prevention, i.e. certain Conservation Element and Open Space Element policies,
and includes additional mitigation activities that are operational in nature, such as
periodically inventorying emergency supplies. The HMP also provides a detailed risk
assessment and loss estimates of each hazard.
The Safety Element therefore focuses on hazards in the context of land use planning
per State requirements for General Plan adequacy, while the HMP provides an analysis
of hazards per Federal requirements, including risk assessment and loss estimates.
D. Planning Area Setting
The City of Thousand Oaks is situated in the Conejo Valley of eastern Ventura County.
The City includes the community of Newbury Park and part of the community of
Westlake Village. It does not include the neighboring City of Westlake Village, which is
in Los Angeles County. The City's Planning Area also includes unincorporated islands
and adjacent unincorporated areas such as Lynn Ranch, Casa Conejo, Ventu Park,
Kelly Estates, Miller Ranch and Rolling Oaks.
2

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 1
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                   Introduction
The Conejo Valley has distinctive geomorphic features comprised of mountains, artificial
lakes and rolling hills with clearly defined access points to the City. The Valley is about
nine miles long and seven miles wide and is situated at an elevation of about 800 feet
above sea level. The Valley is rimmed by Mountclef Ridge and the Simi Hills to the
north and east, the Santa Monica Mountains to the south, and Conejo Mountain to the
west. The developed portions of the City are located primarily on the Conejo Valley floor
and on slopes of less than 25% gradient.
Access to the City is primarily via seven major arterials. From the east, entrance to the
Valley is via U.S. Route 101 (Ventura Freeway), Thousand Oaks Boulevard, and
Agoura Road. From the west, access is via U.S. Route 101 over the Conejo Grade.
Access from the north is via State Route 23 (Thousand Oaks Freeway), Moorpark Road
and Olsen Road. From the south, access is available from State Route 23 at the east
end of the City and from Potrero Road at the west end of the City.
The City provides police protection service by contract with the Ventura County Sheriff's
Department. The main police station is located on Olsen Road near the northern City
limits. Fire prevention and suppression services are provided within the City and
adjacent unincorporated areas by the Ventura County Fire Protection District. Water is
provided by three retail purveyors, including the City itself, each with its own service
area. The retailers purchase water from Calleguas Municipal Water District which in turn
purchases water from the Metropolitan Water District. Bard Reservoir, located northeast
of the City, stores much of the water used by the City.
As of 2012, the City is served by two acute care hospitals: Los Robles Hospital and
Medical Center (359 beds) and the Thousand Oaks Surgical Hospital (17 beds). The
Los Robles Hospital and Medical Center operates the only trauma center in Thousand
Oaks. There are also several urgent care facilities.
                                                                                          3
Chapter 1                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Introduction                                Safety Element 2014 Update
             This page intentionally left blank.
4
  Chapter 2
Geology &
Seismicity
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                              Chapter 2
Safety Element 2014 Update                                             Geology and Seismicity
CHAPTER 2: GEOLOGY AND SEISMICITY
A. Faulting and Seismic Hazards
The City of Thousand Oaks lies in a seismically active area. No active faults have been
mapped within the city limits, but two potentially active faults, the Boney Mountain and
Sycamore Canyon faults, traverse parts of the City. Seismically induced ground shaking
has affected the City in the past and is expected to affect the City in the future.
Ground shaking caused by the magnitude 6.7 Northridge Earthquake of January 17,
1994 resulted in the single most costly natural disaster in U.S. history. In the City of
Thousand Oaks, located about 20 miles from the epicenter, over 850 building permits
were issued to repair earthquake damage.
Based on seismic modeling, the Simi fault, located about one mile north of the Planning
Area boundary (see Figure 1), is anticipated to be capable of generating the highest
peak ground accelerations for the City. A maximum credible earthquake of 6.9 on the
Simi fault would be capable of generating peak ground accelerations of 0.6 g and a
Modified Mercalli Intensity (MMI) of X (see Table 1-1). Seismic experts believe that
within the next 30 years, there is about a 40% chance of peak ground accelerations
exceeding 0.2 g for the Thousand Oaks area, which corresponds to a MMI of VIII or
greater.
            Photo 1: Northridge Earthquake, Calif., January 17, 1994; Buildings, cars and personal
           property were destroyed when the earthquake struck. Approximately 114,000 residential and
              commercial structures were damaged and 72 deaths were attributed to the earthquake.
                        Damage costs were estimated at $25 billion. (FEMA News Photo)
                                                                                                   5
Chapter 2                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Geology and Seismicity                                       Safety Element 2014 Update
B. Regional Geology
Stratigraphy
Conejo Volcanics of Miocene age are found in the south and western parts of the City.
These rocks are hard and generally stable. Softer marine sediments of the Topanga
and Monterey formations of Miocene age are found within the eastern and southern
areas of the City, and the Sespe, Llajas, Santa Susana, and Chatsworth formations of
Oligocene to Cretaceous age are found near the northeast part of the City.
Unconsolidated alluvial sediments are found within canyons and the Conejo Valley
bottom.
The major rock sequences of the Thousand Oaks area [compilation of sources
including, Weber (1973) and (1984), French (1980), and Diblee (1990) and (1993)] are
described by age group from oldest to youngest as follows:
Chatsworth Formation (Kcs), Upper Cretaceous (99.6 to 65.5 mya) - Thick, mostly
north dipping sequence of very resistant marine, arkosic sandstone, siltstone, and
conglomerate. Outcrop restricted to small area in the eastern part of Conejo Valley.
Santa Susana Formation (Ts), Paleocene (65.5 to 55.8 mya) or Early Eocene (55.8 to
48.6 mya) - North dipping, marine claystone, siltstone and conglomerate. Outcrops in
northeastern part of the valley.
Llajas Formation (TIl), Eocene (55.8 to 33.9 mya) - North dipping, claystone siltstone
and sandstone. Outcrops in northeastern part of the valley.
Sespe Formation (Tsp), Oligocene (33.9 to 23.0 mya) - Non-marine sandstone and
conglomerate with outcrops restricted to small exposure in the northeastern part of the
valley.
Conejo Volcanics (Tcv), Middle Miocene (16 to 11.6 mya) - Mostly north dipping
sequences of volcanics consisting of andesitic to basaltic flows, breccias, and
agglomerates, tuffs, and dikes with a total thickness of 13,000 feet. These rocks crop
out over much of the valley.
Topanga Formation (Tt), Middle Miocene (16 to 11.6 mya) - Marine clay shale,
siltstone and sandstone that is time equivalent to the Conejo Volcanics and occurs both
interbedded with it and in fault contact with it. Crops out over eastern half of the valley
with total thickness of 9,000 feet.
Monterey Formation (Tm), Middle (16 to 11.6 mya) and Late Miocene (11.6 to 5.3
mya) - Described previously as the Modelo Formation (Weber, 1984). This unit is
described as marine biogenic thinly bedded to finely laminated siliceous shales. This
unit crops out over much of the eastern third of the valley.
Alluvium (Qal), Quaternary (2.6 mya to present) - Alluvium covers much of the floor of
the Conejo Valley and the bottoms of stream channels. The alluvium is comprised of
unconsolidated deposits of boulders, cobbles, pebbles, sand, silt, and clay deposited by
streams. It is typically 100 feet or less in thickness.
6
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                      Chapter 2
Safety Element 2014 Update                                      Geology and Seismicity
Structural Geology
The City of Thousand Oaks lies within the very southern part of the west-central portion
of the Transverse Ranges geologic province of southern California. This province is
characterized by east-west trending folds, faults, and mountain ranges -- which is
transverse to the northwest trend of most of the geologic features in California Structural
geology of the region has been described in several reports including Weber (1973 and
1984), AEG (1981), and Yeats (1988 and 1994).
Hilly and mountainous areas within the Transverse Ranges are referred to as structural
highs, whereas valley areas generally reflect structural lows (Weber, 1984). The Conejo
Valley forms a structural low known as the Conejo-Las Virgenes low (roughly coincident
with U.S. Highway 101). South of the Conejo Valley, the north edge of the Santa Monica
Mountains forms a structural high. This structural high area comprises the southern
margin of the Transverse Ranges province. North of the Conejo Valley is the Simi Hills
structural high and further to the north lies the Simi-Tierra Rejada-Santa Rosa valleys
structural low .
The Santa Monica and Conejo Mountain areas had their beginning in the Cretaceous
period (over 75 million years ago). During this time, marine and non-marine sediments
began accumulating in the subsiding Ventura Basin. Following the emplacement of the
sediments, the area was affected by volcanic activity, faulting, and folding. The latest
period of major tectonics occurred during the middle of the Pleistocene (about 1 million
years ago), when most of the present land forms were formed.
Regional east to west trending folds have been accompanied by simultaneous reverse
faulting (Weber, 1984). The Malibu Coast Fault (to the south) and the Simi-Santa Rosa
fault zone (to the north along the northern edge of the Tierra Rejada and Simi valleys)
are the major reverse faults in the vicinity of the site. These faults are considered the
most likely sites for nearby possibly damaging earthquakes that could affect the
Thousand Oaks area. Figure 1 shows the location of these faults.
No active faults have been mapped within the City of Thousand Oaks. Two Quaternary
age faults (faults with movement in the Iast.1.6 million years), the Boney Mountain and
Sycamore Canyon faults, cross within the city limits (Diblee and Ehrenspeck, 1990).
C. Seismic Setting
The regular occurrence of earthquakes in the southern California area serves as
ongoing evidence that the area is seismically active. Although nothing can be done to
prevent the occurrence of earthquakes, through proper construction design and
planning, their destructive effects can be reduced. Within the last several decades,
there has been a recognition that structures should not be built over active fault traces.
Ongoing earthquake research has resulted in improved construction standards for
buildings, roadways, and other structures. Another approach to increasing awareness of
seismic hazards has been the State requirement that local governments address
seismic safety issues in their General Plans [Government Code Section 65302(g)]. This
                                                                                         7
Chapter 2                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Geology and Seismicity                                        Safety Element 2014 Update
Safety Element meets the requirement to consider the goals, programs, and policies
that are to be followed to reduce the danger of earthquakes.
Earthquake hazards are manifested in many ways, including ground rupture, ground
shaking, landslides, tsunamis, liquefaction, and seiches. Secondary hazards that can be
caused by earthquakes include flooding due to dam failure, urban fires, and toxic
chemical releases. The Seismic Hazards section of this document focuses on the
hazards of ground shaking, liquefaction, and ground rupture that could occur within the
City of Thousand Oaks.
Regional Seismicity and Earthquake History
Earthquakes occur along active faults. One of the tools used in the evaluation of seismic
risk is the historical earthquake record. These records list when an earthquake
occurred, its epicenter and depth below ground surface, and strength (Modified Mercalli
Intensity or Magnitude). Seismic records in southern California date back about 200
years -- to the time of Spanish colonization. Earthquake recurrence along an individual
fault can be on the order of thousands of years, so the historical record alone is not
sufficient to fully determine the seismic risk that an area may experience. Despite these
limitations, a review of historical seismicity has value in evaluating the seismicity that an
area may undergo. The accuracy of the database increases with time; events before
about 1940 are based on colloquial data and are not instrumentally recorded. These
events, therefore, may not accurately locate the recorded event.
Historical Seismicity of the Thousand Oaks Area
Records of historical earthquakes that have affected southern California are maintained
by the United States Department of Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA). A NOAA data base search was performed for the City of
Thousand Oaks (34° 10.5' North, 118°50' West) which is in the vicinity of Hillcrest Drive
and Hampshire Road. Earthquakes greater than magnitude 4 and within 50 miles of the
site were plotted. Earthquakes with magnitudes of less than 4 were eliminated from the
record because earthquake damage occurs from larger magnitude events (typically
events greater than magnitude 5). Elimination of the smaller magnitude events thus
serves to screen out seismic noise and minor events that pose an insignificant seismic
risk. A 50-mile radius was selected to focus on faulting that has the greatest potential to
cause damaging ground shaking. Because the strength of ground shaking diminishes
with distance, events beyond 50 miles pose a minor ground shaking risk to the
Thousand Oaks area.
A total of 612 earthquakes, including duplicated events, are listed on the NOAA
earthquake file. The data base includes the Northridge (1994, magnitude 6.7), Whittier
(1987, magnitude 5.9), Point Mugu (1973, magnitude 5.9), San Fernando (1971,
magnitude 6.5), Arvin-Tehachapi (1952, magnitude 7.7), Santa Barbara Channel (1812,
magnitude 7.2, 1941, magnitude 5.9, and 1968, magnitude 5.7) and Long Beach (1933,
magnitude 6.3) earthquakes. The recorded earthquake nearest to the City of Thousand
Oaks occurred in 1911. This event occurred 5 miles from the search location, had a
magnitude of 4 and a MMI of IV. Ten events (two of which are suspected duplicates)
8

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                     Chapter 2
Safety Element 2014 Update                                     Geology and Seismicity
have been recorded within 10 miles of this site. Of these 10 events, the one with the
greatest magnitude (4.7) was recorded in 1976 and was located about 9 miles from the
site search point. Two hundred and three events (including duplicates) have been
recorded within 20 miles of the site. This distance includes the Northridge earthquake
(1994, magnitude 6.7, MMI IX, located about 17 miles from the search point) and
related aftershocks, and aftershocks associates with the San Fernando (1971,
magnitude 6.5) earthquake.
The greatest magnitude event listed in the NOAA search is a magnitude 7.2 event
which occurred in 1812. This earthquake was located in the Santa Barbara Channel,
and was located about 50 miles from the site. Ten earthquakes having a magnitude of 6
or greater are listed in the NOAA data base. The nearest magnitude 6 or greater event
was the Northridge (1994, magnitude 6.7) earthquake, located about 17 miles from the
site.
Summary
The Thousand Oaks area is in a seismically active region. The NOAA data base of
historical seismicity listed 612 events within 50 miles of the project area. The nearest
recorded earthquake occurred 5 miles from the project search area. This event had a
magnitude of 4. The greatest recorded earthquake within 50 miles of the site was a
magnitude 7.2 event within the Santa Barbara Channel which occurred in 1812. Ten
earthquakes having a magnitude of 6 or greater were listed in the NOAA data search.
The nearest magnitude 6 or greater was the Northridge (1994) earthquake, having a
magnitude of 6.7 and located 17 miles from the site.
D. Geologic Hazards
Geologic hazards that pose the greatest concern to the City of Thousand Oaks include
seismically induced ground shaking, fault rupture, landslides, debris flows, mudslides,
rockfalls, expansive soils, and flooding (Weber, 1984). All of these hazards have
affected Thousand Oaks to some extent since the mid-1950s, when rapid development
began. An awareness of these potential geohazards is needed with increased
population density and encroachment into the hills and mountains.
Ground Shaking
Earthquake-generated ground shaking is the greatest cause of widespread damage in
an earthquake. The California Seismic Safety Commission (1993, 1994) estimates that
ground shaking causes 99% of the earthquake damage to residences and other
structures in California. Local conditions can greatly influence the intensity of ground
shaking. Types of soil depth to bedrock, depth to groundwater, and orientation of the
fault movement all influence the intensity of ground shaking.
Ground shaking is the shock wave produced when there is a sudden movement created
by an earthquake rupture. Seismic energy is lost and the intensity of the wave
diminishes as the shock wave travels away from the point of rupture (epicenter). In
general, ground shaking diminishes as the distance from the earthquake epicenter
increases. This attenuation relationship has been studied by numerous scientists,
                                                                                       9
Chapter 2                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Geology and Seismicity                                       Safety Element 2014 Update
resulting in several attenuation models. Distance from the epicenter also affects the
form of the ground shaking. Near (within about 10 miles) the epicenter, one may feel a
sharp, high frequency shock wave. This type of shock wave tends to affect short (one to
two story) structures. At greater distances, the high frequency shock wave is attenuated
and one feels a rolling motion. This rolling motion tends to affect higher structures
(multi-story structures, towers, large tanks).
A common scale used to measure the magnitude of an earthquake is the Richter scale.
Richter magnitude is a logarithmic measurement of the maximum motion of the
earthquake event as recorded on a seismograph. Richter magnitude is defined as the
logarithm of the maximum amplitude on a seismogram written by an instrument of a
specified standard type calculated to be at a distance of 62 miles (100 km) from the
epicenter. By definition, Richter magnitude is fixed to an event and does not vary with
distance. Seismically induced ground shaking can also be measured quantitatively as
ground surface acceleration (acceleration with respect to the force of gravity-[g]), and
qualitatively by the modified Mercalli scale (see Table 1). Because of the attenuation of
ground shaking with distance, modified MercaIli intensities (MMIs) vary depending on
distance from the earthquake, soil type, resonance of the underlying sediments, and
other site specific phenomena.
One way that geologists classify faults is on their movement history. As defined by the
California State Mining and Geology Board (Hart, 1994), faults that have had surface
displacement within the last 11,000 years (Holocene age) are considered active faults.
Faults are considered potentially active if they show evidence of surface displacement
during Quaternary time (within the last 1.6 million years).
When designing a structure, it is important to consider the likely earthquake that a fault
can produce. A maximum probable earthquake is the largest earthquake that is
expected to be produced within a 100-200 year time frame. Because the life of most
structures is on the order of this range, maximum probable earthquakes are commonly
used as design criteria for a structure. A maximum credible earthquake is the largest
event that can be produced by a particular fault, regardless of time span. For critical
structures, such as dams, emergency operation centers, fire stations, nuclear power
plants, and other similar buildings, the maximum credible earthquake is often used as
the seismic design criteria.
10
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                           Chapter 2
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                      Geology and Seismicity
Table 1: Modified Mercalli Intensity Scale
Intensity     Description
I             Not felt. Marginal and long-period effects of large earthquakes.
II            Felt by persons at rest, on upper floors, or favorably placed.
III           Felt indoors. Hanging objects swing. Vibration like passing of light trucks. Duration
              estimated. May not be recognized as an earthquake.
IV            Hanging objects swing. Vibration like passing of heavy trucks; or sensation of a jolt like a
              heavy ball striking the walls. Standing motor cars rock. Windows, dishes, doors rattle.
              Glasses clink. Crockery clashes. In the upper range of IV, wooden walls and frames creak.
V             Felt outdoors; direction estimated. Sleepers wakened. Liquids disturbed, some spilled.
              Small unstable objects displaced or upset. Doors swing, close, open. Shutters, pictures
              move. Pendulum clocks stop, start, change rate.
VI            Felt by all. Many frightened and run outdoors. Persons walk unsteadily. Windows, dishes,
              glassware broken. Knickknacks, books, etc., off shelves. Pictures off walls. Furniture moved
              or overturned. Weak plaster and masonry D cracked. Small bells ring (church, school).
              Trees, bushes shaken (visibly, or heard to rustle).
VII           Difficult to stand. Noticed by drivers of motor cars. Hanging objects quiver. Furniture
              broken. Damage to masonry D, including cracks. Weak chimneys broken at roof line. Fall of
              plaster, loose bricks, stones, tiles, cornices (also unbraced parapets and architectural
              ornaments). Some cracks in masonry C. Waves on ponds; water turbid with mud. Small
              slides and caving in along sand or gravel banks. Large bells ring. Concrete irrigation ditches
              damaged.
VIII          Steering of motor cars affected. Damage to masonry C; partial collapse. Some damage to
              masonry B; none to masonry A. Fall of stucco and some masonry walls. Twisting, fall of
              chimneys, factory stacks, monuments, towers, elevated tanks. Frame houses moved on
              foundations if not bolted down; loose panel walls thrown out. Decayed piling broken off.
              Branches broken from trees. Changes in flow or temperature of springs and wells. Cracks in
              wet ground and on steep slopes.
IX            General panic. Masonry D destroyed; masonry C heavily damaged, sometimes with
              complete collapse; masonry B seriously damaged. (General damage to foundations.) Frame
              structures, if not bolted, shifted off foundations. Frames cracked. Serious damage to
              reservoirs. Underground pipes broken. Conspicuous cracks in ground. In alluviated areas,
              sand and mud ejected, earthquake fountains, sand craters.
X             Most masonry and frame structures destroyed with their foundations. Some well-built wooden
              structures and bridges destroyed. Serious damage to dams, dikes, embankments. Large
              landslides. Water thrown on banks of canals, rivers, lakes, etc. Sand and mud horizontally
              on beaches and flat land. Rails bent slightly.
XI            Rails bent greatly. Underground pipelines completely out of service.
XII           Damage nearly total. Large rock masses displaced. Lines of sight and level distorted.
              Objects thrown into the air.
Definition of Masonry A, B, C, D:
Masonry A: Good workmanship, mortar and design; reinforced, especially laterally, and bound together by using
                steel, concrete, etc.; designed to resist lateral forces.
Masonry B: Good workmanship and mortar; reinforced, but not designed in detail to resist lateral forces.
Masonry C: Ordinary workmanship and mortar; no extreme weaknesses like failing to tie in at corners, but neither
                reinforced nor designed against horizontal forces.
Masonry D: Weak materials, such as adobe; poor mortar; low standards of workmanship; weak horizontally.
                                                                                                               11
Chapter 2                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Geology and Seismicity                                         Safety Element 2014 Update
Hazard Analysis
No active faults have been mapped within the City of Thousand Oaks planning area
boundary. However, because of the proximity of active faults, ground shaking has
affected and will continue to affect the Thousand Oaks area.
Ground shaking caused by the magnitude 6.7 Northridge Earthquake of January 17, 1994
resulted in the single most costly natural disaster in U.S. history (Earthquake Engineering
Research Center, 1994). Over 33 fatalities and 7,000 injuries were attributed to the
earthquake (Science, 1994). Damages were widespread and included six sections of
collapsed highway structures, thousands of damaged or destroyed residential and
commercial structures, widespread disruption of utilities and other lifeline facilities, and
numerous landslides and soil embankment failures (Earthquake Engineering Research
Center, 1994). In all, over 14,000 structures in 28 cities were damaged by the earthquake.
In the City of Thousand Oaks, located about 20 miles from the epicenter, over 850
building permits were issued by the City to repair earthquake damage.
As stated previously, ground shaking attenuates with distance, thus, active faults near
the City of Thousand Oaks have the potential to produce the greatest ground
accelerations. The 1994 Northridge earthquake resulted in accelerations (rock sites) of
up to about 0.5 g near the epicenter and accelerations of about 0.25 to 0.3 g near the
City of Thousand Oaks (EERC, 1994).
Table 2 provides a listing of the closest and most significant faults that are modeled
herein to predict ground shaking within the planning area. This information is taken from
the City of Thousand Oaks Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (2004).
     Table 2: Estimated Ground Accelerations and Intensities
                                                                                Modified
                                   Design         Distance    Peak Ground        Mercalli
     Faults                      Magnitude        In Miles    Acceleration4     Intensity
     Regional Faults
     Simi - Santa Rosa                6.91           1-8         0.28-0.6          IX-X
     Chatsworth                       6.31          6-16         0.12-0.3         VIII-IX
     Malibu Coast                     7.32          8-16          0.2-0.3         VIII-IX
     Oak Ridge                        7.32          8-17          0.2-0.3         VIII-IX
     Santa Monica Mtns. Thrust        7.21           92            0.26             IX
     Santa Susana                     6.92          9-20        0.13-0.23         VIII-IX
     Northridge Hills                 6.61          9-20        0.11-0.21         VIII-IX
     San Fernando                     6.82         18-29        0.08-0.15        VII-VIII
     San Gabriel                       71          19-30         0.1-0.15        VII-VIII
     San Andreas                     8.25          39-50        0.11-0.15           VIII
     Local Faults
     Boney Mountain                    63           0.6-7         0.2-0.5         VIII-X
     Sycamore Canyon                  6.23          0.6-7       0.21-0.51          IX-X
    1-Wesnousky (1986)          3-  Slemmons (1977)         5- Evernden and Thomson (1985)
    2- Dolan et al (1994)       4-  Idriss (1985)
12
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                           Chapter 2
Safety Element 2014 Update                                            Geology and Seismicity
Table 2 also lists maximum credible earthquake (MCE) magnitudes, peak ground
accelerations and modified Mercalli intensities for each fault. Attenuation relationships
developed by Idriss (1985) – which are applicable for rock sites - were used to calculate
peak ground accelerations. MMIs were calculated for each fault using the relationship
between ground shaking intensity and MMI (Evemden and Thomson, 1985). MMIs can
be influenced by site specific features, such as the thickness of loosely consolidated
alluvium and the depth to groundwater. These factors have not been included in the
calculation of expected MMIs, thus, the actual intensities that are felt at a site could
differ from the levels calculated here. Figure 1 and Figure 2 show the locations of faults
in close proximity to Thousand Oaks.
           Photo 2: Northridge Earthquake, Calif., January 17, 1994 (FEMA News Photo)
                                                                                           13

Chapter 2                                                Thousand Oaks General Plan
Geology and Seismicity                                    Safety Element 2014 Update
          Photo 3: 1994 Northridge Earthquake Damage to Thousand Oaks Library
14
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                     Chapter 2
Safety Element 2014 Update                        Geology and Seismicity
                           Figure 1: Local Faults
                                                                     15
Chapter 2                                        Thousand Oaks General Plan
Geology and Seismicity                            Safety Element 2014 Update
                       Figure 2: Regional Faults
16
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 2
Safety Element 2014 Update                                        Geology and Seismicity
Following is a description of the faults located within or near to Thousand Oaks, as well
as faults of regional significance:
Sycamore Canyon Fault: As shown on the Fault Activity Map of California (Jennings,
1994), the Sycamore Canyon fault has Quaternary but not Holocene offsets (i.e., offsets
occurred between 11,000 and 1.6 million years ago). This fault, therefore, is considered
potentially active. The Sycamore Canyon fault has a mapped length of about 13 miles
(Jennings and Strand, 1969) and extends from the Pacific Ocean northeast to
Thousand Oaks. The Sycamore Canyon fault crosses within the city boundary. If this
fault were to be active, it would be expected to create a maximum credible earthquake
of 6.2 (Slemmons, 1977) and could potentially produce ground accelerations of 0.21-
0.51. Because this fault is so close, ground shaking would be a sharp, high frequency
wave.
Ground shaking intensities from a Sycamore Canyon fault earthquake range from MMI
IX to X. The peak ground level acceleration attenuates as distance from the fault
increases, resulting in a decline in intensity away from the fault.
Boney Mountain Fault: The Boney Mountain fault is also shown on the Fault Activity
Map of California (Jennings, 1994) as having Quaternary but not Holocene activity (i.e.,
offsets between 11,000 and 1.6 million years ago). Thus, this fault is considered
potentially active. The Boney Mountain fault has a mapped length of about 9 miles
(Jennings and Strand, 1969) and extends from the coastline northeast towards
Thousand Oaks. This fault is modeled to produce a maximum credible earthquake of 6
(Slemmons, 1977). Ground accelerations could range from 0.2-0.5 and:MMI could
range from VITI-X. Because this fault is so close, ground shaking would be a sharp,
high frequency wave.
L-l Lineament: The L-I bedrock fault, located in the southwestern portion of the City, is
a near vertical fault located within the Conejo Volcanics. The L-l fault was originally
mapped as a prominent lineament defined by vegetation alignments. As part of the
proposed Dos Vientos development project in the southwestern portion of the City, the
lineament was trenched at numerous locations and was judged to be a bedrock fault
that does not penetrate the overlying pre-Holocene (12,000 to 15,000 year old) surficial
deposits (Keith W. Ehlert Consulting Engineering Geologist, 1994). The fault is, thus,
not believed to be active. Because no sediments or soil profiles older than 15,000 years
old overlie the Miocene Conejo Volcanics, which are about 15 million years old, it is
possible that the L-l fault could be Quaternary in age and, thus, potentially active.
Quaternary activity on this fault is thought to be unlikely, though (Keith W. Ehlert
Consulting Engineering Geologist, 1994), for the following reasons: 1) this fault is
thought to be a vertical fault in contrast to contemporary seismicity and associated
active faults in the Transverse Ranges which are almost exclusively associated with
north-dipping reverse faults, and 2) the fault does not appear to be a major feature that
extends for any great distance. Because of the questionable history of activity on this
fault, this fault is not depicted on Figure 1 and an acceleration or intensity has not been
assigned herein.
                                                                                         17
Chapter 2                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Geology and Seismicity                                        Safety Element 2014 Update
San Cayetano Fault: The San Cayetano fault is part of a series of north-dipping
reverse faults extending from Santa Barbara County into Los Angeles County. The
maximum likely earthquake magnitude for the San Cayetano Fault system is 6.7 with a
recurrence interval of 2,908 years (Source: Ventura County Hazard Mitigation Plan,
2010).
Simi – Santa Rosa Fault: The Simi- Santa Rosa fault is the nearest active fault to
Thousand Oaks crossing within about 1 mile of the City (Jennings, 1994). This fault
extends from the Las Posas Hills area near Camarillo (where it is mapped by Jennings
and Strand [1969] as the Santa Rosa fault) eastward through the southern flank of Big
Mountain (the northern edge of Simi Valley). This fault aligns with the Northridge Hills
fault which continues eastward into the San Fernando Valley. The Simi fault (including
the Santa Rosa fault) has a mapped length of about 28 miles (Jennings and Strand,
1969) and is described by Irvine (1991) as a northern dipping reverse fault. Although
offset aIong this fault is late Quaternary in age, there also appears to some evidence of
Holocene fault activity (Ziony and Yerkes, 1985 and Blake, 1991) and, thus, for
purposes of this study is considered active. A magnitude 6.7 earthquake is projected for
this fault with a recurrence interval of approximately 933 years (2010 Ventura County
Hazard Mitigation Plan, URS, 2010).
Malibu Coast Fault: The Malibu Coast fault is mapped by Jennings and Strand (1969)
as an east-west trending reverse fault. The fault is located within about eight miles
south of Thousand Oaks with a fault length of 18 miles. The Malibu Coast fault extends
from west of Point Dume near the Ventura-Los Angeles County line, eastward to the
City of Santa Monica. There, it is aligned with the Santa Monica-Raymond Hill fault.
Jennings (1994) describes this fault as having Late Quaternary to Holocene
displacement and is thus, classified as an active fault. The maximum likely earthquake
magnitude for the Malibu Coast Fault is 6.7 with a recurrence interval of 2,908 years
(Source: Ventura County Hazard Mitigation Plan, URS, 2010).
Oakridge Fault: The Oak Ridge fault is an east-west trending fault that traverses much
of the Santa Clara River Valley about 8 miles north of the City of Thousand Oaks..
There is little evidence of surface rupture along this fault. Only short sections of this fault
have been identified in the Moorpark Quadrangle, Special Studies Zones map prepared
by the California Geological Survey. This fault is a steeply dipping reverse fault that has
an onshore length of about 25 miles (SCEC, 1995). As described by Yeats and Huftile
(l995), the 1994 Northridge earthquake may have occurred on a continuation of the Oak
Ridge fault system. The maximum likely earthquake magnitude for the Oak Ridge fault
is 6.7 with a recurrence interval of 299 years (Source: Ventura County Hazard Mitigation
Plan, URS, 2010). The Oak Ridge fault is located within about eight miles north of the
City of Thousand Oaks.
San Andreas Fault: The San Andreas fault is mapped by Jennings (l994) as a
northwest-southeast trending active fault with a length of over 600 miles. This fault
forms the plate tectonic boundary between the Pacific plate to the west and the North
American plate to the east. Numerous earthquakes have been recorded along the San
Andreas fault. Of the faults discussed here, the San Andreas fault has the highest
possibility of future rupture. Because this fault is located about 40 miles from Thousand
18

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 2
Safety Element 2014 Update                                        Geology and Seismicity
Oaks at its closest approach, ground shaking from a San Andreas fault event would be
somewhat attenuated by the time it reached the City.
The maximum likely earthquake magnitude for the San Andreas Fault is 8.0 with a
recurrence interval of 300 years (Source: Ventura County Hazard Mitigation Plan, URS,
2010).
Blind Thrust Faults
Low angle thrust faults, known as blind thrust/faults, have recently been recognized as a
seismic risk in southern California. Blind thrust faults are low angIe features that do not
reach the ground surface but do have surface expressions in the form of overlying folds
that grow during large earthquakes. The seismic hazard from blind thrust faults has
been demonstrated by the Northridge (1994) and the Whittier Narrows (1987)
earthquakes. The magnitude 6.7 Northridge earthquake was produced by a south
dipping blind thrust fault extending northward from beneath the San Fernando Valley to
the Santa Susana Mountains (Jackson et al, 1995). The magnitude of an earthquake
that a blind thrust can produce is dependent on the fault's area and characteristic
displacement. Earthquakes ranging in size from m = 6.4 to m = 7.5 can be expected on
individual blind thrust segments.
The Santa Monica Mountains blind thrust (Petersen and Wesnousky, 1994) underlies
the Santa Monica Mountains, extending inland from the Malibu coastline area. This
thrust system may extend below the City of Thousand Oaks as identified in recent
publications by Dolan et al (1995) and others. Rupture of the Santa Monica Mountains
blind thrust fault is believed to be active and is estimated to be capable of producing a
magnitude 7.2 earthquake every 740 years (Dolan et al, 1995). Slip rate on this blind
thrust fault is estimated to be about 4 mm per year. Based on a near distance (beneath
the City) of 9 miles, peak ground accelerations could be on the order of 0.26 and a MMI
of IX.
In 2003, California Geological Survey developed an updated map of earthquake
shaking potential for California. Figure 3 indicates the level of earthquake hazard based
on the 2003 California Geological Survey data (Source: City of Thousand Oaks, Local
Hazard Mitigation Plan, 2004). Regions near major, active faults (shown in red and pink)
experience stronger and more frequent shaking. Regions that are far from active faults
(shown in orange and yellow) experience weaker and less frequent shaking.
Summary
The City of Thousand Oaks lies in a seismically active area. Although no active faults
have been mapped within the city limits, two potentially active faults (Boney Mountain
and Sycamore Canyon faults) do traverse parts of the City. Five earthquake events
were modeled to determine peak ground accelerations and MMIs that could affect the
City. Based on the models, the greatest ground acceleration that the City would be
subject to is a peak: ground acceleration of 0.6 g, which correlates to a MMI of X. Such
an event could be produced from a maximum credible earthquake of 6.9 occurring
along the Simi fault. In areas of loosely consolidated alluvium or areas with a water
                                                                                         19
Chapter 2                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Geology and Seismicity                                       Safety Element 2014 Update
table within 30 feet from ground surface, MMI levels may be greater than the values
calculated in the model.
The most recent modeling efforts of seismic experts (probabilistic modeling) have
attempted to evaluate earthquake potential for a given area by factoring all available
potential fault sources. Jackson et al (1995) have estimated that by 2025, there is about
a 40% chance of peak ground accelerations exceeding 0.2 g for the Thousand Oaks
area. This corresponds to a MMI of VIII or greater.
Proper design of new structures and strengthening of existing structures can reduce or
prevent damage associated with ground shaking. Conformance-with the California
Building Code in the building of new structures helps reduce the likelihood of damage.
In residences, most of the damage caused by ground shaking is the result of:
       Unbraced water heaters,
       Houses that have weak cripple walls, or are on pier-and-post foundation, and
       Houses not adequately anchored to their foundations
       Much of the life-threatening earthquake damage to commercial property is
        caused by:
        o      Walls that are poorly anchored to the roof or floors,
        o      Unreinforced masonry walls, and
        o      Poorly reinforced concrete walls or columns.
The majority of buildings in the Thousand Oaks area were constructed from the 1950's
on, and do not have unreinforced masonry walls. The California Seismic Safety
Commission (1993, 1994) has published guidebooks that assist property owners with
identifying structural weaknesses and provide recommendations for mitigating these
problems. These guidebooks can be ordered directly through the Seismic Safety
Commission (Sacramento) and are entitled:
       The Homeowners Guide to Earthquake Safety
       The Commercial Property Owner ~ Guide to Earthquake Safety
20

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                             Chapter 2
Safety Element 2014 Update                                Geology and Seismicity
                       Figure 3: Ground Shaking Potential
                                                                             21
Chapter 2                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Geology and Seismicity                                       Safety Element 2014 Update
The City of Thousand Oaks conducted a study of earthquake safety for existing steel
water reservoirs in 1985 (Perliter & Ingalsbe Consulting Engineers, 1985). The purpose
of the study was to determine the safety of reservoirs constructed prior to 1971 and to
make recommendations for improving the safety of those reservoirs where appropriate.
All of the listed reservoirs were seismically upgraded.
The City operated sixteen potable water storage reservoirs in 2012. The Pederson
Reservoir received seismic retrofits in 2012. In 2012, HDR conducted a seismic
evaluation and structural retrofit study of the remaining fifteen reservoirs (HDR,
“Citywide Reservoir Seismic Evaluation/ Structural Retrofit, City of Thousand Oaks; MI
2094”; November 2012). The report included detailed recommendations for every
reservoir including seismic safety recommendations to improve anchoring, providing
more flexible couplings and lowering water levels to increase freeboard.
The private water purveyors in the City, California American Water and California Water
Services Company also conduct seismic safety reviews of their water storage
reservoirs. In 2012, California Water reported that it inspects its Thousand Oaks storage
tanks (6 tanks) every 5 years. The tanks are inspected for structural integrity, seismic
retrofits and other several other items. Tanks are also examined after major storms,
seismic events, acts of vandalism and/or security breaches. Corrective measures are
taken as needed. For example, the Harris reservoir, constructed in 1977, was replaced
in 2011 to mitigate structural integrity concerns and stabilize the site geology.
California American also does periodic planning studies that include seismic safety
reviews of its water storage reservoirs in Thousand Oaks. The company completed a
planning study of its 22 water tanks in 2012.
Fault Rupture Hazard
Ground rupture occurs when displacement along a fault reaches the ground surface.
Ground rupture capable of causing several inches or greater displacement could have a
catastrophic effect on the integrity of a structure. Thus, setbacks from active fault traces
are incorporated into determining areas that are suitable to develop. A difficulty in
determining the fault rupture hazard is predicting where future ground rupture will occur.
Fault displacement often is within a fault zone and not necessarily along exact traces of
previous breaks. Also, movement typically is along more than one fault break.
The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act, signed into law in 1972, addresses
development in areas prone to faulting. Under the act, the State Geologist is required to
delineate earthquake fault zones along known active faults in California. The act defines
active faults as one which has "had surface displacement within Holocene time (about
the last 11,000 years)" [Hart, 1994]. Cities and counties affected by the zones must
regulate certain development within the zones. For proposed development within one of
the fault zones, a geologic study must be performed to demonstrate that the sites are
not threatened by ground rupture from future faulting.
22

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 2
Safety Element 2014 Update                                           Geology and Seismicity
Hazard Analysis
No mapped active faults have been identified within the city limits of Thousand Oaks.
Thus, there are no Alquist-Priolo special study areas within the city limits. The lack of
mapped active faults within the City does not preclude ground rupture from occurring
within the City. However, until there is evidence of active faulting within Thousand Oaks,
the risk of seismically induced ground rupture appears to be minor. Although the
Alquist-Priolo Act pertains to active faults, a conservative planning approach would be
to limit the development along traces of potentially active faults within the City
(Sycamore Canyon and Boney Mountain faults).
Summary
No Alquist-Priolo Special Study Zones have been designated within the City of
Thousand Oaks. As geologic studies are performed, there is the possibility that active
faults may be identified. Thousand Oaks should follow the guidelines of the Alquist-
Priolo act for proposed new development within the City. A setback from the mapped
potentially active faults should be considered for all development, and especially for
critical facilities. Setback distances should be determined through engineering geologic
investigation.
      Photo 4: Road Displacement Due to Ground Rupture (USGS Open-File Report 2010-1333
                               and CGS Special Report 221, Fig. 14E)
                                                                                        23
Chapter 2                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Geology and Seismicity                                        Safety Element 2014 Update
Liquefaction
Liquefaction is a phenomenon that occurs when loosely consolidated soils lose their
load bearing capabilities during shaking and flow in a fluid-like manner. Liquefaction
typically occurs in water saturated loosely compacted fine to medium grained sand
where the groundwater table is within about 50 feet below grade. When these materials
are shaken, such as during an earthquake, pore pressure of the sediments increases,
causing the sediment to behave as a liquid. Where the liquefied layer occurs near the
ground surface, structures built on such a layer could sink into the ground. Other effects
of liquefaction include lateral spread, flow failures, ground oscillations, and loss of
bearing strength (Tinsley et al, 1985). Because liquefaction occurs in sediments, areas
of bedrock are not considered liquefiable.
Lateral spread is the movement of blocks of ground as a result of liquefaction in a
subsurface layer. During liquefaction of a subsurface layer of sediment into a fluid mass,
gravity can cause the mass to flow down slope. Examples of this include movement into
a cut slope such as a river channel, irrigation channel, or a storm drain. Lateral spread
typically occurs on gentle slopes ranging from 0.3° to 3°. Ground movement of several
feet to tens of feet is possible. Lateral spread is particularly destructive for pipelines,
utilities, bridge piers, and other structures having shallow foundations.
Ground oscillation may take place where liquefaction occurs at depth and where the
ground slope is too gentle for lateral spreading. When deeper zones liquefy, overlying
sediment that are not liquefied can decouple and differentially move. The result is a
ground wave; ground settlement and opening and closing of fissures are manifestations
of ground oscillation.
Flow failure occurs when blocks of ground are decoupled from underlying sediment and
move downslope. Flow failures occur on slopes greater than 3°. These blocks can be
quite large, from tens of feet to several miles in length and width. Flow failures comprise
the greatest hazard produced by liquefaction.
Loss of bearing strength can occur under a structure when the underlying soil liquefies.
Large movement in the soil column is possible, allowing for structures to settle, tip, or
float upwards.
Conditions that favor liquefaction include areas of young (recently deposited)
sediments, the looseness of cohesionless soil, and the depth to groundwater. Because
young sediments tend to be poorly consolidated, recently deposited material, such as
river and flood plain deposits, are more susceptible to liquefaction than other types of
sedimentary deposits. The distribution of sediment grain size also influence the
susceptibility of liquefaction. Silty sand deposits have the greatest potential for
liquefaction. Gravely sand or deposits having less than 15 percent clay are susceptible
to liquefaction, whereas bouldery and cobbly gravels or deposits containing more than
15 percent clay are not known to liquefy (Tinsley et al, 1985).
Depth to groundwater influences the susceptibility for liquefaction. Where groundwater
is within 10 feet from ground surface, the susceptibility is very high. For groundwater
24

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                          Chapter 2
Safety Element 2014 Update                                       Geology and Seismicity
between 10 and 30 feet, the susceptibility is high. For groundwater at 30 to 50 feet
below grade, the susceptibility is low, and for groundwater deeper than 50 feet, the
susceptibility is very low.
The magnitude and duration of ground shaking also has an influence on the
susceptibility of liquefaction. The larger the magnitude of an earthquake, the greater the
distance at which liquefaction is observed. Similarly, the longer the duration of shaking,
the greater the distance at which liquefaction is observed.
Hazard Analysis
Much of the City of Thousand Oaks lies on bedrock, thus, is not susceptible to
liquefaction. Areas of the City underlain by unconsolidated alluvium, such as along
canyons and the floor of the Conejo Valley, may be susceptible. Ground water levels in
the Conejo Valley Basin fluctuate considerably -- being highly dependent on rainfall. In
the past five years, it appears that much of the basin may have had ground water levels
within about 10 to 20 feet from ground surface. Thus, based on groundwater depths
only (and not taking into account soil composition), the entire alluvial basin may be
susceptible to liquefaction during periods of relatively high rainfall. In areas where the
subsurface sediments have a high clay content (greater than 15%) or are very coarse
grained (cobbles or boulders), the susceptibility to liquefaction would be decreased. No
detailed liquefaction studies have been performed for the Thousand Oaks area.
To more accurately determine the potential for liquefaction, site specific geologic studies
are required. These studies should be performed in areas with a moderate to high
liquefaction potential prior to new construction and for the retrofitting of critical facilities.
The studies should include site specific depth to groundwater and stratigraphy of the
underlying sediments. Areas having liquefiable sediments should be identified, and
structures should be properly designed to withstand the conditions.
Summary
Areas of unconsolidated alluvium and shallow groundwater exist within the City of
Thousand Oaks. In such a setting, there is a potential for liquefaction to occur. Factors
that influence liquefaction include soil composition (sand, silt, clay, cobbles, boulders),
seismically induced ground shaking intensity, duration of ground shaking, and depth to
groundwater. Figure 4 depicts areas of liquefaction potential derived from Seismic
Hazard Zones maps prepared by the California Department of Conservation, Division of
Mines and Geology (Thousand Oaks Quadrangle, released Nov. 17, 2000; Newbury
Park Quadrangle, released February 7, 2002). Detailed liquefaction analyses are
necessary prior to development to evaluate the site specific liquefaction potential and
determine what it needed to mitigate the hazard.
                                                                                              25
Chapter 2                                         Thousand Oaks General Plan
Geology and Seismicity                              Safety Element 2014 Update
                       Figure 4: Liquifaction Areas
26
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 2
Safety Element 2014 Update                                        Geology and Seismicity
E.      Slope Stability (Landslides, Debris Flows, Rockfalls, and Mudslides)
Landslides, debris flows, rockfalls, and mudslides all occur within the planning area. All
are manifestations of gravity driven flows of earth materials due to slope instability. Hill
slopes naturally have a tendency to fail. Unless engineered properly, development in
hillside areas tends to increase the potential for slope failures. Slope modification by
grading, changes in the infiltration of surface water, and undercutting slopes can create
unstable hill slopes, resulting in landslides or debris flows.
Much of the City of Thousand Oaks is comprised of topographically pronounced areas.
These hill slopes and mountains consist of sedimentary and volcanic rock outcrops that
are locally covered with soil. Slope instability is of greatest concern in these
topographically pronounced areas. The majority of landslide and slope wash problems
in the Thousand Oaks area occur in geologic terrenes involving folded sequences of
clay shale, siltstone, and very fine-grained sandstone of the Monterey (Modelo) and
Topanga Formations - especially in north facing slopes. These fine-grained units are
easily eroded, resulting in the undermining of slopes which then tend to fail. If the slopes
are unstabilized, seismically induced ground shaking can trigger the landslide
movement. Several landslides are depicted on geologic maps of the Thousand Oaks
area (Weber, 1984- Diblee, 1990 and 1993; Yerkes, 1991). The largest ancient
landslide mapped in the planning area is in the vicinity of Lang Ranch and is commonly
referred to as the Erbes Road landslide. This bedrock landslide encompasses about
230 acres and involves slightly folded and contorted but mostly gently dipping shale
bedrock of the Monterey (Modelo) Formation (Weber, 1984).
Debris and mud flows often occur after periods of precipitation. Water soaked soil and
rock are destabilized by the weight of the water. Often compounding the added weight
is erosion of the base of a hill slope. Once this slope becomes destabilized, the water.
soil, and mud mass is driven downhill by gravity. Numerous mud and debris flows
occurred during the very heavy rains of January 1969. One death was attributed to
these incidents.
Rockfalls occur in virtually all types of rocks and especially on slopes steeper than 40°.
Areas of primary risk from rockfalls are those located at the base of steep, high slopes
where rock outcroppings (usually Conejo Volcanics) are susceptible to dislodgment of
large boulders. These conditions are locally present along the northwest, west and
south margins of the planning area. Rockfalls are usually triggered by seismically
induced ground shaking or by erosional destabilization of a hill slope.
Hazard Analysis
Numerous landslides have been mapped within the hillsides of the City of Thousand
Oaks (Weber, 1984; Diblee, 1990 and 1993; Yerkes, 1991). The hillsides also are prone
to rockfalls, mudflows, and debris flows. Because many factors contribute to the
instability of hill slopes (precipitation, soil and rock lithology and in duration, seismic
ground shaking, steepness of slope), the California Building Code requires that site
specific investigations be performed for development on hillsides. These include:
                                                                                          27

Chapter 2                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Geology and Seismicity                                        Safety Element 2014 Update
      Requiring preliminary     studies   by     qualified  geotechnical  engineers    and
       engineering geologists
      Requiring developers to retain both engineering geologists and geotechnical
       engineers during construction
      Requiring certification as to the stability of the proposed building site to adverse
       effects of rain and earthquakes prior to the issuance of building permits
      Assuring the coordination between the civil engineer and the project engineering
       geologist/geotechnical engineer during the supervision of construction grading
      Requiring the mitigation of onsite hazards caused by grading that may affect
       adjacent properties, including erosion and slope instability.
Areas having the potential for earthquake induced landslides are depicted on Figure 5.
This information was obtained from Seismic Hazard Zones maps prepared by the
California Department of Conservation, Division of Mines and Geology (Thousand Oaks
Quadrangle, released Nov. 17, 2000; Newbury Park Quadrangle, released February 7,
2002). Development within these areas should follow the appropriate CBC criteria and
site specific studies should be performed prior to development.
Summary
Numerous landslides have been mapped within the hillsides of the City of Thousand
Oaks. These hillsides also pose a high risk of debris flows, mudflows, and rockfalls.
Land development near or at the base of canyons, cliffs, or landslides should take these
hazards into consideration during the planning, construction and life of the development.
Site specific geologic studies should be conducted and measures should be
implemented, as appropriate, to mitigate potential impacts associated with these
geohazards. Slope stability hazards encountered during the construction phase should
be mitigated to minimize future problems.
28

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                           Chapter 2
Safety Element 2014 Update                              Geology and Seismicity
                        Figure 5: Landslide Hazard Area
                                                                           29
Chapter 2                                                     Thousand Oaks General Plan
Geology and Seismicity                                         Safety Element 2014 Update
F. Soil Related Hazards
Soil related hazards include expansive soils, settlement, subsidence, and
hydrocompaction. This section focuses on areas within the City of Thousand Oaks that
have the potential for these soil problems.
Expansive Soils
Expansive soils are characterized as having a high shrink-swell potential (U.S. Soil
Conservation Service, 1970). The shrink-swell potential of a soil refers to the change in
volume resulting from a change in moisture content. Soils with high shrink-swell
potential generally have a high clay content and shrink when dry and swell when wet.
Shrink-swell properties also vary with the type of clay in the soil. Expansive soils can
cause considerable damage to building foundations, roads, and other structures.
In the early 1960's, many homes in Thousand Oaks were damaged due to soil
expansion and other factors. Soil expansion cracked concrete slabs in the area west of
Route 23 in the vicinity of Avenida de las Flores and Avenida de los Arboles. By 1965,
State law (Health and Safety Code 17953-18955) was amended to require soil reports
and construction techniques to prevent damage due to expansive soils for every
subdivision where a tentative and final map is required. In addition, the Thousand Oaks
Municipal Code (Sec. 801.16) requires all building foundations to be designed to
account for the soil expansion.
Detailed studies of soil properties, including shrink-swell potential, were conducted in
the soil survey of Ventura County (U.S. Soil Conservation Service, 1970). Figure 1-6
depicts areas with potentially highly expansive soils as described in the Soil Survey of
Ventura County (U.S. Soil Conservation Service, 1970). However, due to the variability
within each soil type, the map should be used for planning purposes only. Detailed site
specific investigations are required to fully evaluate the shrink-swell characteristics of
the soils at a given site.
Settlement
Settlement is the downward movement of a soil or of the structure which it supports,
resulting from a reduction in the voids in the underlying strata. Inadequately emplaced
fill material, if not compacted properly, can subside when a structure is built on the fill. It
is important that fills be engineered so that the density of the material can be controlled.
This will result in a lesser chance that the material will compact following development
on the fill. Natural soils that are potentially susceptible to settlement can be found in the
alluvial valley areas and where old pits or gullies have been filled in with trash and loose
soil (Leighton and Associates, 1974).
Settlement hazards can occur in areas with alluvial deposits. Large-scale settlement
problems have generally not been an issue in the study area provided that adequate
soils and foundation studies are performed prior to construction and that CBC
guidelines are followed. Areas of poorly consolidated sediments should be engineered
to support the weight of a structure that is to be built on the site. In areas of fill, the fill
should be compacted to adequately support the proposed development.
30
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 2
Safety Element 2014 Update                                         Geology and Seismicity
Subsidence
Subsidence is the decrease in volume of a material as the result of an increase in the
density of a material. It is generally related to the withdrawal of fluids such as water, oil,
and gas from the subsurface. When fluids are removed from the subsurface, the
overburden weight, which the water had previously help support through buoyant
forces, is transferred to the soil structure. Subsidence typically occurs over a long period
of time and results in a number of structural impacts. Facilities most impacted by
subsidence are long, surface infrastructure facilities - such canals, sewers and
pipelines.
No recognized subsidence has occurred within the study area even during periods of
heavy ground water pumping (see ground water conditions section) in the 1950s and
1960s. Accordingly, the potential for subsidence in the study area is considered to be
minimal. If present, these hazards would be manifested in areas of unconsolidated
alluvium.
Hydrocompaction
Hydrocompaction occurs in relatively loose, open textured soils above the groundwater
table. Once water is introduced, whether by heavy irrigation or a rise in the water table,
the soil loses strength and consolidates under its own weight. Hydroconsolidation
typically occurs in desert environments and has been noted in some semi-arid regions
of southern California.
Areas of hydrocompaction have not been identified within the City of Thousand Oaks. If,
during the preparation of a foundation study, soils susceptible to hydrocompaction are
encountered, the condition should be mitigated prior to development. Mitigation
measures should be designed by a civil or geotechnical engineer. Hydrocompaction
could potentially occur in areas of unconsolidated soils
Summary
Soil problems are substantially mitigated by standard practice as required by Chapter
18 of the California Building Code. A soil report is required prior to issuance of a grading
or building permit for most new construction. If soils are encountered that are
susceptible to expansion, settlement, subsidence or hydrocompaction, the report must
recommend corrective measures to prevent damage to any proposed structure. These
corrective measures are incorporated into the plans for the proposed structure.
                                                                                          31
Chapter 2                                       Thousand Oaks General Plan
Geology and Seismicity                           Safety Element 2014 Update
                       Figure 6: Expansive Soils
32
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                   Chapter 2
Safety Element 2014 Update                                    Geology and Seismicity
Ground Water/Seepage
The ground water basin beneath the City of Thousand Oaks closely corresponds with
the surface watershed basin of the Arroyo Conejo (French, 1980; Kennedy/Jenks,
1992). The ground water is unconfined and flows northward from the Santa Monica
Mountains, westward from the Simi Hills, and eastward from the western ridges of the
basin. Ground water exits the basin through base flow of the Arroyo Conejo. No
problems have been reported due to groundwater seepage from the main aquifers in
the floor of the Conejo Valley.
The 1996 Safety Element identified surfacing ground water problems in two locations
(Leighton and Associates, 1974). One location was at the intersection of Lynn Road and
Avenida De Las Flores. A second location was identified at the intersection of
Gainsborough Road and Shadow Lake Drive (east of Lynn Road). These are no longer
problem areas.
Surfacing groundwater problems, however, have occurred in two other areas shown on
Figure 7. Groundwater seepage in these areas affects building foundations, landscaping
and sidewalks.
Hazard Analysis
Areas with groundwater seepage problems are shown on Figure 7. Surfacing
groundwater in these areas creates wet soil and nuisance water that adversely affects
building foundations, landscaping, streets and sidewalks. Residents have installed
drains around their homes and the City has installed sidewalk interceptor drains to
alleviate problems in selected areas.
Summary
The potential for seepage problems should be addressed during geotechnical studies
and appropriately minimized or corrected, as necessary, during construction. The
groundwater seepage areas shown on Figure 7 were based on the February 10, 2005,
report “Geotechnical Evaluation of Shallow Groundwater, Kevin Street and Surrounding
Area, Thousand Oaks, California” (Prentice. L.E., 2005). Subsurface tests were not
performed to confirm that every property within the mapped areas is subject to
groundwater seepage or that properties outside of the mapped areas are not affected.
Therefore, the map does not meet disclosure requirements for real estate transactions
or for regulatory purposes.
                                                                                    33

Chapter 2                                         Thousand Oaks General Plan
Geology and Seismicity                             Safety Element 2014 Update
                     Figure 7: Groundwater Seepage Areas
34
 Chapter 3
Flooding
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                    Chapter 3
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                     Flooding
CHAPTER 3: FLOODING
Development within the Thousand Oaks Planning Area is primarily on the Conejo Valley
floor and on slopes less than 25% (Hawks and Associates, 1992). The watershed is
bound by the Santa Monica Mountains to the south and the Simi Hills on the north and
east. The major drainages in the Planning Area are shown on Figure 8. The Arroyo
Conejo is the main drainage feature through the City. This watercourse and the South
Branch tributary drain from the eastern and southwestern limits of the watershed,
northwesterly to the Santa Rosa Valley. Flow proceeds westerly to Conejo Creek and
then to Calleguas Creek and on to the Pacific Ocean. Major tributaries of the Arroyo
Conejo include Olsen Channel, North Fork Arroyo Conejo and Lang Creek.
Southeastern portions of the City, including the Westlake area, drain into Westlake Lake
and Malibu Creek in Los Angeles County via Lindero Creek, Schoolhouse Canyon and
Potrero Creek.
Certain areas of the Thousand Oaks Planning Area are subject to periodic inundation
from flooding which can result in destruction of property and improvements, loss of life,
health and safety hazards, and disruption of commerce and governmental services.
Encroachment into floodplains, such as artificial fills and structures, reduces the
capacity of the floodplain and increases the height of flood water upstream of the
encroachments. Floodplain management involves the balancing of economic gain
associated with land development within the floodplain against the increased flood
hazard.
A. Dam Inundation
Five dams in the Thousand Oaks Area have the potential to result in inundation (in the
event of a dam failure) to the City or in a serious disruption of water supply. These
include dams at Lake Sherwood and Lake Eleanor. Failure of any of these dams during
a catastrophic event such as an earthquake is considered possible, though unlikely.
Failure of Lake Sherwood Dam would cause significant flooding between Lake
Sherwood and Westlake Lake, and would cause the level of Westlake Lake to rise
several feet. Failure of Lake Eleanor Dam would impact the Westlake Boulevard area to
Westlake Lake.
B. Historic Flooding
Table 3 provides a listing of major non-coastal flood events that have occurred in
Ventura County over the previous 50 years.
                                                                                      35
Chapter 3                                                       Thousand Oaks General Plan
Flooding                                                          Safety Element 2014 Update
            Table 3: Major Flood Events in Ventura County
            Date                   Disaster Description
            01/13/95               Severe winter storms, flooding, mud/landslides
            03/95                  Severe winter storms, flooding, mud/landslides
            10/28/93               Fires, mudslides, flooding, soil erosion
            02/25/92               Severe winter storm
            02/09/83               Flood/winter storms
            02/09/83               Flood, severe storm
            02/21/80               Flood
            02/15/78               Severe storm
            01/26/69               Flood, storms
            12/7/65                Flood, severe storm
            Source: City of Thousand Oaks, Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (2004)
During the February 10-12, 1992 storms, heavy rainfall in Calleguas Creek Watershed
produced runoff in Conejo Creek which rose to bank full stage (Ventura County Public
Works Agency, 1986). Within the City of Thousand Oaks, a box culvert that crosses
under Erbes Road (Lang Ranch area) was unable to adequately convey the storm flow
(communication with County of Ventura, Watershed Protection District). This resulted in
flooding of the Conejo Recreation and Park District Offices, an area adjacent to the Old
Meadows Park, threatening some of the nearby homes. During this same event, a
clogged drain in the vicinity of Newbury Road and Ventu Park Road resulted in 4 to 5
feet of ponding and localized flooding.
During storms of early 1995, there was extreme high flow of Potrero Creek (between
Lake Sherwood and Westlake Lake). The high flows damaged a wing wall adjacent to a
bridge on Triunfo Canyon Road (personal communication - Curt Reithmayr, City of
Thousand Oaks Public Works Department). Floodwaters also washed away a section of
sewer trunk main and released raw sewage into the Arroyo Conejo (City of Thousand
Oaks Local Hazard Mitigation Plan: 2004).
36
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                      Chapter 3
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                       Flooding
                 Photo 5: Flooding on Newbury Road (1992); (Courtesy of “Conejo
                             Through the Lens” Thousand Oaks Library)
C. Flood Hazards
Flood hazard areas of the City of Thousand Oaks are subject to periodic inundation
which can result in destruction of property and improvements to the property, loss of life,
health and safety hazards, and disruption of commerce and governmental services.
Encroachment onto floodplains, such as artificial fills and structures, reduces the
capacity of the floodplain and increases the height of flood water upstream of the
obstructions. Floodplain management involves the balancing of economic gain
associated with land development within the floodplain against the increased flood
hazard.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) establishes base flood
elevations and inundation areas for 100-year and 500-year flood zones. The 100-year
flood zone is defined as the area that could be inundated by the flood which has a one
percent probability of occurring in any given year. The 500-year flood is defined as the
flood which has a 0.2 percent probability of occurring in any given year. Figure 8
illustrates areas of the City that could be inundated by the 100-year flood (FEMA, 2010).
A Master Plan of Drainage was prepared for and adopted by the City in 1974 (Koebig
and Koebig, Inc., 1974). The original study encompassed about 29,000 acres lying
entirely within the watershed of the Arroyo Conejo. To account for ensuing geographic
expansion of the City, an updated Master Plan of Drainage was prepared and adopted
by the City in 1992 (Hawks and Associates, 1992). The updated study (encompassing
                                                                                        37

Chapter 3                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Flooding                                                    Safety Element 2014 Update
about 45,000 acres) expanded easterly toward the Ventura-Los Angeles County line,
southerly to include portions of Westlake within the City limits, and northerly to
Moorpark Road and Read Road. The updated study proposed a planned program of
drainage facilities required to provide a reasonable degree of protection from flooding
with respect to existing anticipated land uses, including no inundation of building pads in
a 100-year storm and underground system carrying capacity for a 10-year storm. In
2007, another updated Storm Drain System Master Plan was adopted by the City that
incorporated detailed infrastructure data into a geographic information system (GIS) and
identified specific deficient drain reaches. Phase 2 of the 2007 Master Plan remains
unfunded to date, and will identify and prioritize recommended drainage improvement
projects to reduce or eliminate city-wide flood hazards.
Both the Master Plan of Drainage and the update to the Master Plan of Drainage
(Koebig and Koebig, Inc., 1974 and Hawks and Associates, 1992) identified citywide
improvements necessary to alleviate existing and future problems with flooding. One of
the more prominent "problem areas" identified was the Lang Creek and proposed
development upstream at Lang Ranch. Lang Creek has a history of flooding problems,
notably at the EI Monte and Las Flores drains, and at the Erbes Road undercrossing
(Michael Brandman Associates, 1994). Flood waters have reportedly backed up onto
the roadway and adjacent residential properties at the latter location as a result of
deficient drainage capacity. A master environmental impact report prepared for the Lang
Ranch development in 1988 concluded that the existing downstream flood control
channels had inadequate hydraulic capacity, and that continued development would
exacerbate the problem. Under a federal judgment, the developers of Lang Ranch
funded a stormwater retention and debris basin in the lower portion of Oakbrook
Community Park between Erbes Road and Westlake Boulevard. The project was
managed by the Ventura County Watershed Protection District and funded through the
City’s Community Facilities District 88-1.
A follow-up study to the Master Plan of Drainage indicated that there are some
deficiencies in the existing flood control system (Clearpoint Engineering, 1994). The
Erbes Road Drain, Thousand Oaks North Drain and Arroyo Conejo Red Line Drainage
facilities between Lynn Road and Westlake Boulevard comprise the backbone drainage
system for the Thousand Oaks area, totaling approximately 35,000 feet in length (see
Figure 8). These facilities were constructed during the period of 1966 to 1988, with the
majority of the facilities constructed before 1976. Portions of these facilities have been
identified as being deficient in carrying capacity for a 10-year storm. In 2011, the
Ventura County Watershed Protection District commissioned a flood damage
assessment by CDM-Smith for the Upper Calleguas Creek Watershed. The study area
included the Arroyo Conejo, South Branch of the Arroyo Conejo and Lang Creek sub-
watersheds in Thousand Oaks. It provided estimates of flood inundation and flood
damage due to 100‐, 50‐, 25‐, and 10‐year flood events. The study also identified a
range of alternatives for mitigating the flood hazard. The alternatives will need to be
studied further to ensure that they are technically and economically feasible (CDM
Smith, 2012).
38

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                 Chapter 3
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                                  Flooding
        Photo 6: Casitas Springs CA, January 15, 2005; Residents attempt to salvage
        belongings and clean up mud and water remaining in homes where winter storms caused
        flooding that damaged private property and roads. (Photo by John Shea/ FEMA News Photo)
D. Flood Control and Prevention
Flood hazards may be alleviated through a variety of measures, some corrective and
some preventive. Corrective measures include warning and relief programs, flood-
proofing of existing structures, and the construction of flood control works. Preventive
measures include public acquisition of flood plain lands, public information programs,
development policies and regulations.
Protecting life and property from flood damage is primarily the responsibility of the
Ventura County Watershed Protection District. The District has the authority to maintain
and construct flood control facilities on all major channels. The network of tributary
storm drain trunks and laterals that collect and convey surface water from the urban
areas to the major channels is the responsibility of the City.
On the Federal level, the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP),
which is administered by the Federal Insurance Administration (a component of the
Federal Emergency Management Agency), require that communities adopt land use
restrictions for the 100-year flood plain in order to qualify for Federally-subsidized flood
insurance. The 100-year floodplain is shown on Figure 8. The program requires that
residential structures be elevated above the level of the l00-year flood and that other
types of structures be flood-proofed. The NFIP was established by Congress with the
passage of the National flood Insurance Act of 1968. The NFIP was broadened and
modified with the passage of the Flood Disaster Protection Act of 1973 and other
legislative measures. Section 4-7.05 of the Municipal Code prohibits encroachments,
                                                                                                  39
Chapter 3                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Flooding                                                       Safety Element 2014 Update
including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development
unless certification by a registered professional or architect is provided demonstrating
that encroachments shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence
of the 100-year flood.
To provide for early flood warning, the Ventura County Watershed Protection District
has been operating an automated flood warning system since 1979. The system is
known as “ALERT” (Automated Local Evaluation in Real Time) and was developed by
the National Weather Service in Sacramento, California. The system is comprised of
self-reporting rain gages and stream gages that collect data and transmit signals to a
flood warning center computer system located in the County Government Center
Administration Building in Ventura. Operators of the system compare rainfall forecasts
with the runoff forecasts from the hydrologic models and notify proper authorities in
threatened areas to initiate evacuation warnings as appropriate. In the Thousand Oaks
area, self reporting stations are located at Lang Ranch (wind, precipitation, humidity,
and temperature) and at Conejo Creek above Highway 101 (stream level and
precipitation).
E. Potential Inundation Due to Dam Failure
The State of California has been responsible for supervising dams since August 14, 1929
for the purpose of safeguarding life and protecting property (California Department of
Resources, 1995). The legislation was enacted following the failure of St. Francis Dam in
March 1928. In 1965, legislation was revised to include off stream storage reservoirs as
result of the failure of Baldwin Hills Reservoir in December of 1963. In March 1973, Senate
Bill 896 was adopted by the State of California amending the Government Code. This law
required dam owners, under the direction of the Office of Emergency Services, to show the
possible inundation below their dam in the event of a failure.
Lake Sherwood and Lake Eleanor have the potential to result in inundation (in the event
of a dam failure) to the City or in a serious disruption of water supply. General
information for each of these dams is discussed below and is summarized in Table 4.
Areas of dam inundation (California Department of Water Resources, 1974, 1976a, and
1976b) are depicted on Figure 9. Following is a brief description of each dam:
Lake Sherwood Dam is a constant radius concrete arch dam operated by Lake Sherwood
Ranch (Jensen Engineering, 1975). Lake Sherwood Dam is one of the oldest concrete
dams in the State, constructed in 1902. The reservoir has a drainage area of 16.1 square
miles. Normal operation is at 100% capacity. Storm inflows are not impounded, and are
passed over the main arch dam to Potrero Valley Creek. Under a worst-case scenario,
Lake Sherwood Reservoir could fail by sudden removal of the concrete arch dam, resulting
in a very high discharge in a short period of time. The area impacted in the event of a failure
would be the Westlake area of the City of Thousand Oaks.
Banning Dam (Lake Eleanor) is a constant radius arch dam operated by the Conejo
Open Space Conservation Agency. The reservoir has a relatively small capacity of 128
acre-feet, although this capacity has been diminished with siltation (about 80% infilling).
The area impacted in the event of a failure would be the Westlake Boulevard area to
Westlake Lake.
40

Thousand Oaks General Plan                        Chapter 3
Safety Element 2014 Update                         Flooding
                           Figure 8 : Flood Zones
                                                         41
Chapter 3                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Flooding                                                       Safety Element 2014 Update
               Photo 7: Aerial view of Westlake Lake; (Courtesy of city-data.com)
Hazard Analysis
Failure of any of the above referenced dams during a catastrophic event, such as an
earthquake, is considered possible but unlikely. According to the California Department
of Water Resources (DWR), Division of Safety of Dams (letter dated September 28,
1995), Lake Sherwood Dam and Westlake Reservoir Dam are believed to be stable
under seismic loading from a maximum credible earthquake of Magnitude 7.0 occurring
on the Malibu Coast Fault, located about seven miles from these structures. According
to the DWR, Wood Ranch Dam is believed to be stable under seismic loading from a
maximum credible earthquake of Magnitude 7.0 occurring on the Santa Rosa-Simi Fault
located two miles from the dam.
42
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                           Chapter 3
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                            Flooding
Table 4: Dams in the Thousand Oaks Area
                                                                           Storage
                                      Year                                 Capacity    Height
 Name                                Built   Type of Dam                    (Ac-ft)    (Feet)
 Lake Eleanor (Banning Dam)          1889    Concrete constant radius arch       104      37
 Lake Sherwood                       1904    Concrete constant radius arch     2,600      45
 Wood Ranch (Lake Bard)              1965    Earth embankment                 11,000     146
 Potrero Dam (Westlake Lake)         1967    Concrete gravity                    791      40
 Westlake (Las Virgenes)             1972    Earth embankment                  9,200     158
 Reservoir
Dept. of Water Resources, Division of Safety of Dams, 2012
Failure of the dams associated with Westlake, Bard Reservoir and Las Virgenes
Reservoir would result in flows away from the City of Thousand Oaks and would not be
expected to inundate the City’s Planning Area.
Failure of Lake Sherwood Dam would cause significant flooding between the dam and
Westlake Lake, and would cause the level of the lake to rise. Failure of the dam would
potentially expand the perimeter of the lake by about 1,000 feet (City of Thousand
Oaks, Emergency Operations Plan). Water levels could rise by 16 feet in the event of a
sudden and total failure.
Failure of Banning (Lake Eleanor) Dam would impact the Westlake Boulevard area to
Westlake Lake. A critical facility located in the inundation path of Lake Sherwood Dam
is Westlake Elementary School, which is located at Westlake Boulevard and Potrero
Road.
Summary
Failure of Lake Sherwood Dam, Westlake Reservoir Dam, or Lake Eleanor Dam could
have significant inundation impact on the Westlake area of Thousand Oaks. One of the
best criteria for evaluating dam/reservoir safety and inundation risk is compliance with
State Standards. Annual safety inspections are conducted by the State. Operational and
maintenance recommendations must be adhered to by the dam owner in order to
remain in compliance with State safety standards. Emergency response actions
associated with a dam failure are specified in the City’s 2008 Emergency Operations
Plan.
                                                                                             43

Chapter 3                            Thousand Oaks General Plan
Flooding                              Safety Element 2014 Update
          Figure 9: Dam Inundation Areas
44
     Chapter 4
Fire Hazards
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 4
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                    Fire Hazards
CHAPTER 4: FIRE HAZARDS
The City of Thousand Oaks experiences fires from a number of sources. These include
wildland, structural, vehicle, refuse, and human-generated incidents. Wildland fires are
a result of a combination of three primary factors: vegetation, climate, and people. The
native plant communities of greatest concern include the coastal sage scrub and
chaparral that cover the natural hillside areas. These plant communities have evolved to
incorporate burning into their ecological cycle. Mediterranean climate characterized by
hot dry summers and hot dry winds in the fall turn this vegetation into a major source of
fire fuel. These fuel sources are most commonly ignited by man, either directly through
careless action or arson, or indirectly through accidents.
Fire prevention and suppression services are provided within the Thousand Oaks
Planning Area by the Ventura County Fire Protection District. The Fire Protection
District has instituted a number of programs to minimize the potential for hazards
including fire safety and fire prevention training, site inspections, and urban/wildland
interface hazard mitigation programs.
A. Urban Fire Hazards
Fire Prevention and Suppression
Fire prevention and suppression services are provided to the City of Thousand Oaks by
the Ventura County Fire Protection District. The Fire Protection District is responsible for
enforcing the following:
       California Health and Safety Code, Division 12, Part 2. 7 (Fire District Law) and
        Part 5 (Abatement of Hazardous Weeds and Rubbish).
       Ventura County Fire Protection District Ordinance. (Adopting the California Fire
        Code and portions of the International Fire Code).
The District has a number of mutual aid agreements with other fire services agencies
within Ventura and Los Angeles Counties. If the resources of these agencies are
depleted, assistance can also be obtained through various state and federal agencies
including the Office of Emergency Services, the Department of Forestry and Fire
Protection (Cal Fire), the State Fire Marshal, the U.S. Forest Service, the National Park
Service and Bureau of Land Management, and the Department of Defense. Urban fire
hazard abatement is discussed in this section and wildland fire hazard abatement is
discussed in the following section.
The District has a goal of responding to emergencies within 5 minutes. The 5-minute
response time includes 1 minute to dress into protective gear and 4-minutes to drive to
the incident. This is consistent with the National Fire Protection Association’s response
time standard of 4 minutes (2010 edition of NFPA 1710) for the initial arriving company.
The initial response time standard described in Sec. 5.2.4.1.1 of NFPA 1710 reads as
follows: “The fire department’s fire suppression resources shall be deployed to provide
for the arrival of an engine company within a 240-second travel time to 90 percent of the
incidents as established in Chapter 4.”
                                                                                         45

Chapter 4                                                        Thousand Oaks General Plan
Fire Hazards                                                      Safety Element 2014 Update
The Fire Department responded to 9,633 incidents in the City of Thousand Oaks
Service Area in 2011 as shown in Table 5. The number of calls for service increased
from 8,590 in 2008.The service area includes unincorporated areas in the vicinity of
Thousand Oaks. The vast majority of calls for service are for medical emergencies.
                     Photo 8: Structure Fire on Thousand Oaks Boulevard;
                          (Courtesy Ventura County Fire Protection District)
B. Existing and Proposed Fire Stations
The Ventura County Fire Protection District currently operates 32 fire stations
throughout Ventura County. Eight stations serve the Conejo Valley (Battalion 3). The
Valley is well served by fire stations, with virtually all developed areas within two miles
of a station. Table 6 provides a summary of the local fire stations capabilities (personnel
and equipment). In addition, depending on the nature of the emergency, four other
stations may be called into service for the Thousand Oaks area. These include two
stations north of the City of Thousand Oaks (Station 40-Mountain Meadows in Moorpark
and Station 44 Wood Ranch in Simi Valley) and two stations west of the City (Station 52-
Mission Oaks and Station 54 Camarillo, both in Camarillo). Additionally, in the event of a
very large incident, all available equipment and manpower can be called into the Conejo
Valley 24 hours a day.
46
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                                 Chapter 4
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                              Fire Hazards
                     Table 5: Incident Activity for Thousand Oaks
                     Service Area (2011)
                     Fire/Incidents                     Number of Incidents
                     Fires                                       281
                     Emergency Medical                         6,918
                     Rescue                                      674
                     Public Service                              876
                     Alarms                                      711
                     Hazardous Materials                         173
                     Other                                         0
                     Total Incidents                           9,633
                     Source: Ventura County Fire Protection District Calls for
                     Service Report March 2, 2012
There are plans to relocate Fire Station No. 35 to a site on Mitchell Road. One
additional station is proposed for the South Ranch area. However, there is presently no
schedule for its construction.
Station 50 on Las Posas Road in Camarillo is the designated hazardous materials
response station (2012). Personnel assigned to this station are specifically trained to
respond to hazardous materials incidents. The station is equipped with a trailer with a
workstation, a small laboratory, protective suits and specialized tools.
Table 6: Fire Station Capabilities
 Station Year Built Name/Location                         Personnel Equipment
   30        1974      Civic Center                           8       engine, ladder truck,
                       325 W. Hillcrest Dr                            command vehicle
   31        1977      Westlake                               5       engine and a paramedic
                       151 Duesenberg Dr                              truck
   32        1972      Potrero                                3       medic/engine, brush engine,
                       830 S. Reino Rd                                patrol truck
   33        1949      Lake Sherwood                          3       engine, reserve engine, utility
                       25 Lake Sherwood Dr                            pickup
   34        1961      Arboles                                3       medic/engine, reserve
                       555 Avenida de Los Arboles                     engine, reserve paramedic
                                                                      truck
   35        1962      Newbury Park                           3       engine, reserve engine
                       2500 W. Hillcrest Dr
                       (Replacement station planned at
                       751 Mitchell Road, Newbury Park)
   36        1985      Oak Park                               3       medic/engine, reserve
                       855 N. Deerhill Rd                             engine, brush engine
   37        2001      North Ranch                            3       engine, light and air supply
                       2010 Upper Ranch Rd                            truck, utility van
Source: Ventura County Fire Protection District website
                                                                                                   47
Chapter 4                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Fire Hazards                                                 Safety Element 2014 Update
Prior to construction of new developments, applicants must submit plans to the Ventura
County Fire Department for the approval of the location of fire hydrants. The Fire
Department should be contacted in advance of submitting these plans to evaluate hydrant
locations and required fire flow for the specific development. In addition, all new single
family homes must be fitted with an automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with the
Ventura County Fire Protection District Ordinance.
To help ensure adequate fire flow, the City and other water purveyors maintain reservoir
storage for fire flow, have redundant reservoirs where possible and have developed
looping systems.
Peak Water Requirements
Peak load water supply standards ensure that sufficient water flow is available to fight
fires. The minimum fire flow required is determined by the type of building construction,
proximity to other structures, fire walls, and fire protection devices as specified by the
Ventura County Fire Protection District Ordinance. New residences, for example, are
generally required to have fire flows of 1,000 gallons per minute. Exceptions are older
in-fill industrial and commercial uses which are typically required to have higher fire
flows. Applicants for new development projects in the City must verify that the water
purveyor can provide the required volume at the project.
Minimum Road Widths and Clearances around Structures
Per City of Thousand Oaks municipal code requirements (9-3.1015 and 9-3.1016) roads
shall be installed or improved to the standards specified in the City of Thousand Oaks
Road Standards and construction specifications in effect at the time of construction
(Ord. 744-NS. eff April 17, 1980). The improvement shall not begin until the City
Engineer has approved the improvement plans or the proposed construction.
The Ventura County Fire Protection District, Fire Prevention Division has established
Standard Planning Conditions pertaining to road widths and clearances for development
projects -- including parcel maps, tracts (single and duplex dwelling units) apartments
and condominiums, and commercial and industrial projects. Standard Planning
Conditions include those pertaining to street widths; length, width, and percent grade of
private access roads; number and type of turnaround areas and means of ingress and
egress; minimum vertical clearances; and percent grade.
Section 9-4.3106 of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code specifies minimum road widths
in the HPD (Hillside Planned Development) zone which requires less width than any
other residential zone. In the HPD zone, each new street shall have a right-of-way,
roadway, and median widths conforming to the specified standards.
C. Wildfires
Causes and Origins of Brush Fires
Brush fire problems can be traced to three factors: vegetation, climate, and people
(Leighton and Associates, 1974). The major types of vegetation found in the Thousand
48
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                     Chapter 4
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                  Fire Hazards
Oaks area (coastal sage scrub and chaparral, etc.) provide a natural source of fire fuel.
These vegetative associations contain many species of plants considered pyrophytic,
plants which need the heat of the fire to germinate their seeds for reproduction. When
these vegetation systems are burned over by a brush fire, the existing ground cover is
destroyed, but in many cases the plant association survives and is regenerated by this
means of natural selection.
The climate of the region is one of the critical factors influencing the occurrence and
severity of our brush fires. The hot dry summers leave the area hillsides susceptible to a
major fire. During the early fall, periods of "Santa Ana" winds occur, caused by a local
weather phenomenon of a low pressure system developing off the coast while a high
pressure system settles over the inland desert areas. The result is the hot dry winds
which pour over the mountain areas into the Conejo Valley and other southern
California subregions, aggravating the potential fire threat in the high brush areas,
already dried out by the summer heat. Nearly 90 percent of the large southern California
fires documented over the years have occurred between September and December -
during the Santa Ana season (Crosby, 1992).
Wildland fires generate burning embers that are blown ahead of the main fire. These
embers can spread a fire and catch buildings on fire when they encounter combustible
materials.
Most wildland fires are ignited by man, through arson or careless action, or through
accidents such as sparks from engine exhaust and falling power lines. Natural causes
are now relatively minor causes of brush fires.
Historic Brush Fires
Table 7 provides a summary of brush fires which have occurred in or immediately
adjacent to the City of Thousand Oaks area since 1952. The Ranch Fire consumed over
58,000 acres in 2007 and the Day Fire destroyed more than 162,000 acres in 2006.
Hazard Analysis
The principal effects of brush fires include loss of vegetative ground cover, increased
erosion, loss of man-made improvements, and loss of life (Leighton and Associates, 1974).
Loss of the vegetative ground cover results in damage to valuable recreational and
open space areas. Many of the plant and animal associations in the natural
communities have adapted themselves to a fire-climax cycle, and will naturally generate
themselves through fire. Hence, they themselves may not be permanently impacted.
Loss of vegetative cover results in secondary erosional impacts, especially in areas that
are sloped. When a slope is burned over by a fire of intense heat, a chemical reaction in
the soil takes place which makes it less porous. As the rains of winter come, rain water
runs off and causes mudslides arid mudflows. Properties not affected directly by the fire
may be damaged or destroyed by the effects of increased runoff due to brush fire.
                                                                                        49
Chapter 4                                                      Thousand Oaks General Plan
Fire Hazards                                                    Safety Element 2014 Update
               Table 7: Brush Fires Near Thousand Oaks (1952-2013)
                         Name                Date Started      Acres Burned
               Springs                      5/2013                        24,251
               Hampshire                    9/2010                            25
               Ranch (Ventura & LA Co.) 10/2007                           58,401
               Topanga                      09/2005                       24,175
               Wendy                        8/24/2004                        120
               Westlake                     6/29/2001                        278
               North Ranch                  8/14/1998                        108
               Autumn                       7/22/1997                         47
               Green Meadow                 10/26/1993                    38,152
               Academy                      7/20/1992                         35
               Westlake                     10/30/1991                       170
               Sapra                        7/5/1990                         119
               Sycamore                     4/10/1988                        367
               Sherwood                     6/30/1985                      3,830
               Hall                         10/8/1982                      2,627
               Hill Canyon                  10/28/1980                     8,700
               Conejo Grade                 11/30/1979                       100
               Arroyo                       12/16/1976                       200
               Decker                       7/4/1976                         146
               Potrero Road                 6/23/1976                         80
               Los Robles                   6/22/1976                      2,000
               Guadalasca                   1/17/1976                         84
               Potrero                      12/28/1975                     2,773
               Conejo                       11/11/1975                       200
               Santa Rosa                   9/26/1973                        437
               Potrero                      9/26/1973                     12,800
               Camarillo Grove              9/18/1971                        440
               Conejo Grade                 9/22/1968                        873
               Parker                       10/15/1967                    25,000
               Santa Rosa                   12/29/1958                       910
               Conejo Grade                 6/18/1957                      1,000
               Silverwood                   12/28/1956                    26,170
               Ventu Park                   11/7/1955                     13,840
               Source: Ventura County Fire Protection District
The loss of man-made improvements in the brush covered areas constitute most of the
dollar loss from fires. Losses along this line include homes, barns and sheds, utility lines
and facilities. The loss of valuable watershed area combined with the actual
suppression costs also are major determinants of the total costs of any fire. The
potential for loss of life is the most dangerous aspect of brush fires. Occasionally,
50
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 4
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                   Fire Hazards
trapped residents are injured or killed when there is no warning of the impending
disaster, or when they simply refuse to evacuate their homes in the face of the fire.
Unfortunately, the largest loss of life occurs to the professional fire fighters who are
killed while fighting brush fires, which have a highly unpredictable nature, or in other
accidents during the support operations necessary to suppress the fire.
As the population of California cities continue to grow, more and more people are
encroaching on what firefighters call the urban/wildland interface -- the perimeter of
urban areas adjacent to wildlands. According to California Department of Forestry and
Fire Protection (Cal Fire) statistics, since 1980, more than 5,000 structures have been
damaged in wildland fires -- triple the amount of damage that occurred in the previous
15 year period. Some of the more recent devastating examples of this phenomenon
include:
Santa Barbara: Painted Cave Fire of June 1990 which swept across almost 5,000
acres of coastal hillsides, destroying more than 600 houses.
Oakland/Berkeley: 1991 Fire covering over 1,600 acres, decimated entire
neighborhoods, killing 25 people, destroying 2,900 homes, and leaving more than $1.5
billion in property damage.
Malibu to Laguna Beach: A series of fires in the fall of 1993 which killed three people
and destroyed over 1,000 homes.
A number of residential areas in Thousand Oaks which are located at the perimeter
adjacent to large expanses of open space have been threatened by wildland fires in the
past, including:
        The Ventu Park area adjacent to steep hillside areas covered with heavy
         chaparral brush,
        Residential areas adjacent to densely-vegetated steep canyons of the Arroyo
         Conejo system,
        Other developments located adjacent to large expanses of brush and grassland.
         (City of Thousand Oaks, Emergency Operations Plan).
Figure 10 is a map of very high wildfire hazard areas as determined by Cal Fire. The
level of hazard is based largely on the type of ground cover and slope. It is important to
maintain fire protection standards in these areas, such as brush clearance and building
standards.
Fire Hazard Reduction
Experienced firefighters believe they can no longer protect homes and lives as well as
they did in the past with fuel loading causing such catastrophic fires (Gilmer, undated); It
is up to the homeowners living on the urban/wildland interface to establish defensible
space. Defensible space describes a band of managed vegetation around a home
which stops the movement of fire by denying fuel. The Fire Department does not
                                                                                        51

Chapter 4                                                    Thousand Oaks General Plan
Fire Hazards                                                  Safety Element 2014 Update
recommend indiscriminate clearing of native chaparral and other vegetation. Natural
vegetation plays an important role in erosion control. The goal is to obtain a balance
between fire hazard reduction and erosion control. Defensible space also provides a
place where fire fighters can do their jobs without unnecessary risk to themselves.
According to Cal Fire, as many as 80 percent of the homes lost to wildfires in the past
could have been saved if the owners had followed a few simple fire safe practices.
Some of these fire safe practices include the following:
Use fire resistant landscaping. Fire resistant plants are those with low growth habit
(generally less than 18 inches in height), low fuel volume, and high moisture content.
Such plants offer far less fuel than upright woody shrubs.
Irrigate and maintain landscaping. A fire resistant plant will lose this quality if allowed to
dry out. Maintenance insures the effectiveness of the fire resistant landscape by
retaining proper spacing between plants and removing dead/dry vegetation.
Have a fire-retardant roof. Wood shake roofs provide fuel for an advancing fire. Class A
roofs provide the most protection. These include: clay tile, concrete tile, fibrous cement
shake, metal tile, and fiberglass composition shingles.
In response to the disastrous Oakland Hills Fire of 1991, the Bates Bill (AB 337) was
passed in 1992. The Bates Bill is a State measure that requires the California Department
of Forestry and Fire Protection (Cal Fire) to identify “Very High Fire Hazard Severity
Zones” with consistent statewide criteria. Figure 10 depicts Very High Fire Hazard
Severity Zones for the Thousand Oaks Planning Area based on computer modeling by
CalFire (Sources: Ventura County Fire Hazard Severity Zones in SRA, adopted
November 7, 2007; and Thousand Oaks Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones in LRA,
as recommended by CalFire, dated October 6, 2010).
Buildings within Very High Fire Hazard Severity Zones are required to maintain
defensible space (vegetation clearance and management) around the perimeter of the
buildings. The California Building Code, Chapter 7A requires special fire-resistive
construction in these areas. It requires building products and construction methods for
ignition-resistant roofing, attic vents, eaves, decks and exterior siding, doors and
windows. All of these measures reduce the chance that a wildland fire will ignite
buildings directly or through intrusion by burning embers.
The Ventura County Fire Protection District has developed a Fire Hazard Reduction
Program with the goal of preventing the loss of life and property due to uncontrolled
wildfire in the urban/wildland interface through the cooperation of the property owners of
Ventura County (Ventura County Fire Protection District, undated). The stated
objectives of the Fire Hazard Reduction Program are to:
       Reduce significantly the incidence of destructive fires in the urban/wildland
        interface areas, and the resulting loss of life and property.
       Provide a defensive perimeter around urbanized areas of the Fire District.
52

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 4
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                    Fire Hazards
       Provide for the protection of structures in the urban/wildland interface by
        establishing and maintaining a 100-foot defensible perimeter around each
        structure.
       Provide for the removal of annual fuels within the defensive perimeter.
       Provide any fire suppression resource from any agency the opportunity to
        successfully protect structures and other valuable properties during a wildfire
        threat.
       Protect the watershed fire areas from exposure to structure fires in the
        urban/wildland interface areas.
The Fire Hazard Reduction Program strives to establish defensive barriers in the
urban/wildland interface in preparation for the potential for wildfire. Native vegetation is
at its peak growth in the spring and fall seasons. An inspection program has been
developed that targets hazard reduction in the spring and fall months. Within the 100-
foot defensible perimeter, all brush, flammable vegetation, or combustible growth
identified as a fire hazard by an inspecting officer is required to be mowed or cut. All
cuttings from shrubs are required to be removed from the property. Single specimens of
trees, ornamental shrubbery or ground covers are permissible provided that they do not
form a means of rapidly transmitting fire from the native growth to any structure. Other
specific clearance requirements pertain to roof surfaces, chimneys, propane tanks,
access roads, and vacant parcels and are specified within the Fire Hazard Reduction
Program guidelines (Ventura County Fire Protection District, undated).
If the Fire Department conducts an inspection of a property and determines fire hazard
reduction is necessary, a "Notice to Abate Fire Hazard" is generated and mailed to the
property owner. If the property owner fails to comply with the notice, the Fire
Department retains a contractor to remove the hazardous vegetation from the property
and places a tax lien assessment for the costs involved on the property owner's tax bill.
                                                                                         53

Chapter 4                                     Thousand Oaks General Plan
Fire Hazards                                   Safety Element 2014 Update
             Figure 10: Very High Fire Severity Zone
54
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 4
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                    Fire Hazards
The best defense against disastrous fires affecting the urban/wildland interface is a
working partnership between property owners, their neighbors, and the Ventura County
Fire Protection District. More detailed information pertaining to defensible space
strategies and other fire hazard reduction approaches can be obtained from the Ventura
County Fire Protection District.
The Ventura County Fire Protection District has developed a five year vegetation
management plan with the goal of identifying and treating high fire hazard and risk
areas that are found to constitute a threat to high value property. Treatment to remove
and manage the hazardous accumulations of wildland vegetation is accomplished using
prescribed burning and other means. Burning projects identified in the plan consider
and protect the values of air quality, historical artifacts, endangered plants and species.
The plan is reviewed and updated every three years.
The purpose of prescribed burning is:
       To provide a defense against wildfire destroying private property where the Fire
        Hazard Reduction Program cannot stand alone.
       To enhance rangeland productivity.
       To increase useful water yield.
       To protect and/or improve the wildland - carrying capacity and habitat diversity
        for wildfire.
Prescribed burning is the application of fire to wildland fuels when conditions such as
weather, fuels and topography permit the specific objective to be accomplished safely.
Prescribed burning is the most economical and environmentally sound approach to
managing large blocks of fuel.
The Ventura County Fire Protection District approved a Fire Management Plan in July of
2005. The Fire Management Plan includes an assessment of wildland protection
services and locations where there is a high risk of damaging wildfires. It recommended
fuel reduction treatments in certain locations around the County to reduce the potential
for fire damage. With respect to Thousand Oaks, the Fire Management Plan proposed
fuel reduction treatments around the Lynnmere community in the vicinity of Wildwood
Park.
                                                                                        55

Chapter 4                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Fire Hazards                                Safety Element 2014 Update
             This page intentionally left blank.
56
  Chapter 5
Hazardous
 Materials
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 5
Safety Element 2014 Update                                             Hazardous Materials
CHAPTER 5: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Hazardous materials are substances that are potentially harmful to human health or the
environment. Hazardous materials can be liquids, solids, or contained gases. They
include products and waste related to industrial, commercial and household uses, such
as fuels, cleaning fluids and pesticides. Thousands of Ventura County businesses use
or store hazardous materials, including pesticides, acids, caustics solvents, and heavy
metals. These businesses include, but are not limited to, gasoline stations, automotive
repair facilities, dry cleaners and a variety of industrial businesses.
More than 60,000 chemicals are produced in the United States. Over 11,000 of these
chemicals are used for commercial purposes. Within the County of Ventura, over 5,000
manufacturing and service industries use or store hazardous materials, including
pesticides, acids, caustics, solvents, and heavy metals (Ventura County, 1989).
Because of the widespread use of hazardous materials in our communities, minor and
major hazardous materials spills and incidents occur. Most of these incidents are
related to the increasing transport of chemicals over roadways or through industrial
accidents. U.S. Highway 101 and State Route 23 are major transportation corridors
through the Conejo Valley. The California Highway Patrol estimates that about 105
trucks carrying hazardous materials or waste travel northbound through Thousand Oaks
on a given day (number based on data obtained from inspection station at the top of the
Conejo Grade). Accounting for southbound traffic and traffic on S.R. 23, the total
number of trucks passing through the City is likely 200 or more.
In an effort to reduce impacts associated with a hazardous material Incident, Ventura
County has developed a Hazardous Materials Emergency Response Plan. The goal of
the plan is to protect life, property, and the environment from the effects of a hazardous
material release to air, land or water or a hazardous material fire. Procedures to be
used in the event of an incident and specific agency responsibilities are identified within
the plan. The Plan is activated by the designated Incident Commander at the scene.
Depending on the nature of the incident, this could be either the appropriate law
enforcement authority (Ventura County Sheriff’s Department or California Highway
Patrol) or the Ventura County Fire Department.
Because of the widespread use of hazardous materials in our communities, hazardous
materials spills and incidents occur. Most of these incidents are related to the transport
of chemicals over roadways (such as U. S. Highway 101 and State Route 23) or
through industrial accidents. The Ventura County Environmental Health Division is the
Certified Unified Program Agency that provides regulatory oversight over hazardous
materials and hazardous waste programs in Thousand Oaks, unincorporated areas as
well as other cities in Ventura County. The following programs are operated by the
Environmental Health Division:
       Hazardous Materials Inventory and Business Plan
       Hazardous Waste Generator
       Onsite Hazardous Waste Treatment
       Underground Storage Tank
       Above-ground Storage Tank Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasure
       California Accidental Release Prevention
                                                                                        57

Chapter 5                                                       Thousand Oaks General Plan
Hazardous Materials                                              Safety Element 2014 Update
Every business that handles hazardous materials above certain thresholds must file a
Hazardous Materials Business Plan and Emergency Response/Contingency Plan with
the Ventura County Environmental Health Division. The Environmental Health Division
provides this information to the Ventura County Fire Protection District for its use in
responding to emergencies at these businesses.
                    Photo 9: Hazardous materials incident on Highway 118;
                         (Courtesy Ventura County Fire Protection District)
The County Hazardous Materials Emergency Response Plan is supplemented by
individual Business Plans for businesses/facilities that store or handle hazardous
materials and wastes. Under Chapter 6.95, Section 25503 of the California Health and
Safety Code, Business Plans are required from California businesses that handle a
hazardous material in quantities equal to or greater than the following:
      55 gallons of a liquid,
      500 pounds of a solid,
      200 cubic feet of a compressed gas, or
      extremely hazardous substances above Federal threshold reporting quantities.
As part of the Business Plan, emergency response plans and procedures must be
developed and training sessions must be provided to employees. Businesses are
periodically inspected by local administering agencies (Ventura County Environmental
Health Services Division) to ensure that handling, storage, and waste disposal practices
conform with appropriate laws and regulations.
58

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 5
Safety Element 2014 Update                                           Hazardous Materials
According to the Ventura County Environmental Health Division, in 2012 there were
approximately 296 businesses in the City of Thousand Oaks using and/or storing
hazardous materials. These businesses include gasoline stations, automotive repair
facilities, dry cleaners, and miscellaneous commercial and industrial facilities. Industrial
use of hazardous materials is centered in the Newbury Park industrial area (Rancho
Conejo Industrial Park) north of Highway 101. Many of the commercial businesses that
store or use hazardous materials are located on Thousand Oaks Boulevard or Moorpark
Road. Specific information regarding the location of businesses and types and
quantities of hazardous substances used or stored can be obtained through the County
of Ventura Division of Environmental Health.
Hazardous waste refers to discarded materials that can potentially threaten human
health or the environment. Planning for facilities for handling and disposing of
hazardous waste is addressed in a separate element of the General Plan.
State Assembly Bill 2948 (Tanner 1986) mandates that each local government have a
hazardous waste management plan for dealing with hazardous waste generated within
the community. In 1986, the County Board of Supervisors adopted the Ventura County
Hazardous Waste/Materials Management Plan (CHWMP). It identifies sources of
hazardous waste, transportation routes needed to remove the waste and areas for
potential treatment and disposal. On July 10, 1990, the City of Thousand Oaks adopted
the Policy and Implementation Document of the CHWMP as a separate element of the
Thousand Oaks General Plan.
Pipelines
A 10-inch diameter crude oil pipeline traverses the northeastern portion of the City.
Crude oil pipelines are typically buried and are equipped with emergency shut off
valves. This pipeline could potentially be damaged in an earthquake. If oil should leak
from the damaged pipeline, there could be environmental contamination or a fire if the
leaking material were ignited.
Hazard Analysis
The seriousness of a hazardous material incident is dependent on a number of factors
including the type and quantity of material involved, the proximity to populated areas,
the time of day, weather conditions and physical state of material (i.e., solid, liquid,
vapor or gas). The greater the number of people exposed to the hazardous material, the
greater the potential for significant impact. Because of their dispersion characteristics,
vapors and gases tend to involve greater hazards. Under a worst case scenario, an
incident could result in fatalities and injuries, destruction of private and public
improvements, and contamination of the environment.
Although a hazardous materials release could occur anywhere within the City of
Thousand Oaks, certain areas are at greater risk. These include the following:
        U.S. Highway 101 and State Route 23 are major transportation corridors through
         the Conejo Valley. A hazardous material spill involving transportation would most
         likely occur along one of these highways.
                                                                                         59

Chapter 5                                                  Thousand Oaks General Plan
Hazardous Materials                                          Safety Element 2014 Update
      Because of the high number of businesses that use or store hazardous materials
       on Thousand Oaks Boulevard or Moorpark Road, these major arterials and
       adjacent neighborhoods are potentially at greater risk than other areas of the City.
      Because of the concentration of industrial businesses north of Highway 101 in
       Ranch Conejo Industrial Park, this area is also potentially at greater risk than
       other parts of the City.
In addition to traffic related incidents, hazardous materials spills could be caused by
ground shaking associated with a large earthquake or other soil related hazards
(landslide, debris flow, liquefaction, etc.). Ground shaking related to the Simi Fault could
cause major structural damage to facilities using hazardous materials. Hazardous
material containers not properly secured could be felled and/or ruptured. Improperly
segregated materials could result in toxic or explosive reactions.
60

  Chapter 6
Terrorism
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 6
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                        Terrorism
CHAPTER 6: TERRORISM
The Ventura County Sheriff’s Office, serving as the Thousand Oaks Police Department,
works with other law enforcement agencies and the private sector to combat terrorism.
The Thousand Oaks Police Department is a conduit for the central reporting for our
region and has Terrorism Liaison Officers who have been trained to identify suspicious
activities.
Barriers and security systems can help deter terrorists, but no barrier or security system
can provide complete protection. It is also important for all citizens to remember, if they
"See something, Say something" as the slogan states.
Terrorism is defined in the Code of Federal Regulations as “the unlawful use of force
and violence against persons or property to intimidate or coerce a government, the
civilian population, or any segment thereof, in furtherance of political or social
objectives” (28 C.F.R. Section 0.85). The majority of Americans see terrorism as an
assault on the most basic human right to life and security that cannot be justified on the
basis of any political or social objective.
Internationally, terrorism is a controversial term. The international community,
represented by the United Nations, has been unable to agree on a basis for determining
when the use of violence (at whom, by whom, and for what purpose) is legitimate.
However, it is generally agreed that certain terrorist activities are crimes. In 1994, the
United Nations General Assembly condemned terrorism with the following statement:
"Criminal acts intended or calculated to provoke a state of terror in the general public, a
group of persons or particular persons for political purposes are in any circumstance
unjustifiable, whatever the considerations of a political, philosophical, ideological, racial,
ethnic, religious or any other nature that may be invoked to justify them."
The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) maintains statistics on terrorist attacks in the
United States (Source: Terrorism 2002-2005 U.S. Department of Justice, Federal
Bureau of Investigation). FBI records show that 318 terrorist acts occurred in the United
States between 1980 and 2005. Of these events, 209 were classified as bombings, 43
arsons, 20 malicious destructions, 16 shootings, 10 hostile takeovers, 8 robberies, 4
assaults, 2 hijackings, 2 kidnappings, 2 rockets, 1 assassination and 1 weapon of mass
destruction (anthrax). The majority of these attacks can be attributed to individuals and
groups who subscribe to specific ideologies.
The catastrophic attacks of September 11, 2001, illustrate the threat presented by
terrorists with an agenda based on religious intolerance. Militant Islamic jihadists have
demonstrated a commitment to use mass murder on a worldwide basis to advance their
cause. They believe it is their religious duty to kill (or subjugate) people who do not
follow their religion and way of life. The threat of massive attacks by militant jihadists is
greatest in major metropolitan areas like New York and Washington, D.C. because they
offer high-profile targets and the potential to harm large numbers of people.
Issue-based terrorists carry out attacks to express grievances and to compel change
regarding a range of issues. Issue-motivated terrorists have used violence to compel
                                                                                           61

Chapter 6                                                         Thousand Oaks General Plan
Terrorism                                                          Safety Element 2014 Update
change concerning issues such as animal rights, environmental damage, abortion,
globalization and capitalism. The deadly bombing of the Federal Building in Oklahoma
City, Oklahoma in 1995, for example, was carried out by anti-government, issue-based
extremists. The bombing resulted in 168 deaths and 642 injuries. Animal rights and
environmental extremist attacks, on the other hand, have tended to target property,
primarily through fire-bombings and arsons, rather than people.
 Photo 10: A visitor looks at the faces of some of the victims of the Oklahoma City bombing at the
         Oklahoma City National Memorial and Museum (www.time.com/time/photogallery)
Many acts of terrorism are simply motivated by hate. While hate might be the central
motivation, hate-based terrorists often have extremist religious or anti-government
motivations as well. Hate-based terrorist incidents have been attributed to individuals
and groups who subscribe to extreme neo-Nazis, racist, anti-Semitic, anti-gay and anti-
minority ideologies. For example, in 2009, a white supremacist and anti-Semite attacked
the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, DC, killing a security guard. In
addition, on August 5, 2012, a white supremacist shot and killed six people and
wounded four others at a Sikh temple in Oak Creek, Wisconsin.
The motivations behind terrorist attacks in the United States have changed over the
years. Terror attacks in the 1970s were often motivated by extreme left-wing and ethno-
national/separatist ideologies. Many attacks in the 1980s were religiously motivated.
Anti-government terrorism was prevalent during the 1990s and issue-based terrorism
was widespread during the 2000s (Source: LaFree, Gary, and Bianca Bersani. “Hot
Spots of Terrorism and Other Crimes in the United States, 1970 to 2008,” Final Report
62

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 6
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                       Terrorism
to Human Factors/Behavioral Sciences Division, Science and Technology Directorate,
U.S. Department of Homeland Security, College Park, MD: START, 2012).
The City of Thousand Oaks does not have high-profile targets or a history of terrorist
attacks or extremist activity. Therefore, the probability of terrorist attacks is relatively
low. However, it would be unrealistic to assume that the City is entirely immune from
terrorism. There will be a risk of terrorism as long as there are people who are
motivated by extremist ideologies. While the risk of terrorism is low in Thousand Oaks,
government buildings and religious facilities are the most likely targets.
Terrorists often go for hard targets, but large public events are also vulnerable to
terrorist attacks. For example, on April 15, 2013, two terrorists set off bombs with
deadly results at the finish line of the Boston Marathon.
Security planning should to be considered when an organization is going to hold an
event involving large numbers of people. Parades, walks, races, funeral processions,
concerts, celebrations, festivals and fairs (e.g. Conejo Valley Days) can attract many
people, but not all events will require the same level of security. Events of religious or
political significance or involving high-profile or controversial public figures might pose
an elevated risk. These kinds of events might require special security arrangements.
Terrorism cannot always be stopped by controlling access, erecting barricades or other
security arrangements. Defeating terrorism requires finding and disrupting terrorists
before they can strike. Among other things, this requires effective intelligence sharing
among law enforcement agencies. Therefore, the Thousand Oaks Police Department
participates in interagency initiatives to gather, analyze and disseminate information on
suspected terrorists.
The Boston Marathon bombing in 2013 underscored the need to improve the sharing of
information among law enforcement agencies on potential terrorist threats. Regional
“fusion” centers were set up after the attacks of September 11, 2001, to allow federal,
state, and local governments to share information on terrorist activities. However, this
system was not able to track one of the Boston bombers despite documented warnings
about his behavior. Breakdowns in information sharing allowed the Boston bombing plot
to go undetected and slowed the identification and capture the bombers.
As a society we can combat terrorism by discrediting extremist ideologies and opposing
organizations and regimes that encourage terrorism. Ultimately, our security depends
on a world that promotes human rights and rejects intolerance and violence. Current
and future generations must also learn the true history of terrorism, racism, slavery,
religious persecution, the Holocaust and other genocides. It is up to all citizens to teach
tolerance and to condemn hatred and terrorism.
                                                                                         63

Chapter 6                               Thousand Oaks General Plan
Terrorism                                Safety Element 2014 Update
          This page intentionally left blank.
64
     Chapter 7
     Disaster
Preparedness
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                      Chapter 7
Safety Element 2014 Update                                       Disaster Preparedness
CHAPTER 7: DISASTER PREPAREDNESS
The City of Thousand Oaks adopted an Emergency Operations Plan on May 27, 2008
that provides emergency guidelines for responding to disasters. The Plan focuses on
potential large scale disasters requiring mutual aid from various agencies. It provides for
the emergency organization, policies and procedures, and coordination among
emergency personnel utilizing the Standardized Emergency Management System
(SEMS) and the National Incident Management System (NIMS). There are also mutual
aid agreements in place for law enforcement, fire, medical, and public works services.
A. Emergency Operations Plan
The City of Thousand Oaks adopted an Emergency Operations Plan (EOP) on May 27,
2008. The EOP provides emergency guidelines for responding to disasters. The Plan
focuses on potential large scale disasters that often require mutual aid from various
agencies.
The EOP directs the City to use the State’s Standardized Emergency Management
System (SEMS). Local governments must use SEMS to be eligible for reimbursement of
response-related costs under the state’s disaster assistance programs. SEMS divides
the emergency management organization into five functions: Management, Operations,
Planning/Intelligence, Logistics and Finance.
The EOP also directs the City to use the National Incident Management System (NIMS).
NIMS was developed by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to ensure that all
levels of government across the nation have the capability to work together effectively to
manage emergency incidents. NIMS requires, for example, standard operating
procedures, standardized classes, interoperable communications systems, mutual aid
agreements and interagency training exercises. The City must comply with NIMS to be
eligible for federal emergency preparedness grants and emergency response relief.
The Emergency Operation Center (EOC) is the City location where disasters are
managed. The EOC is located at City Hall, 2100 Thousand Oak Boulevard. An
alternative EOC will be selected if the EOC is damaged or inaccessible in an
emergency.
Evacuation Routes
The Ventura County Sheriff’s Department is ultimately responsible for coordinating
evacuation necessitated by an emergency. If delayed during a large disaster, the Public
Works Director for the City is responsible for coordinating evacuation efforts on an
interim basis.
Evacuation routes are determined for each emergency based on the nature of the event
and the location of evacuation shelters. Ventura County relays evacuation information to
residents by telephone and, when possible, in person.
Annex H of the EOP provides a listing of freeways and streets to be used in the event of
a disaster requiring evacuation. Detailed maps for evacuation routes are kept at the
Municipal Service Center located in Newbury Park. Major evacuation routes are shown
on Figure 11.
                                                                                        65

Chapter 7                                       Thousand Oaks General Plan
Disaster Preparedness                            Safety Element 2014 Update
                      Figure 11: Evacuation Routes
66
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 7
Safety Element 2014 Update                                         Disaster Preparedness
Evacuation Centers
The EOP describes the organizational and operational procedures to be used during a
major natural disaster or incident in order to meet the food, shelter and clothing needs
of large numbers of people. The American Red Cross is the lead agency involved in
providing disaster relief during peacetime disasters. Authority is mandated by Federal
Law 36-USC-3 arid reaffirmed in Public Law 930288 (Federal Disaster Relief Act of
1974). The Red Cross acts cooperatively with State and local governments, including
the California Office of Emergency Services and the California Department of Social
Services, and private relief organizations to provide relief services.
Evacuation centers to be used in the event of disaster vary depending on the location
and nature of the disaster. The facilities most likely to be used are local colleges, public
schools, churches and community centers because they can shelter large numbers of
people.
                                                                                         67
Chapter 7                                           Thousand Oaks General Plan
Disaster Preparedness                                Safety Element 2014 Update
                      This page intentionally left blank.
68
          Chapter 8
        Critical &
Lifeline Facilities
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                      Chapter 8
Safety Element 2014 Update                                 Critical and Lifeline Facilities
CHAPTER 8: CRITICAL AND LIFELINE FACILITIES
A. Critical Facilities
    Critical facilities are generally defined as those structures whose ongoing
    performance during an emergency is required or whose failure could threaten many
    lives. Type of structures vary but may include:
       Hospitals
       Urgent care centers
       Private ambulance companies
       Fire stations
       Police and emergency services facilities
       Assisted living facilities and nursing homes
       Schools
A map of selected critical facilities in the Thousand Oaks area is included as Figure 12.
These facilities are described in Table 8.
Hazard Analysis
Based on information provided in previous sections of this report, there are a number of
potential hazards that could affect existing critical structures in the City of Thousand
Oaks. These include flood and dam inundation, seismic and geohazards and fire
hazards. The following provides a summary of existing critical facilities located in
potentially hazardous areas. No specific reference is made to geologic hazards because
all of the facilities may be affected by such hazards – especially groundshaking caused
a large regional earthquake. Measures that can be taken to reduce these hazards are
addressed in previous sections of this document.
Hospitals and Emergency Care Facilities
The Thousand Oaks Planning Area is served by two hospitals, Los Robles Regional
Medical Center and the Thousand Oaks Surgical Hospital. Neither of these facilities are
located in areas subject to specific hazards other than ground shaking due to
earthquake.
New hospitals are required to undergo stringent design and construction standards in
conformance with the Hospital Act of 1972. This legislation was enacted following the
1971 San Fernando Earthquake of Southern California in which several hospitals in the
vicinity of the epicenter were seriously damaged and unable to continue functioning
during a critical period.
On January 13, 2010, the City approved an expansion of the Los Robles Regional
Medical Center to increase the maximum bed count from 277 to 337 beds and to
comply with Senate Bill 1935, which mandates that critical patient services be located
within buildings that meet current seismic safety standards by January 2013. The
approved project included the addition of a fourth floor to the 3-story wing completed in
2007, a new 659-space parking structure and a new 4-story patient care wing.
                                                                                         69

Chapter 8                                                 Thousand Oaks General Plan
Critical and Lifeline Facilities                           Safety Element 2014 Update
B. Schools
Existing schools are potentially susceptible to a number of hazards including:
      Newbury Park High School and EARTHS (Manzanita) Elementary School are
       located within or adjacent the 100-year flood zone.
      Walnut Elementary School is located in the 500-year flood zone (2010 Ventura
       County Hazard Mitigation Plan).
      Sequoia, Wildwood, Westlake, Conejo and Lang Ranch elementary schools and
       Westlake High School are located within or adjacent to areas of very-high fire
       hazard.
      Madrona, Cypress, Sycamore Canyon, Banyan and Maple elementary schools
       are in or adjacent to areas of high fire hazard.
      Westlake Elementary School is located within the dam inundation hazard area
       that would be caused by a failure of Lake Sherwood Dam.
      The proposed Conejo Community Learning Center (Continuation School) is
       within an area susceptible to liquefaction.
70

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                   Chapter 8
Safety Element 2014 Update                              Critical and Lifeline Facilities
                           Figure 12: Critical Facilities
                                                                                      71
Chapter 8                                                       Thousand Oaks General Plan
Critical and Lifeline Facilities                                 Safety Element 2014 Update
Table 8: Critical Facilities in Thousand Oaks
 Assisted Living/Nursing Homes Medical Services                  Schools (Continued)
  Altria Hillcrest               AMR Ambulance Service            Conejo Valley Waverly Adult
  Belmont Village                Los Robles Hospital East         Cypress Elementary
  CLC Oak View Health Care           Campus                       EARTHS (Manzanita) Elementary
  Grand Oaks Senior Living       Los Robles Regional Medical      First Baptist Academy
  Hillcrest Royale                   Center                       Glenwood Elementary
  Mary Health of the Sick        Thousand Oaks Surgical           Hillcrest Christian
  Sunrise Assisted Living            Center                       Honey Tree Early Childhood Ctr
  The Reserve at Thousand Oaks                                    Horizon Hills Adult & Preschool
  Thousand Oaks Health Care     Public Safety                     La Reina High
  Thousand Oaks Royale                                            Ladera Elementary
                                 East Valley Law Enforcement
  United Cerebral Palsy                                           Lang Ranch Elementary
                                     Center
  University Village                                              Little Oaks
  Westlake Health Care           Fire Station 30-Civic Center     Los Cerritos Middle
                                 Fire Station 31-Westlake         Madrona Elementary
                                 Fire Station 32-Portero
 Community Centers                                                Maple Elementary
                                 Fire Station 34-Arboles
                                                                  MATES (Meadows) Elementary
  Borchard Community Center      Fire Station 35-Newbury Park
                                                                  Montessori Children’s Place
  Conejo Community Center            (relocation planned)         Neighborhood City Ctr Day Care
  Dos Vientos Community Center   Station 37-North Ranch           Newbury Park Academy (HS)
  Goebel Senior Adult Center
                                                                  Newbury Park Academy
  Thousand Oaks Comm. Center    Schools                           Newbury Park High
  Thousand Oaks Teen Center
                                 Acacia Elementary                Pinecrest
                                 Adventist Academy                Redwood Middle
 Government Facilities                                            Sequoia Middle
                                     Elementary
  City Hall                      Ascension Lutheran               St. Paschal’s Elementary
  CRPD Maintenance Yard          Aspen Elementary                 St. Patrick’s
  CVUSD Admin. Offices           Banyan Elementary                Sycamore Canyon
  CVUSD Maintenance Yard         Bethany Christian                Thousand Oaks High
  Dept. of Motor Vehicles        BRIDGES (Park Oaks) Elem.        Thousand Oaks Kinder Care
  Grant R. Brimhall Library      California Lutheran University   University Early Childhood Center
  Hill Canyon Treatment Plant    Carden Elementary                Walnut Elementary
  Hillcrest Center               Century Academy                  Weathersfield Elementary
  MSC Household Hazardous        Colina Middle                    Westlake Elementary
      Waste Facility             Conejo Community Learning        Westlake High
  Municipal Service Center           Center (proposed)            Westlake Hills Elementary
  Newbury Park Library           Conejo Elementary                Westlake Montessori
  Thousand Oaks Post Office      Conejo Valley High               Wildwood Elementary
  Thousand Oaks Transit Center
The State of California has the responsibility for ensuring that public school buildings
are adequately constructed to meet seismic design standards.
Fire Stations and Law Enforcement Facility
Thousand Oaks has five fire stations and one law enforcement facility. The location of
these facilities is shown on Figure 12. Some of these facilities are potentially susceptible
to various hazards including:
As discussed in Table 6 of this document, Fire Stations 33, 34, and 35 were constructed
prior to 1971 and could require seismic retrofitting to be in compliance with current
guidelines.
72

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 8
Safety Element 2014 Update                                  Critical and Lifeline Facilities
Fire Station No. 32 is located adjacent to the l00-year flood zone.
Fire Station No. 35 is located within the 500-year flood zone (2010 Ventura County
Hazard Mitigation Plan).
Fire Station No. 33 (Lake Sherwood) is within a landslide hazard area (2010 Ventura
County Hazard Mitigation Plan).
Fire Station Nos. 31 (Westlake) and 37 (North Ranch) are within or adjacent to areas of
very-high fire hazard (2010 Ventura County Hazard Mitigation Plan).
The East Valley Law Enforcement Facility is located within a high fire hazard area.
Other Facilities
Various other critical facilities are potentially susceptible to hazards including the
following:
      The Newbury Park branch public library and the Borchard Community Center
       (and Conejo Valley Recreation and Park District Corporate Yard) are located
       within or adjacent the 100-year flood zone.
      The Alex Fiore Thousand Oaks Teen Center and the Goebel Senior Adult Center
       and the Grant R. Brimhall Library are within an area susceptible to liquefaction.
      The Municipal Service Center, Hill Canyon Wastewater Treatment Plant, CLC
       Oak View Health Care Center, Belmont Village (assisted living), Thousand Oaks
       Transportation Center, Dos Vientos Community Center and Calleguas Municipal
       Pumping, Filtration, and Treatment Plant are located within or adjacent to a high
       fire hazard area.
                                                                                          73

Chapter 8                                                      Thousand Oaks General Plan
Critical and Lifeline Facilities                                Safety Element 2014 Update
                        Photo 11: Hill Canyon Wastewater Treatment Facility
C. Lifeline Facilities
Lifeline facilities are vital utility corridors and associated facilities that may be damaged
by catastrophic events such as earthquakes. These include: major gas lines, major
power lines, crude oil pipelines, major communication stations, major water lines and
water tanks. Figure 13 shows lifeline facilities in the Thousand Oaks area.
Electricity
The City of Thousand Oaks is supplied electrical power by Southern California Edison.
The location of major electrical transmission lines are shown in Figure 13. Electrical
transmission substations (Newbury, Thousand Oaks, and Potrero) are located at 1295
Lawrence Drive, 199 E. Wilbur Road and 2345 Townsgate Road. In 2008, Edison also
proposed a new electrical substation on the south side of Olsen Road at the northern
city boundary. As of February of 2014, the proposed project involved upgrades to the
Potrero Substation in Thousand Oaks and the Royal Substation in Simi Valley instead
of building a new substation. The California Public Utilities Commission has final
authority to approve or deny the project. Substations are the most-vulnerable
component of the electrical power delivery system.
Transformers, switches, circuit breakers, control equipment, and high-voltage porcelain
insulators are especially susceptible to high-frequency ground motions which can be
generated in earthquakes. A substation can be disabled by seismic intensities as low as
74
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 8
Safety Element 2014 Update                                  Critical and Lifeline Facilities
VII (Toppozoda et al., 1988). Newbury substation is located in an area of extremely high
fire hazard. Buried electrical transmission lines may be susceptible to liquefaction in the
event of a ground failure triggered by an earthquake. Many of the transmission lines
(including those running along Reino Road, Moorpark Road, and Thousand Oaks
Boulevard) are located in areas of older unconsolidated alluvium and may be
susceptible to liquefaction and other soil related hazards.
If damaged during an earthquake, sections of the City may be without power. Critical
facilities such as hospitals, the East Valley Law Enforcement Facility Emergency
Operations Center and Fire Stations can function on backup generators. If only limited
electrical service can be restored following a disaster, these facilities should be given
priority.
Lack of electrical power can also impair designated evacuation centers, communication
facilities, and water distribution systems. Evacuation centers that will most likely be
used during a disaster and emergency communication facilities should be equipped with
backup power systems, Gravity-fed water distribution systems should be incorporated
into City-wide, fire suppression emergency programs.
Natural Gas and Oil
Natural gas is supplied to the City by Southern California Gas Company. The location of
major distribution lines (12" to 20") are shown in Figure 13. Distribution lines between
Olsen Road and Westlake Boulevard and along Lynn Road traverse areas of older
alluvium and may be susceptible to liquefaction and other soil related hazards. Damage
to these lines during an earthquake could result in an interruption of service or, in a
worst case scenario, fires or explosions. Leaks would be expected to occur mostly at
piping connections and valves. Another area of concern is the Erbes Road Landslide
(along Westlake Boulevard). Three main gas lines pass through this feature. Movement
of the landslide mass could result in rupture of a gas line which could cause fires or
explosions.
A 10-inch diameter crude oil pipeline (Ventura- Wilmington Crude Line), traverses the
northeastern portion of the City. Crude oil pipelines are typically buried within the upper
5 feet and are equipped with emergency shut off valves. This pipeline could potentially
be damaged in an earthquake, resulting in disruption of service and contamination of
surface waterways, soil, and underlying ground water. The pipeline passes through the
Erbes Road Landslide and areas of older unconsolidated alluvium (between Olsen
Road and Westlake Boulevard) and, thus, may be susceptible to landsliding,
liquefaction and other soil related hazards.
Water
Water is supplied to water purveyors within the City of Thousand Oaks by the Calleguas
Municipal Water District (CMWD). The CMWD distribution lines and water filtration plant
are shown on Figure 13. CMWD purchases water from the Metropolitan Water District of
Southern California (MWD). Bard Reservoir, located north of the City and owned by
CMWD, stores about 10,000 acre-feet of water. Area reservoirs include Newbury Park
                                                                                          75
Chapter 8                                                 Thousand Oaks General Plan
Critical and Lifeline Facilities                           Safety Element 2014 Update
Reservoir, Lake Sherwood Reservoir, and Thousand Oaks Reservoir. Four water retailers
supply CMWD water to City residents. These include: 1) California-American Water
Company, 2) California Water Service Company, and 3) City of Thousand Oaks and 4)
Camrosa Water District. The location of local water tanks are shown on Figure 13.
Water distribution lines could be damaged in an earthquake as a result of liquefaction.
Breaks in water distribution pipelines could result in disruption of service, loss of
pressure, and localized flooding and associated impacts (erosion, sinkholes, etc.). A
lack of adequate water pressure could result in inadequate flow for fire suppression.
Areas of the City potentially susceptible to liquefaction and other soil related hazards
include lines along Borchard Road, Lawrence Drive, U.S. Highway 101, Olsen Road,
Moorpark Road, Paige Lane, and Erbes Road.
Water lines along Borchard Road and Highway 101, and lines crossing under Moorpark
Road, Paige Lane, and the Thousand Oaks North Drain could be damaged by a l00-
year flood event.
76
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                   Chapter 8
Safety Element 2014 Update                              Critical and Lifeline Facilities
                           Figure 13: Lifeline Facilities
                                                                                      77
Chapter 8                                               Thousand Oaks General Plan
Critical and Lifeline Facilities                         Safety Element 2014 Update
                          This page intentionally left blank.
78
Chapter 9
Policies
Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                      Chapter 9
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                        Policies
CHAPTER 9: POLICIES
This chapter identifies the City’s goals and policies for hazard reduction. Goals are
intended to establish direction for an ideal future end condition related to public health,
safety, or general welfare. In the context of a General Plan, goals are expressions of
community values adopted by the City Council to guide the development and
implementation of policy. A policy is a specific statement that guides decision-making. It
indicates a clear commitment of the City Council. It is based upon the goals, as well as
upon the technical background data. Programs are fundamental rules guided by the
goals and policies. Programs are based on community values, generally-accepted
planning practice, and current technology.
A. Faulting and Seismic Hazards
Goal
S-1    Minimize the risk of loss of life, injury, damage to property, and economic and
       social dislocation resulting from fault rupture and seismically induced ground
       shaking.
Policies
A-1    Require site-specific geologic and engineering investigations as specified in the
       California Building Code (International Building Code with California
       amendments) and Municipal Code for proposed new developments and/or when
       deemed necessary by the City Engineer and/or through the CEQA process.
A-2    Adopt the latest California Building Code (CBC) and enforce provisions relating
       to earthquake resistant design.
A-3    Enforce provisions of Title 7, Chapter 3 (Grading) and Title 8, Chapter 1 (Building
       Code) of the Municipal Code that incorporate the CBC with amendments specific
       to the City.
A-4    Continue to allocate a percentage of building permit fees (as specified in Chapter
       8 of Division 2 of the Public Resources Code) to a trust fund (Strong Motion
       Instrumentation Program Fund) which is remitted to the State of California. The
       moneys are earmarked for seismic education pursuant to the Seismic Hazards
       Mapping Act of 1990.
A-5    Provide setbacks, as determined to be necessary, for any proposed development
       located on or near an active or potentially active fault. Appropriate setback
       distances will be determined through engineering geologic investigation. No
       active faults have been mapped within the Planning Area. Potentially active faults
       include the Sycamore Canyon and Boney Mountain Faults.
A-6    Require all developers and/or subdividers of a parcel or parcels in an area of
       known fault hazard to record a Notice of Geologic Hazards with the County
       Recorder describing the hazards on the parcel and the level of prior geologic
       investigation conducted.
A-7    Require project modifications, including but not limited to hazard mitigation,
       project redesign, elimination of building sites, and the delineation of building
                                                                                        79

Chapter 9                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Policies                                                     Safety Element 2014 Update
       envelopes, building setbacks and foundation requirements, as deemed
       necessary, in order to mitigate faulting/seismic hazards.
B. Geologic Hazards
Goals
S-2    Safeguard life, limb, health, property, and the public welfare by establishing
       minimum requirements for regulating grading and procedures by which such
       requirements may be enforced (Municipal Code Section 7-3.01).
S-3    Provide minimum standards to safeguard life or limb, health, property and the
       public welfare by regulating and controlling the design, construction, quality of
       materials, use and occupancy, location, demolition, and maintenance of all
       buildings and structures within the City and certain equipment specifically
       regulated therein (Municipal Code Section 8-1.02).
Policies
Grading/Building Construction
B-1    Require any alteration, grading, excavation or fill activity to comply with the City’s
       Grading Ordinance.
B-2    Require that all construction be in accordance with the most current version of
       the California Building Code and Title 8, Chapter 1 of the Municipal Code which
       incorporates the CBC with specific amendments.
B-3    Perform site-specific geologic and engineering investigations for new
       developments as specified in the CBC and Municipal Code.
B-4    Prohibit grading or relocation of earth on land having a natural slope greater than
       25% unless approval is obtained from the Planning Commission or City Council
       and a grading permit has been obtained from the City Engineer (Municipal Code
       Section 7-3.07).
B-5    Continue to regulate grading during the rainy season (November-April) in order to
       control erosion and protect life and property from damage due to flooding or
       erosion associated with grading activities.
Liquefaction
B-6    Conduct soils investigations to evaluate hazards potential for proposed
       developments in areas of potential liquefaction.
B-7    Require project modifications, including but not limited to project redesign,
       elimination of building sites, building envelopes and drainage and foundation
       requirements, as necessary in order to mitigate liquefaction hazards.
B-8    Require the developers and/or subdividers of a parcel or parcels in a Liquefaction
       Hazard Zone to record a Notice of Geologic Hazards with the County Recorder
       describing the potential hazards on the parcel and the level of prior geologic
       investigation conducted unless the condition has been mitigated.
80

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                       Chapter 9
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                         Policies
Landslides and Debris Flows
B-9    Require that all development activities provide a setback from potentially
       unstable areas or from the margins of potential debris flow channels and
       depositional areas as identified through engineering and geologic studies.
B-10   Require drainage plans designed to direct runoff away from unstable areas.
B-11   Where washouts or landslides have occurred on public or private roads, require
       that road reconstruction meet the conditions of appropriate geologic and
       engineering reports and provide for adequate engineering supervision.
B-12   In general, prohibit building sites within the flowline or discharge areas of hillside
       swales or channels. Building may be able to occur near smaller swales and
       channels given appropriate mitigation measures.
B-13   In an area of known slope stability or debris flow hazards, require developers
       and/or subdividers of a parcel or parcels to record a Notice of Geologic Hazards
       with the County Recorder describing the potential hazards on the parcel and the
       level of prior geologic investigation conducted.
B-14   Require project modifications, including but not limited to hazard mitigation,
       project redesign, elimination of building sites and development of building and
       septic system envelopes, building setbacks and foundation and drainage
       requirements as necessary in order to mitigate landslide and debris flow hazards.
Soils Subject to Expansion, Settlement and Hydrocompaction
B-15 Require the preparation of a preliminary soils report, prepared by a registered
       civil engineer and based upon adequate test borings, for every subdivision and
       every individual lot where soils have been identified that are subject to
       expansion, settlement or hydrocompaction.
B-16 Require a soils report where there is inadequate soils information prior to
       issuance of permits for habitable structures and private wastewater disposal
       (septic) systems.
B-17 Require the developers and/or subdividers of a parcel or parcels in an area of
       known highly expansive soils hazard to record a notice of Geologic Hazards with
       the County Recorder describing the potential hazards on the parcel and the level
       of prior geologic investigation conducted.
B-18 Require project modifications, including but not limited to hazard mitigation,
       project redesign, elimination of building sites, building envelopes and drainage
       and foundation requirements as necessary in order to mitigate hazards
       associated with soils that may be subject to expansion, settlement or hydro-
       compaction.
C. Flood Hazards
Goal
S-4    Minimize the risk of loss of life, injury, damage to property, and economic and
       social dislocations resulting from inundation by dam failure or floods.
                                                                                           81
Chapter 9                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Policies                                                     Safety Element 2014 Update
Policies
C-1    Restrict or prohibit uses which are susceptible to flood hazards (M.C. 4-7.01).
C-2    Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including flood control facilities, be
       protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction (M.C. 4-7.01).
C-3    Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural
       protective barriers which help accommodate or channel floodwaters (M.C.4-
       7.01).
C-4    Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase
       flood damage (M.C. 4-7.01).
C-5    Prevent or regulate the construction of barriers which will unnaturally divert
       floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas (M.C. 4-7.01).
C-6    Locate structures and additions outside of the 100-year floodplain unless such
       facilities are necessary to serve existing uses and construction of these
       structures will not increase the hazard to life or property within or adjacent to the
       floodplain. Location within the floodplain shall be governed by Title 4, Chapter 7
       of the Thousand Oaks Municipal Code and shall require certification by a
       registered professional demonstrating that encroachments shall not result in any
       increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the 100-year flood.
C-7    Avoid development of new critical facilities within 100-year flood plain areas and
       dam inundation areas.
C-8    Comply with provisions of the Master Plan of Drainage for all new development
       within the City. The City shall update this document as necessary.
C-9    Implement drainage improvements to address deficiencies identified in the
       Master Plan of Drainage.
C-10   Endorse and support Ventura County’s flood warning system for residents living
       in designated floodplains. Special precautions should be taken for critical
       facilities within floodplains and dam inundation areas [e.g., Westlake Elementary
       School (dam inundation area), Newbury Park High School and Manzanita
       Elementary School (100-year flood area)].
C-11   Update the City's Emergency Operations Plan (Multi-Hazard Function Plan)
       periodically to incorporate emergency preparedness procedures relating to flood
       hazards.
C-12   Require the developers and/or subdividers of a parcel or parcels in an area of
       known flood hazards to record a Notice of Geologic Hazards with the County
       Recorder describing the hazards on the parcel or parcels and the extent of prior
       hydrologic or geologic investigation conducted.
C-13   Require project modifications, including but not limited to: hazard mitigation,
       project redesign, building elimination, development of building and septic system
       envelopes and special foundation requirements as deemed necessary in order to
       mitigate potential flood hazards.
D. Fire Hazards
Goals
S-5    Provide minimum standards to protect life, limb, property, safety, and welfare of
       the citizens of the City by regulating and controlling the hazards of fire and
82

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                        Chapter 9
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                         Policies
       explosion arising from the storage, handling, and use of hazardous substances,
       materials, and devices.
S-6    Prevent the loss of life and property due to uncontrolled wildfire in the
       urban/wildland interface through the cooperation of the Ventura County Fire
       Protection District and property owners living in these areas.
Policies
D-1    Continue to enforce the following:
        California Health and Safety Code
        Ventura County Fire Protection District Ordinance
        California Building Code (CBC), which is the International Building Code with
           California amendments
D-2 Continue to provide adequate fire protection and prevention services to meet the
       needs of the community and continue to support inter-jurisdictional fire protection
       agreements.
D-3 Inspect buildings susceptible to fire damage and abate hazardous conditions as
       necessary.
D-4 Conduct and encourage fire safety and fire prevention programs for schools and
       other critical facilities.
D-5 If it is determined that older fire stations do not meet seismic structural codes,
       upgrade or replace these facilities as necessary.
D-6 Continue to strive for 5-minute response time to all fire and life safety emergency
       responses.
D-7 Provide adequate fire flow for all new developments in accordance with the CBC
       and adopted Amendments (or the most current edition of the CBC as adopted).
D-8 Equip new buildings with an automatic fire sprinkler system in accordance with
       the CBC and Ventura County Fire Protection District Ordinance.
D-9 Continue to upgrade existing developments with deficient fire flows.
D-10 Provide for minimum road widths and clearances for new development projects
       in accordance with:
        Municipal Code requirements (Sections 9-3.1015 and 9-3.1 016);
        Standards specified in the City of Thousand Oaks Road Standards and
           construction specifications in effect at the time of construction; and
        Any other standard and specific conditions required by the Fire Department in
           the permit application.
D-11 Ensure that streets within the Hillside Planned Development zone are designed
       with right-of-way, roadway, and median widths conforming to the specified
       standards in Section 9-4.3108 of the Municipal Code.
D-12 Establish defensive barriers in the urban/wildland interface to protect against
       wildfire. Specifically this shall include:
        Establish maintain a 100-foot defensible perimeter around each habitable
           structure along the urban wildland interface. Provide for the removal of annual
           fuels within the defensive perimeter.
                                                                                         83

Chapter 9                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Policies                                                     Safety Element 2014 Update
          Provide any fire suppression resource from any agency the opportunity to
           successfully protect structures and other valuable properties during a wildfire
           threat.
        Protect the watershed fire areas from exposure to structure fires in the
           urban/wildland interface areas.
D-13   Discourage the location of public facilities and above-ground utilities in extreme
       fire hazard areas. When unavoidable, special precautions should be taken to
       minimize potential impacts.
D-14   Encourage public participation in arson prevention programs.
D-15   Implement appropriate fuel management and prescribed burning programs on a
       selective basis in order to reduce the potential for devastating wildfires and the
       resulting damage they cause to both natural ecosystems and urban
       environments.
D-16   Coordinate with Ventura County Fire Protection District as determined to be
       necessary in order to identify suitable fuel management and prescribed burning
       areas.
D-17   Work with the Ventura County Fire Protection District, the Conejo Open Space
       Conservation Agency and other agencies, as appropriate, to implement fuel
       management and post fire recovery plans that conserve wildlife habitat while
       protecting public safety.
D-18   Review the very high fire hazard severity zone map with the Ventura County Fire
       Protection District in order to update City information.
E. Hazardous Materials
Goal
S-7    Protect life, property, and the environment from the effects of releases of
       hazardous materials into the air, land or water.
Policies
E-1    Manage hazardous wastes and materials in such a way that waste reduction
       through alternative technology is the first priority, followed by recycling and on-
       site treatment, with disposal as the last resort.
E-2    Continue to work with the County to implement the County Hazardous Materials
       Emergency Response Plan (developed by the Ventura County Environmental
       Health Department).
E-3    Strive to locate businesses that utilize hazardous materials in areas which will
       minimize risk to the public or the environment.
E-4    Coordinate with the Ventura County Environmental Health Department and the
       Regional Water Quality Control Board to encourage cleanup of sites that have
       been impacted by hazardous materials releases -- especially those that have
       impacted groundwater.
E-5    Implement programs to ensure proper disposal of household hazardous wastes.
       Educate the public about the importance of complying with such programs.
84

Thousand Oaks General Plan                                                          Chapter 9
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                           Policies
E-6    Continue to coordinate with the Ventura County Sheriff's Department, the
       California Highway Patrol, and the Ventura County Fire Protection District
       regarding regional plans for transportation corridors for hazardous materials.
F. Terrorism
Goal
S-8    Protect life and property from the potential effects of terrorist acts.
Policies
F-1    As part of the development review process, conduct vulnerability assessments of
       terrorist-sensitive facilities and, where practical, implement measures to protect
       these facilities against terrorist acts. Terrorist-sensitive facilities include places
       that are at-risk for terrorism, including, but not limited to, government offices and
       religious facilities.
F-2    Require any permit for a large or sensitive special event to include a security
       plan. The event organizer will be responsible for implementing the security plan.
F-3    Continue to share terrorist-related information with Federal, State and local law
       enforcement agencies and make use of the shared information to identify terrorist
       threats.
F-4    Encourage and assist property owners to evaluate their risks and vulnerabilities
       to terrorism and strengthen their level of protection against terrorist attacks.
G. Disaster Preparedness
Goal
S-9    Provide for the preparation and implementation of plans for the protection of
       persons and property within the City in the event of an emergency or a disaster
       and provide for the coordination of the emergency or disaster functions of the
       City with all other public agencies and affected private persons, corporations, and
       organizations (M.C.4-4.01).
Policies
G-1    Pursuant to the Municipal Code, City shall continue to review and recommend for
       adoption by the City Council, emergency and disaster and mutual aid plans and
       agreements, including such ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations as are
       necessary to implement such plans and agreements (M.C. 4-4.04).
G-2    Implement the City’s Emergency Operations Plan as may be amended from time
       to time. Coordinate emergency response and preparedness efforts with the
       Ventura County Office of Emergency Services, the American Red Cross, and
       other appropriate agencies.
G-3    Provide on-going disaster preparedness training to all City employees. All
       inspectors and plan checkers within the Building Department shall receive
       training and certification in post-disaster assessment as provided by the
       California Building Officials Organization.
                                                                                           85

Chapter 9                                                   Thousand Oaks General Plan
Policies                                                     Safety Element 2014 Update
G-4    Support the American Red Cross and other applicable agencies to ensure that
       adequate shelter facilities are available in the event of an emergency.
G-5    Periodically inventory emergency relief supplies (sandbags, medical equipment,
       traffic control equipment, road-clearing equipment, water purification equipment,
       etc.) to ensure availability during an emergency situation. Coordinate with other
       agencies to provide supplies/services as appropriate.
G-6    Evaluate and provide emergency power generation capabilities at key City-
       owned critical facilities (including the East Valley Law Enforcement Facility,
       Municipal Service Center, City Hall, and the Wastewater Treatment Plants).
G-7    Promote public awareness of seismic, geologic, flood, fire, and other potential
       hazards to the public and prospective developers.
G-8    Critical facilities subject to City approval that are susceptible to safety hazards
       shall incorporate feasible hazard mitigation measures.
G-9    The 2004 City of Thousand Oaks Local Hazard Mitigation Plan and the 2010
       Ventura County Hazard Mitigation Plan (as may be amended from time to time)
       are incorporated herein by reference.
86
Thousand Oaks General Plan
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                    Glossary
GLOSSARY
Acceleration: The time rate of change of velocity of a reference point during an
earthquake. Commonly expressed in percentage of gravity.
Active Fault: As defined by the State Mining and Geology Board, a fault which has had
surface displacement within Holocene time (about the last 11,000 years).
Alluvium: Loosely compacted gravel, sand, silt, or clay deposited by streams.
Amplified-Shaking Hazard Zone: An area where historic occurrence of amplified
ground shaking, or local geological and geotechnical conditions indicate a potential for
ground shaking to be amplified to a level such that mitigation as defined in California
Public Resources Code Section 2693 would be required. AS-Zones are characterized
by soft sediments overlying hard rock and include the soil conditions described in CBC
Soil Types S3 and S4.
Aquifer: A water-bearing body of porous and permeable rock or sediment.
Attenuation: A decrease in seismic signal amplitude as waves propagate from the
seismic source.
Base Flood: A flood that statistically could occur once in 100 years on average,
although it could occur in any year. For flood insurance purposes, 100-year flood and
base flood have the same meaning.
Bedrock: Relatively hard, solid rock that commonly underlies softer rock, sediment, or
soil.
Certified Engineering Geologist: An individual who is licensed by the State of
California to practice engineering geology.
Cohesionless: Refers to a sediment whose shear strength depends only on friction,
because there is no bonding between the grains.
Colluvium: Loose soil or rock fragments on or at the base of gentle slopes or hillsides.
Deposited by or moving under the influence of rainwash or downhill creep.
Combustible Material: Under VCFPD Ordinance No. 20, seasonal and recurrent
weeds, stubble, brush, dry grass, dry leaves or tumbleweeds; or rubbish, letter or
flammable material of any kind.
Conflagration: A large and destructive fire, usually aggravated by strong winds which
carry firebrands over natural or manmade barriers.
Conglomerate: A sedimentary rock composed of rounded, pebble, or cobble to
boulder-size fragments, usually in a finer matrix of sand.
Critical Structures and Facilities: Structures and facilities which are subject to
specified seismic safety standards because of their immediate and vital public need or
because of the severe hazard presented by their structural failure. Type of structures
                                                                                     87
                                                           Thousand Oaks General Plan
Glossary                                                     Safety Element 2014 Update
vary but may include (1) structures such as nuclear power reactors or large dams
whose failure might be catastrophic; (2) major communication, utility, and transportation
systems; (3) involuntary- or high-occupancy buildings such as prisons or schools; and
(4) emergency facilities such as hospitals, police and fire stations, and disaster-
response centers.
Debris Flows: A fast-moving slurry of mud, rocks and organic debris; commonly termed
mudflow. Debris flows occur during intense storm events.
Defensible Space: An area around the perimeter of structures or developed areas in
the wildland which are key points of defense/attack against encroaching wildfires or
escaping structure fires.
Epicenter: The point on the Earth's surface vertically above the point (focus or
hypocenter) in the crust where a seismic rupture initiates.
Expansive Soil: A soil which undergoes a significant and reversible change in volume
resulting from a change in moisture content.
Fault: A fracture or zone of closely associated fractures along which rocks on one side
have been displaced with respect to those on the other side. Strike-slip faults are chiefly
vertical fractures along which rock masses have shifted horizontally. Dip-slip faults are
chiefly inclined fractures along which rock masses have shifted vertically. If the
rockmass above an inclined fault is depressed, the fault is termed normal slip, whereas
the term reverse slip (or thrust) indicates that the side above the fault is elevated.
Oblique-slip faults have significant components of both strike and dip slip along them.
Fault Trace: Intersection of a fault with the ground surface; also, the line commonly
plotted on geologic maps to represent a fault.
Fill: The deposition of earth or any other substance or material by artificial means for
any purpose.
Fire Hazard: Anything or act which increases or may cause an increase of the fire
hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than that customarily recognized as
normal. Anything or act which may obstruct) delay) hinder. or interfere with the
operations of the Fire District or the egress of occupants in the event of fire.
Flood Insurance Rate Map: Map used for insurance purposes on which the Federal
Insurance Administration has delineated the special flood hazard area, base flood
elevations and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
Floodplain: The relatively level land area on either side of a stream's banks that is
subject to flooding. The 100-year floodplain is used for planning purposes and is
designated on Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps prepared by the Federal Insurance
Administration.
Formation: A rock unit which can be recognized, named, and mapped, e.g., the
Topanga Formation.
88
Thousand Oaks General Plan
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                         Glossary
Geotechnical: Pertaining to geologic-soils engineering studies, features, conditions or
events.
Grading: Excavating or filling land, or a combination thereof.
Hazardous Material: Pursuant to California Hazardous Waste Control Law (HWCL), a
hazardous material (or waste) is defined as a material that, due to its quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics, may: (1) cause, or
significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible,
or incapacitating reversible, illness; or (2) pose a substantial present or potential hazard
to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of or otherwise managed.
Holocene:The most recent geologic epoch of time; the past 11,000 years.
Hypocenter: The point within the earth where an earthquake rupture initiates.
Incident Command System: A standard system for organizing response to hazardous
materials incidents.
Intensity: A subjective numerical index describing the severity of an earthquake in
terms of its effects on the Earth's surface and on humans and their structures. A
condensed version of the Modified Mercalli intensity scale is included with this report.
Liquefaction: Process by which water-saturated sediment temporarily loses strength,
usually because of strong shaking during a major earthquake, and behaves as a fluid.
Magnitude: A number that characterizes the size of an earthquake, based on
measurement of the maximum motions recorded by a seismograph for earthquake
waves of a particular frequency. The scale most commonly used is local magnitude
commonly referred to as Richter magnitude.
Perched Ground Water: Ground water separated from the underlying main body of
ground water by an unsaturated zone.
Period: The time interval required for one full cycle of a wave.
Potentially Active Fault: A fault which shows evidence of surface displacement during
Quaternary time (last 1. 6 million years).
Recurrence Interval: The average time span between events (such as large
earthquakes, ground shaking exceeding a particular value, or liquefaction) at a
particular site.
Registered Geologist: A geologist who is licensed by the State of California to practice
geology.
Registered Geotechnical Engineer: A civil engineer licensed by the State of
California, experienced in the practice of geotechnical engineering.
                                                                                          89
                                                           Thousand Oaks General Plan
Glossary                                                     Safety Element 2014 Update
Soils Engineer: A registered civil engineer licensed in the State of California,
experienced in the practice of soils and foundation engineering:
Soils Investigation: A report prepared by a Registered Geotechnical Engineer or a
Soils Engineer, including subsurface exploration and laboratory testing.
Sandstone: A sedimentary rock of cemented sand-size particles.
Saturated: A rock or soil whose interstices are filled with water.
Sedimentary Rock: The class of rocks made up of transported and deposited rock and
mineral particles (sediment) and of chemical substances derived from weathering.
Seiche: Oscillation of the surface of an enclosed body of water owing to earthquake
shaking.
Seismicity: The geographic and historical distribution of earthquakes.
Settlement: The downward movement of a soil or of the structure which it supports,
resulting from a reduction in the voids in the underlying strata.
Shale: A thinly layered or stratified sedimentary rock of clay-size particles.
Siltstone: A sedimentary rock of cemented particles intermediate in size between sand
and clay (silt).
Slip Rate: The average rate of displacement at a point along a fault as determined from
geodetic measurements, from offset manmade structures, or from offset geologic
features whose age can be estimated.
Soil: In engineering, all unconsolidated material above bedrock.
Stratigraphy: The study of the character, form, and sequence of layered rocks.
Subsidence: Downward settling of the Earth's surface with little or no horizontal motion.
May be caused by natural geologic processes (such as sediment compaction or tectonic
activity) or by human activity (such as mining or withdrawal of ground water or
petroleum).
Subsurface Geologic Report: A geologic investigation conducted by a Registered
Geologist or Certified Engineering Geologist that provides information on the
distribution, nature, genesis and properties of subsurface materials through direct
observation by means of trenches, test pits or borings.
Surface Faulting: Displacement that reaches the ground surface during slip along a
fault. Commonly accompanies moderate and large earthquakes having focal depths to
20 km.
Tectonic: Refers to crustal-deforming processes that affect relatively large areas.
90
Thousand Oaks General Plan
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                         Glossary
Tsunami: An impulsively generated sea wave that results from large-scale seafloor
displacements associated with large earthquakes, major sea-floor slides, or volcanic
activity.
Urban Interface: That line, area, or zone where structures and other human
development meets or intermingles with undeveloped wildland and associated
flammable vegetation.
Wildfire: An uncontrolled fire, usually spreading through vegetative fuels but. often
consuming structures as well.
Wildland: An area in which development is essentially non-existent, except for roads,
railroads, powerlines, and similar transportation facilities. Structures, if any, are widely
scattered and are primarily for recreational purposes.
                                                                                         91
                                       Thousand Oaks General Plan
Glossary                                Safety Element 2014 Update
         This page intentionally left blank.
92
Thousand Oaks General Plan
Safety Element 2014 Update                                             Bibliography
BIBLIOGRAPHY
A. Planning/Planning for Seismic Hazards
California Seismic Safety Commission, 1993, The Commercial Property Owner’s Guide
to Earthquake Safety.
California Seismic Safety Commission, 1994, The Homeowner’s Guide to Earthquake
Safety.
California Seismic Safety Commission, 1994, California at Risk: Reducing Earthquake
Hazards 1992-1996, Report No. 94-01.
County of Ventura, 1995, Hazard Mitigation Grant Program Subgrantee Application.
Jones, L. and Perry-Huston, S., 1994, Living with Earthquakes in Southern California,
unpublished article, U.S. Geological Survey.
Leighton & Associates, 1974, City of Thousand Oaks, Seismic SafetyElement - Part I,
Thousand Oaks General Plan.
Nichols, D.R. and Buchanan-Banks, J.M., 1974, Seismic Hazards and Land-Use
Planning, Geological Survey Circular 690.
Perliter & Ingalsbe Consulting Engineers, 1985, Analyses of Steel Reservoirs for
Earthquake Safety, Engineering Report.
B. Seismicity and Regional Tectonics
American Petroleum Institute, 1987. Recommended Practice for Planning, Designing
and Constructing Fixed Offshore Platforms, API Recommended Practice 2A(RP2A),.
Seventeenth Edition, April 1, 1987.
Blake, T.F., 1991. Synopsis of the Character and Recency of Faulting Along the Simi-
Santa Rosa Fault System, in: Engineering Geology Alorig the Simi-Santa Rosa Fault
System and Adjacent Areas. Simi VaIley to Camarillo; Association of Engineering
Geologists, Southern California Section, 1991 Field Trip.
Boore, D.M., Joyner, W.B., and Fumal, T.E., 1993. Estimation of Response Spectra and
Peak Accelerations from Western North American Earthquakes: An Interim Report, U.S.
Geological Survey, Part 1, Open File Report 93-509, 72p; and Part 2, Open File Report
94-127, 40p.
California Geological Survey, 2000. Seismic Hazard Zone Report for the Thousand
Oaks 7.5-minute Quadrangle, Ventura and Los Angeles Counties, California Seismic
Hazard Zone Report 042.
Campbell, K.W., 1981. Near Source Attenuation of Peak Horizontal Acceleration,
Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America, Vol. 71, No.6, pp. 2039-2070,
December 1981.
                                                                                  93

                                                            Thousand Oaks General Plan
Bibliography                                                  Safety Element 2014 Update
Campbell, K.W., 1985. Strong Motion Attenuation Relations: A Ten-Year Perspective,
Earthquake Spectra, Vol. 1, No.4, August, 1985.
Davis, T. and Namson, J., 1991. Cross Section of the Western Santa Monica Mountains
to the San Andreas Fault, in: Engineering Geology Along the Simi-Santa Rosa Fault
System and Adjacent Areas. Simi Valley to Camarillo; Association of Engineering
Geologists, Southern California Section, 1991 Field Trip.
Dolan, J.F. et al, 1995. Prospects for Larger for More Frequent Earthquakes in the Los
Angeles Metropolitan Region, Science, Vol. 267, 13 January 1995, pp. 199-205 .
Earthquake Engineering Research Center, 1994. Preliminary Report on the Principal
Geotechnical Aspects of the January 17, 1994 Northridge Earthquake, University of
California at Berkeley, Report No. UCBIEERC-94/08, June
Evernden, J.F. and Thomson, J.M., 1985. Predicting Seismic Intensities, in: Evaluating
Earthquake Hazards in the Los Angeles Region-An Earth Science Perspective, U.S.
Geological Survey Professional Paper 1360.
Evernden, J.F. and Thomson, J.M., 1988. Predictive Model for important Ground Motion
Parameters Associated with Large and Great Earthquakes, U.S. Geological Survey
Bulletin 1838.
Hauksson, E., Jones, L.M., and Hutton, K., 1995. The 1994 Northridge Earthquake
Sequence in California: Seismological and Tectonic Aspects, Journal of Geophysical
Research, Vol. 100, No. B7, PP. 12,335-12,355, July 10, 1995.
Idriss, I.M., 1985. Evaluating Seismic Risk in Engineering Practice
Irvine, P.J., 1991. An Overview of Slope Stability in the Simi Valley Area, in:
Engineering Geology Along the Simi-Santa Rosa Fault System and Adjacent Areas.
Simi Valley to Camarillo; Association of Engineering Geologists, Southern California
Section, 1991 Field Trip.
Jennings, C.S., 1994. Fault Activity Map of California and Adjacent Areas, California
Division of Mines and Geology, Geologic Data Map Series, Map No.6. .
Krinitsky, E.L. and Chang, F.K., 1977. State-of-the-Art for Assessing Earthquake
Hazards in the United States, Miscellaneous Paper S-73-1, Report 7, Specifying Peak
Motions for Design Earthquakes, U.S. Army Engineer Waterways Experiment Station.
Los Angeles Times Article, May 20, 1994. 30-Mile Earthquake Fault Suspected Beneath
Thousand Oaks, Los Angeles Times, Ventura County West edition.
Petersen, M.D. and Wesnousky, S.G., 1994. Fault Slip Rates and Earthquakes
Histories for Active Faults in Southern California, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of
America, Vol. 84, No.5, pp. 1608-1649.
94
Thousand Oaks General Plan
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                  Bibliography
Real, CR, Toppozoda, T.R., and Parke, D.L., 1978. Earthquake Epicenter Map of
California Showing Events from 1900 through 1974 Equal to or Greater than Magnitude
4.0 or Intensity V, Map Sheet 39.
Schnabel, P.B. & Seed, H.B., 1972, Acceleration in Rock for Earthquakes in the
Western United States, Earthquake Engineering Research Center report No. 72·2, Univ.
of California, Berkeley.
Jackson, D.D. et al, 1995. Seismic Hazards in Southern California: Probable
Earthquakes, 1994·2024, Southern California Earthquake Center Working Group on
California Earthquake Probabilities, Bulletin of the Seismological Society of America,
Vol. 85, No.2, April, pp. 379- 439.
Tinsley, J.C. et aI, 1985. Evaluating Liquefaction Potential in Evaluating Earthquake
Hazards in the Los Angeles Region·An Earth Science Perspective, U.S. Geological
Survey Professional Paper 1360.
U.S. Geological Survey, 1987. Recent Reverse Faulting in the Transverse Ranges,
California, Professional Paper 1339.
U. S. Geological Survey and Southern California Earthquake Center, 1994. The
Magnitude 6.7 Northridge, California, Earthquake of 17 January 1994, Science, Vol.
266,21 October, 1994, pp. 289·397.
Wells, D.L and Coppersmith, K.J., 1993. Updated Empirical Relationships Among
Magnitude, Rupture Length, Rupture Area, and Surface Displacement, report submitted
to the Seismological Society of America by Geomatrix Consultants, March 1993.
Wesnousky, S.G., 1986. Earthquakes, Quaternary, Faults, and Seismic Hazard in
California, Journal of GeophysicaI Research, Vol. 91, No. B12, PP. 12,587·12631, Nov.
10, 1986.
Yeats, R. S., 1988. Late Quaternary Slip Rate on the Oak Ridge Fault, Transverse
Ranges, California: Implications/or Seismic Risk, Journal of Geophysical Research, Vol.
93, No. BIO, October 10, 1988, pp.12, 137-12,149.
Yeats, RS., Huftile, and Stitt, L.T., 1994. Late Cenozoic Tectonics of the East Ventura
Basin, Transverse Ranges, California, American Association of Petroleum Geologists.
Vol. 78, No.7, July 1994, pp. 1040-1074.
Yeats, RS. and Huftile, G.J., 1995. The Oak Ridge Fault System and the 1994
Northridge Earthquake, Nature, Vol. 373,2. February, 1995, pp. 418-420.
Youd, T.L., ASCE, M., and Perkins, D.M., 1978. Mapping Liquefaction-Induced Ground
Failure Potential, Journal of Geotechnical Engineering Division, April 1978.
Ziony, J.I, ed., 1985. Evaluating Earthquake Hazards in the Los Angeles Region-An
Earth Science Perspective, U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1360.
                                                                                      95

                                                          Thousand Oaks General Plan
Bibliography                                                Safety Element 2014 Update
Ziony, J.I., and Yerkes, 1985. Evaluating Earthquake and Surface -Faulting Potential, in:
Evaluating Earthquake Hazards in the Los Angeles Region - An Earth Science
Perspective, U.S. Geological Survey Professional Paper 1360.
C.     Area Geology
City of Thousand Oaks, 1979. Final Environmental Impact Report, Tract 2828/HPD-77-
12, Kevington Hills, Ltd, prepared by City of Thousand Oaks Planning Department.
Diblee, T. W. and Ehrenspeck, H.E., 1990. Geologic Map of the Camarillo and Newbury
Park Quadrangles, Ventura County, California, Diblee Foundation Map #DF-28.
Diblee, T. W. and Ehrenspeck, H.E., 1993. Geologic Map oj the Thousand Oaks Area,
Los Angeles and Ventura Counties, California, Diblee Foundation Map #49.
Ehlert, KW., 1994. Report of Geological Investigation, Vesting Tentative Tract 4831,
City of Thousand Oaks, Ventura County, California, April 14, 1994, report prepared for
Arrow Engineering.
Envicom Corporation, 1994. Response to Comments Document and Addendum
No.301, Dos Vientos Ranch, Vesting Tentative Tract No. 4831, June 27, 1994.
Jennings, C.W. and Strand, R.G., 1969. Geologic Map of California, Los Angeles Sheet,
California Division of Mines and Geology, Scale 1:250,000.
Weber, F.H., 1973. Geology and Mineral Resources Study of Southern Ventura County.
California, California, Division of Mines and Geology, Preliminary Report 14.
Weber, F.H., 1984. Geology of the Calabasas-Agoura-Eastern Thousand Oaks Area,
Los Angeles and Ventura Counties, California, California Division of Mines and
Geology, Open-file Report 84-1 LA.
Yerkes, R.F., 1991. Preliminary Geologic Map of the Thousand Oaks 7.5'Quadrangle.
Southern California, in: Engineering Geology Along the Simi·Santa Rosa Fault System
and Adjacent Areas. Simi Valley to Camarillo; Association of Engineering Geologists,
Southern California Section, 1991 Field Trip.
D. Soils and Slope Stability
California Geological Survey, 2000. Seismic Hazard Zone Report for the Thousand
Oaks 7.5-minute Quadrangle, Ventura and Los Angeles Counties, California Seismic
Hazard Zone Report 042.
Prentice, L.E., 2005. Geotechnical Evaluation of Shallow Groundwater, Kevin Street
and Surrounding Area, Fugro West, Inc, dated February 10, 2005.
Leighton, F.B. Landslides and Urban Development, in: Engineering Geology in
Southern California, Association of Engineering Geologists Special Publication.
U.S. Soil Conservation Service, 1970. Soil Survey of the Ventura Area, U.S.
Department of Agriculture.
96

Thousand Oaks General Plan
Safety Element 2014 Update                                             Bibliography
Weber, F.R. and Wills, C.J, 1983. Map Showing Landslides of the Central and Western
Santa Monica Mountains, Los Angeles and Ventura Counties, California, California
Division of Mines and Geology Open File Report 83-16.
E. Groundwater and Flooding
California Department of Water Resources, 1974. Wood Ranch Dam, Final Inundation
Map, dated April 11, 1974.
California Department of Water Resources, 1976a. Westlake Reservoir Dam, Final
Inundation Map, dated February 2,1976.
California Department of Water Resources, 1976b. Lake Sherwood Dam, Final
Inundation Map, dated February 2, 1976.
California Department of Water Resources, 1995. Statutes and Regulation Pertaining to
Supervision of Dams and Reservoirs, Division of Safety of Dams.
Clearpoint Engineering, 1994. Deficiency Study, Arroyo Conejo, Erbes Road Drain, and
Thousand Oaks North Drain.
Federal Emergency Management Agency, 2010. Flood Insurance Rate Maps, Ventura
County, California and Incorporated Areas.French, J.J., 1980. Ground Water in the
Thousand Oaks Area, Ventura County. California, U.S. Geological Survey, Water-
Resources Investigation 80-63.
Hawks and Associates, 1992. City of Thousand Oaks, Master Plan of Drainage.
Jensen Engineering, 1975. Inundation Study/or Lake Sherwood
Kennedy/Jenks/Chilton Consulting Engineers and Scientists, 1992. Final Report,
Feasibility Study of Groundwater, Utilization/or Nonpotable Water Demands, report no.
K/J 894608.00
Koebig and Koebig, Inc., 1974. Master Drainage Study, Proposed Drainage Facilities
Plan for Conejo Valley, Flood Zone Ill, June 1974, adopted by the City Council
November 19, 1974.
Michael Brandman Associates, 1994. Final Environmental Impact Report, Lang Ranch
Retention and Debris Basin, Residential Planned Development Permit RPD 94-457,
December 1994.
Perliter & Ingalsbe Consulting Engineers, 1973. Data to accompany Inundation Maps -
Wood Ranch Dam (Lake Bard Reservoir), Owner-Calleguas Municipal Water District,
Thousand Oaks, California.
Ventura County General Plan, 1994. Ventura County General Plan, Hazards Index,
Adopted May 24, 1988, Amended July 12, 1994.
Ventura County Public Works Agency, 1986. Quadrennial Report of Hydrologic Data,
1980-84.
Ventura County Public Works Agency, 1994. Groundwater Conditions Report, 1985-90.
                                                                                  97
                                                        Thousand Oaks General Plan
Bibliography                                             Safety Element 2014 Update
F. Plans, Ordinances and Guidelines
California Seismic Safety Commission, Model Ordinance, Chapter 88 (i), Earthquake
Hazard Reduction if Existing Buildings.
City of Agoura Hills, 1992. Emergency Operations Plan.
City of Thousand Oaks, Development Processing Policy and Procedure Manual, Final
Copy, undated.
City of Thousand Oaks, brochure: Grading in the City of Thousand Oaks, undated.
City of Thousand Oaks, 2008, Emergency Operations Plan.
City of Thousand Oaks, 2004, Local Hazard Mitigation Plan.
City of Thousand Oaks, 1996, Safety Element, Thousand Oaks General Plan.
City of Thousand Oaks, Thousand Oaks Municipal Code.
Department of Conservation, 1990. Seismic Hazards Mapping Act of 1990, State Mining
and Geology Board.
Fisher, J.E., 1994. Proposed Ventura County Geologic Hazards Ordinance, Ventura
County Board of Supervisors.
Hart, E. W.,1994. Fault-Rupture Hazard Zones in California, California Division of Mines
and Geology, Special Publication 42.
Herman, F., Russell, J., Scott, S., and Sharpe, R., 1990. Earthquake Hazard
Identification and Voluntary Mitigation: Palo Alto City Ordinance, California Seismic
Safety Conunission Report No. SSC 90-05.
Leighton & Associates, 1995. Safety Element for the City of Santa Monica General
Plan, Project No. 2910399-01, dated January.
URS, 2010. Ventura County Hazard Mitigation Plan, adopted December 2010,
approved by FEMA February 2011.
Ventura County, 1986. Ventura County Hazardous Waste Management Plan, adopted
in 1986, approved by Department of Health Services in 1990.
Ventura County Fire Protection District, 2005. Fire Management Plan
G. Terrorism
LaFree, Gary, and Bianca Bersani, 2012. Hot Spots of Terrorism and Other Crimes in
the United States, 1970 to 2008, Final Report to Human Factors/Behavioral Sciences
Division, Science and Technology Directorate, U.S. Department of Homeland Security,
College Park, MD: START).
Federal Bureau of Investigation, 2005. Terrorism 2002-2005, U.S. Department of
Justice, Washington, D.C.
98
Thousand Oaks General Plan
Safety Element 2014 Update                                                Bibliography
H. Other
Calleguas Municipal Water District, 1988. Potable Water Distribution Facilities, maps
dated January through March 1988.
California Water Service Company, 1995. Water System of Westlake, zone map dated
January 15, 1995.
Crosby, B., 1992. Our Wild Fire, June 1992 article in Sunset Magazine, distributed by
the Ventura County Fire Department.
Fulton, W., 1995. Burn California, Burn, Planning, Vol. 61, No.6, June 1995, pp. 5-8.
Gilmer, M., 1994. Wildfire Landscaping, Preparing for the Coming Trend in Defensible
Space Homesites, October 1994 article in Pacific Coast Nurseryman and Garden
Supply Dealer, distributed by the Ventura County Fire Department.
Shell Oil Company. Map of 10" Ventura Crude Line (y-1630), Record #3727, Log #16,
Nov-93, TG# 526, 527, undated.
Southern California Gas Company, Map of distribution lines in the Thousand Oaks area,
untitled and undated.
Ventura County Fire Department, undated. Commitment to Defense, Protect Your
Home Against Wildfire.
Ventura County Fire Protection District, undated. Wildland Fire Unit, in Pursuit of
Consistency.
                                                                                      99
                                           Thousand Oaks General Plan
Bibliography                                Safety Element 2014 Update
             This page intentionally left blank.
100


































































































