City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                               Land Use Element
II. LAND USE
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
Land Use Legislation
The adoption of a General Plan by cities and counties became a legal
requirement in 1955. At that time, a General Plan consisted of Land Use and
Circulation Elements. In 1971, the Legislature created one of the most important
features of State planning law by requiring that local zoning and subdivision
approval be consistent with the General Plan. Government Code 65302 (a)
defines the Land Use Element as follows:
       A Land Use Element generally defines the proposed distribution, location,
       and extent of uses of the land for housing, business, industry, open space
       (including agriculture, natural resources, recreation, and enjoyment of
       scenic beauty), education, public buildings and grounds, solid and liquid
       waste disposal facilities, other categories of public buildings and grounds,
       and other categories of public and private uses of land. The Land Use
       Element shall include a statement of the standards of population density
       and building intensity recommended for the various districts and other
       territory covered by the plan which are subject to flooding and shall be
       reviewed annually with respect to such areas.
Purpose and Function
The purpose of the Land Use Element is to establish a pattern of compatible land
uses to reflect existing conditions and to set standards and policies to guide
future development. The focus is on community growth consistent with the City’s
small-town qualities and rural neighborhood character. By law, the element must
set clear standards for density of population and development intensity for each
proposed land use category. The Land Use Element, which has the broadest
scope of the seven required elements, provides a composite discussion of the
issues affecting Villa Park through text, diagrams and illustrative land use maps.
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
Section 65300.5 of the California Government Code requires the General Plan
be consistent throughout (i.e., “internally consistent”). The assumptions and
projections used in the Housing Element, for instance, must be consistent with
those used in the Land Use Element and the Open Space Element. Local
policies must not conflict with Statewide policies pertaining to housing, open
space and environmental quality.
                                         II-1

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                               Land Use Element
INVENTORY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
Sphere of Influence
The City of Villa Park encompasses 2.1 square miles and currently has no
opportunity for expansion of its city limits due to the limitations of “sphere of
influence” boundaries established by the Orange County Local Agencies
Formation Commission (LAFCO). The sphere of influence boundaries are co-
terminus with the City limits. Villa Park is completely encircled by the City of
Orange with the exception of a small area controlled by the County of Orange.
Adjoining Areas
Zoning in areas surrounding Villa Park is composed of single-family residential
parcels ranging from 6,000 to 20,000 square feet, a planned community district, a
multiple family district, a sand and gravel extraction district, water reclamation
and flood control facilities, and a small amount for professional use.
The Santiago Creek Greenbelt, including intercommunity recreational trail
linkages, has been in development since the early 1970’s. The former sand and
gravel mining operations along Santiago Creek between Bond Street and
Cannon Street resulted in extensive pits, some as much as 500 feet in depth.
The pits have been converted for flood control and water conservation uses by
the County of Orange and the Orange County Water District.
Land Use and Zoning Patterns
Land Use Classifications
Land use classifications designated by the Villa Park General Plan are defined in
terms of population density and building intensity and are illustrated on Exhibit II-
1. Single family Residential (SFR) is the predominant land use in Villa Park as
shown in Table II-1. Land use categories are as follows:
    1. Single Family Residential --- 1.75 dwelling units/acre
    2. Single Family Residential --- 2.5 dwelling units/acre
    3. Single Family Residential --- 3.0 dwelling units/acre
    4. Commercial
    5. Open Space
                                          II-2

City of Villa Park
 2010 General Plan
     Exhibit II-1
Land Use Policy Map
   Legend
   Estate Low Density
   Residential 1.75 DU/AC
   Low Density Residential
   2.5 DU/AC
   Low Medium Density
   Residential 3.0 DU/AC
   Commercial
   Open Space
     CITY OF VILLA PARK
     17855 SANTIAGO BOULEVARD
     VILLA PARK, CALIFORNIA 92861
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                                            Land Use Element
                                                      Table II-1
                                                 City of Villa Park
                         Land Use by General Plan Classification (2007)
Land Use Classification                            Total Acreage¹                       Percentage of Total¹
       SFR – 1.75 du/ac                                1170.30                                   87%
       SFR – 2.5 du/ac                                   57.05                                  4.2%
       SFR – 3.0 du/ac                                   78.82                                  5.9%
       Commercial                                        11.55                                   .8%
       Open Space²                                       27.83                                  2.1%
       Total                                           1,345.55                                 100%
¹ All calculations are approximate
² 25.9 acres of which lies within the Santiago Creek water reclamation and flood control area
Zoning Districts
Zoning Classifications implemented by the Municipal Code are defined in terms
of how land is occupied or planned to be utilized. A total of twelve zoning districts
have been formed and are listed as follows:
            1. Small Estates: E-4-20,000 square feet
            2. Single Family Residence: R-1-13,500 square feet
            3. Single Family Residence: R-1-12,000 square feet
            4. Single Family Residence: R-1-10,000 square feet
            5. Single Family Residence: R-1-9,500 square feet
            6. Single Family Residence: R-1-9,000 square feet
            7. Single Family Residence: R-1-8,500 square feet
            8. Single Family Residence: R-1-8,400 square feet
            9. Single Family Residence: R-1-8,000 square feet
            10. Architectural Supervision/Commercial Neighborhood: AC-CN
            11. Planned Community
            12. Open Space
Availability of Vacant Developable and Sub-Dividable Land Parcels
As illustrated on Exhibit II-2, “Developable Land Parcels,” a total of five parcels
in the SFR – 1.75 du/ac land use district are reported as vacant and remain
undeveloped and a total of four parcels in the same district are sub-dividable into
more than four lots.
                                                           II-4

  City of Villa Park
   2010 General Plan
       Exhibit II-2
Developable Vacant and
 Sub-dividable Parcels
     Legend
   Developable Vacant
   Parcels
   Sub-dividable Parcels (>4
   Parcels)
       CITY OF VILLA PARK
       17855 SANTIAGO BOULEVARD
       VILLA PARK, CALIFORNIA 92861
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                      Land Use Element
Non-Residential Development
Neighborhood Shopping Center
Villa Park’s 11.55 acre community Towne Centre provides retail, professional,
and employment opportunities for its residents and visitors. Also, within the Villa
Park Towne Centre are City Hall, the Villa Park branch of the Orange County
Public Library, and a United States Post Office contract station.
Schools: Open Space and Recreational Uses
Eighty acres of “Small Estates: E-4-20,000 sq. ft.” zoned property is currently
utilized by Orange Unified School District as school sites for educating students
residing in the broader Orange, Anaheim and the Villa Park attendance zones.
Infrastructure and Municipal Services
The City of Villa Park remains essentially a “Contract City”, relying heavily upon a
volunteer City Council, a small professional staff, key workers, outside
professional consultants, and a wide variety of contractual agreements for on-
going operations and maintenance.
Table II-2, “Utility Providers,” lists the services and providers of municipal
services.
                                      Table II-2
                                  City of Villa Park
                                  Utility Providers
  Water:                                      Serrano Water District
  Sewer
     Collection:                              City-Owned System
     Treatment:                               O.C. Sanitation District
     Maintenance Districts No. 1:            City System
  Storm Drainage:                            City Maintained System
  Refuse Collection and Disposal:            Villa Park Disposal
  Electric:                                   Southern California Edison
  Gas:                                        Southern California Gas Co.
  Telephone:                                 AT&T
  Cable TV:                                  Time Warner
Sewer System
The City owns and operates a sanitary sewer system in coordination with the
Orange County Sanitation District for the benefit of the residents of the
community. The system was constructed primarily in the 1960’s and 70’s and is
built-out. The system consists of approximately 153,000 linear feet (29 miles) of
                                          II-6

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                Land Use Element
collector and trunk sewer mains ranging in size from 8 to 15 inches in diameter.
Some of the trunk mains are joint use mains with the City of Orange. It is
estimated there are approximately 10 operating septic tank systems remaining in
the City.
A “Sewer Service User Charge”, which is assessed on the property tax role and
based on land use, is for maintenance and rehabilitation of the sewer system
within the City. The Orange County Sanitation Districts, of which Villa Park is a
member, assesses a “sewer hook-up fee” and a “sewer acreage fee” to support
the regional treatment facilities, operations, and new trunk lines.
Storm Drain System
The City operates a drainage system consisting of open channels, pipe and box
conduits and various types of inlet structures. Land use is a significant factor in
the calculation of the development of the system. The total drainage area of the
system is 2.5 square miles and includes some areas outside the City boundaries.
The City system was started in the 1960’s and has expanded with development.
A key element of the system is the Center Street Storm Drain that runs from
Mesa Drive down to Serrano Avenue and proceeds down Center Street to
Santiago Creek. That portion of the system is owned and operated by the
Orange County Flood Control District. In 1997 the City adopted a Master Plan of
Drainage that identified certain deficiencies in the system. The City has been
addressing these on a priority basis as funds permit.
Contract Services
Villa Park contracts for many of its services including: Building Department
services (permitting and inspection); Civil Engineering; Traffic Engineering; Fire
Protection; Law Enforcement; and legal services through an appointed City
Attorney.
ISSUES AND OPPORTUNITIES
Issues
Challenges to Single-Family Residential Land Use
    •  Since development in the City of Villa Park is over ninety-nine percent
       complete, the primary issue for the future is to protect and maintain the
       desirable character and qualities of the single-family residential
       community.
    •  Since the majority of residences in the City were built in the 1965-1985
       timeframe, appropriate maintenance will be needed to maintain the quality
       of the housing stock.
                                          II-7

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                             Land Use Element
   •   In order to maintain a desirable community, strict adherence to, and
       enforcement of, the zoning codes of the City is essential. To the extent
       possible, variances may be approved only under special adverse
       situations and with appropriate special conditions.
   •   Limited areas of Villa Park are potentially affected by 100-year and 500-
       year flooding events. Just over 10% of properties lie within the 500-year
       flood hazard zone and approximately 2% of properties lie within the 100-
       year flood hazard zone.
Challenges to Commercial Land Use
   •   The City’s current commercial site cannot be developed further due to
       infrastructure and expansion limitations.
Opportunities
   •   Single family residential housing, the predominant land use, is primarily
       owner occupied, and is in good condition throughout the City. With
       continued maintenance, existing housing stock is anticipated to remain in
       sound condition for current and future residents.
   •   Key infrastructure is in good condition, and with continued maintenance
       and funding, road, sewer, and storm drain infrastructure is anticipated to
       remain in sound condition for current and future residents.
   •   There is expressed interest and effort by Towne Centre property owners
       to explore potential improvements to structures and infrastructure within
       the commercial district.
                                        II-8

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                              Land Use Element
GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
The goals, policies, and implementation programs throughout the General Plan
focus on both preserving as well as enhancing Villa Park by managing future
growth, maintaining its high quality residential neighborhoods, and maintenance
and development of the surrounding open space areas.
Land Use Goal # 1: Maintain and enhance the desirable qualities of the
                         neighborhoods that comprise the community.
       Land Use Policies:
       LU #1:        Development – The City shall continue to develop standards
                     that encourage high quality development and take into
                     consideration preservation of the neighborhood setting.
       LU #2:        Zoning Codes The City shall continue to adhere to and
                     enforce the zoning codes. To the extent possible, issuance
                     of variances should take place only under special adverse
                     situations and with appropriate special conditions.
       LU #3:        Rental Housing - The City shall have appropriate guidelines
                     or requirements to address rental housing, tenant safety and
                     potential adverse effects on neighborhoods.
       LU #4:        Maximize Community Resources – Through cooperation and
                     coordination with the four public schools and the Orange
                     Unified School District, the City shall seek to maximize
                     access to the existing public properties for community uses
                     beyond educational functions. These may include recreation,
                     organized team sports programs, community events,
                     community emergency functions and services for the region,
                     and maintaining usable open space.
       LU #5:        Community Involvement - The City shall continue to solicit
                     active neighborhood volunteer leadership and participation in
                     addressing neighborhood problems such as graffiti, parking
                     violations, barking dogs, occupancy exceeding single-family
                     residential capacity, rental property management, public
                     nuisances, vandalism, and poor property maintenance.
       Action Programs:
            1.       For each of the land use categories, City staff shall maintain
                     the adopted standards through adherence to current codes,
                     code enforcement, and education of contractors and
                     property owners. Such standards include maximum lot
                                        II-9

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                            Land Use Element
                   coverage, floor area ratio, minimum setback requirements,
                   maximum height restrictions, and the residential design
                   standards.
            2.     The City shall address property maintenance code
                   enforcement on a proactive basis through active public
                   education efforts, open communications and development of
                   minimum thresholds for enforcement actions.
            3.     City Council and Staff shall annually review and update the
                   City's Zoning Ordinance/Codes in support of the General
                   Plan.
            4.     City leaders and management shall continue to develop
                   partnerships with community organizations and schools to
                   identify, implement, and fund community safety,
                   enhancement, and beautification projects and programs.
            5.     The City shall develop guidelines and requirements for the
                   administration of rental housing, tenant safety, and potential
                   impacts on neighborhoods.
Land Use Goal #2: Preserve and enhance the City’s infrastructure system
                      to ensure that it meets the needs of current and future
                      residents.
       Land Use Policies:
       LU #6:      Maintain Infrastructure and Utility Services - Identify useful
                   life of key infrastructure and establish appropriate
                   rehabilitation programs.
       LU #7:      Multi-Jurisdictional Cooperation - The City shall support
                   cooperative planning with          other Orange County
                   municipalities and agencies to achieve common interests,
                   identify potential revenue and cost sharing opportunities, and
                   comply with California state requirements where applicable
                   for infrastructure projects.
       LU #8:      Federal Flood Proofing Standards - The City shall ensure
                   compliance with all current and future Federal flood proofing
                   requirements.
                                       II-10

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                            Land Use Element
       Action Programs:
             6.    Preserve community aesthetics by effectively and efficiently
                   allocating for prioritized infrastructure maintenance and
                   improvements in the Annual Budget and Capital
                   Improvement Program.
             7.    Continue to require compliance with FEMA standards of
                   flood proofing for substantial improvement projects located
                   within the 100-year floodplain.
Land Use Goal #3: Encourage the development of an attractive and diverse
                    retail and professional commercial center serving the
                    needs of the City’s residents, businesses and visitors.
       Land Use Policies:
        LU #9:     Towne Centre Enhancement - The City, along with
                   partnering property owners, shall facilitate through planning
                   and cooperative economic partnerships enhancements to
                   the appearance, character and viability of the existing Towne
                   Center.
       Action Programs:
             8.    Enhance the existing core commercial area by creating
                   landscape standards, revising the signage design guidelines
                   and standards, and enhancing points of Towne Centre
                   entries.
             9.    Continue the development of consensus with Towne Centre
                   property owners to focus public and private resources to
                   upgrade structures and infrastructure within the Towne
                   Centre.
                                     II-11

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                Circulation Element
III. CIRCULATION
INTRODUCTION
The transportation system of a community is vital to its success. Efficient traffic
circulation is important to economic vitality and promotion of a quality living
environment. The transportation system is multi-modal, providing a variety of
transportation alternatives such as transit, bicycle, and pedestrian systems for
citizens and visitors to access the City.
Purpose and Function
The purpose of the Circulation Element of the General Plan is to provide for an
efficient, convenient and safe transportation system for the City. In order to meet
this objective, the Circulation Element has been designed to accommodate the
anticipated transportation needs of the community based on existing and future
land use within the region.
In compliance with state law, all City and County general plans must contain a
circulation element that designates future road improvements and extensions,
addresses non-motorized transportation alternatives, and identifies funding
options. The intent of the element is to:
     •  Identify the transportation needs and issues within the City, as well as
        regional relationships that affect the City’s transportation system.
     •  Describe the potential circulation system is terms of design elements,
        operating characteristics, and limits of operation.
     •  Consider alternatives other than the single-occupant vehicle in providing
        services and accessing facilities.
     •  Establish policies that coordinate the circulation system with the General
        Plan land use map and provide direction for future decision making
        processes in establishing goals for the Circulation Element.
     •  Develop strategies and identify funding sources to provide for the timely
        application of the Circulation Element goals and policies.
INVENTORY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
The circulation network provides the link between land uses and facilitates
access to home, shopping, jobs and recreation. This section of the Element
describes the existing transportation system with the City’s General Plan study
area. A number of transportation systems are described including:
     •  Streets and Highways
     •  Non-Motorized Transportation
     •  Public/Mass Transportation
     •  Truck Routes
                                          III-1

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                      Circulation Element
Street and Highway System
Functional Roadway Classification System
Functional classification is the process by which streets and highways are
grouped into classes or systems, according to the type of service they are
intended to provide. It is with the understanding that most travel involves the
movement through a network of roads. The City of Villa Park is guided by the
Orange County Transportation Authority (OCTA) for the Master Plan of Arterial
Highways (MPAH) 1 . Consistency with the MPAH ensures that each City and the
County implement the same base transportation network with similar standards
and assumptions. Exhibit III-1 shows the existing roadway network and
classifications. The current system of roadways consists of five basic
classifications as follows:
    •   Principal Arterial – is an eight-lane divided roadway, with a typical right of
        way width of 144 feet with roadway width of 126 feet curb to curb. A
        principal arterial is designed to accommodate 60,000 vehicle trips per day
        at Level of Service C. Villa Park has no Principle Arterials.
    •   Major Arterial – is a six-lane divided roadway, with a typical right-of-way
        width of 120 feet with roadway width of 102 feet. A major arterial is
        designed to accommodate 45,000 vehicle trips per day at Level of Service
        C; Cannon Street falls under this category.
    •   Primary Arterial – is a four-lane divided roadway, with a typical right-of-
        way width of 100 feet with roadway width of 84 feet curb to curb. A primary
        arterial is designed to accommodate 30,000 vehicle trips per day at Level
        of Service C; Villa Park Road falls under this category.
    •   Augmented Primary (City of Orange Classification) – contains six through
        travel lanes within a 100-foot right-of-way. Such roads may contain free
        right turn lanes, additional left turn lanes at intersections, lanes to allow
        movement in and out of bus bays, and other features designed to increase
        roadway capacity.
    •   Secondary Arterial – is a four-lane undivided (no median) roadway, with a
        typical right-of-way width of 80 feet with roadway width of 64 feet curb to
        curb. A secondary arterial is designed to carry 20,000 vehicle trips per day
        at Level of Service C; Santiago Boulevard N/S, Wanda Road, and Meats
        Avenue are examples that fall under this category.
    •   Collector – is a two lane undivided roadway with a typical right-of-way
        width of 56 feet with roadway width of 40 feet curb to curb. A collector is
        designed to accommodate up to 10,000 local vehicle trips per day at Level
        of Service C; Taft Avenue, Center Street, and Lemon Street are examples
        that fall under this category
1
  Guidance for Administration of the Orange County Master Plan of Arterial Highways, Effective
Date of MPAH: January 22, 2007
                                             III-2


City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                   Circulation Element
Level of Service Analysis
In order to evaluate the ability of a roadway to handle existing and future traffic a
level of service (LOS) standard is used. The LOS ranks and characterizes traffic
congestion on a scale of A to F, with LOS A being a free-flow condition and LOS
F considered to be extremely congested. In addition to the LOS ranking, volume
to capacity (V/C) is used to provide a quantified description of traffic conditions.
The minimum acceptable LOS for roadways is LOS C and for intersections is
LOS D. The following provides a definition of the six levels of service for
intersections and design capacity of roadways 2 :
LOS A (V/C ratio of 0.0 to 0.60): Indicates no physical restriction on operating
speeds.
LOS B (V/C ratio of 0.61 to 0.70): Indicates stable flow with few restrictions on
operating speed.
LOS C (V/C ratio of 0.71 to 0.80): Indicates stable flow, higher volume, and more
restrictions on speed and lane changing.
LOS D (V/C ratio of 0.81 to 0.90): Indicates approaching unstable flow, little
freedom to maneuver, and conditions intolerable for short periods.
LOS E (V/C ratio of 0.91 to 1.00): Indicates unstable flow, lower operating
speeds and some momentary stoppages.
LOS F (V/C ratio greater than 1.00): Indicates forced flow operation with low
speeds, where the highway acts as a storage area with many stoppages.
Table III-1 provides roadway capacities for each classification. These capacities
are factored by number of intersections, degree of access, sight distance and
amount of truck and bus traffic. Average Daily Traffic (ADT) is used as a
planning tool to assist in determining arterial highway classification to meet future
traffic demand.
                                       Table III-1
                        Roadway Level of Service Capacity
                                                       Level of Service
Roadway Classification                  A           B          C          D           E
Principal                            45,000      52,500 60,000 67,500              75,000
Major                                33,900      39,400 45,000 50,600              56,300
Primary                              22,500      26,300 30,000 33,800              37,500
Secondary                            15,000      17,500 20,000 22,500              25,000
Collector                             7,500       8,800     10,000 11,300          12,500
2
  Source: County of Orange, Advance Planning Program, Transportation Element, Appendix 4
                                           III-4
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                             Circulation Element
Current Average Daily Traffic Volumes are shown in Exhibit III-2. Table III-2
summarizes existing conditions as well as level of service for the studied
roadways.
                                     Table III-2
                      Existing 2008 Conditions for Roadways
                                                     Existing
Roadway                               Classification             V/C       LOS
                                                     ADT
Cannon Street: Loma St to Taft Ave         Major      29,586       0.526     A
Center Dr: Valley Dr to Serrano Ave      Collector     3,149       0.252     A
Center Dr: Serrano Ave to Villa Park     Collector     3,437       0.275     A
Rd
Center Dr: Villa Park Rd to South        Collector     1,201       0.096     A
End
Cerro Villa: Center Dr to Mesa Dr        Collector      991        0.079     A
Lemon St: Villa Park Rd to Valley Dr     Collector     2,245       0.180     A
Lincoln St: Wanda Rd to East End         Collector     1,608       0.128     A
Meats Ave: Santiago Blvd to            Secondary      10,955       0.438     A
Longridge Dr
Mesa Dr: Lemon St to Cannon St           Collector      943        0.075     A
Santiago Blvd (N/S): Meats Ave to      Secondary      18,039       0.721     C
Villa Park Rd
Santiago Blvd (E/W): Santiago NS to      Collector     4,827       0.386     A
Center Dr
Santiago Blvd (E/W): Center Dr to        Collector     3,245       0.259     A
Sycamore St
Taft Ave: Santiago Blvd to Center Dr     Collector    10,222       0.818     D
Taft Ave: Center Dr to Cannon St         Collector     6,020       0.482     A
Villa Park Rd: Wanda Rd to Center          Major      23,877       0.424     A
Dr
Villa Park Rd: Center Dr to Lemon St       Major      22,906       0.407     A
Wanda Rd: Santiago Blvd to Collins     Secondary      11,523       0.461     A
Ave
                                        III-5

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                            Circulation Element
Future Traffic Demand
New development as a result of regional growth east of Villa Park will result in an
increase in traffic volumes along City streets. In order to estimate the effect of
future traffic on the City’s arterial roadway system, the Orange County
Transportation Authority (OCTA) Traffic Model was used. The model provides a
forecast of ADT for the year 2030. These volumes were adjusted or post-
processed to account for the growth between the model base year of 2000 and
existing conditions. For those segments not represented in the OCTA traffic
model, a one percent ambient growth rate was applied to existing 2008 traffic
volumes to the year 2030. These volumes and the adjusted 2030 ADT are
presented in Table III-3. Exhibit III-3 presents the 2030 Average Daily Traffic
Volume for each studied roadway segment.
                                     Table III-3
                           2030 Conditions for Roadways
Roadway                               Classification   2030       V/C       LOS
                                                       ADT
Cannon Street: Loma St to Taft Ave         Major      33,787     0.600         A
Center Dr: Valley Dr to Serrano Ave      Collector     4,508     0.361         A
Center Dr: Serrano Ave to Villa Park     Collector     4,709     0.376         A
Rd
Center Dr: Villa Park Rd to South        Collector     1,465     0.117         A
End
Cerro Villa: Center Dr to Mesa Dr        Collector     1,209     0.097         A
Lemon St: Villa Park Rd to Valley Dr     Collector     2,739     0.219         A
Lincoln St: Wanda Rd to East End         Collector    1,962      0.156         A
Meats Ave: Santiago Blvd to            Secondary      16,949     0.677         B
Longridge Dr
Mesa Dr: Lemon St to Cannon St           Collector     1,150     0.092         A
Santiago Blvd (N/S): Meats Ave to      Secondary      19,088     0.763         C
Villa Park Rd
Santiago Blvd (E/W): Santiago NS to      Collector    5,889      0.471         A
Center Dr
Santiago Blvd (E/W): Center Dr to        Collector    3,959      0.316         A
Sycamore St
Taft Ave: Santiago Blvd to Center Dr     Collector     9,742     0.779         C
Taft Ave: Center Dr to Cannon St         Collector     8,422     0.674         B
Villa Park Rd: Wanda Rd to Center        Primary      28,866     0.770         C
Dr
Villa Park Rd: Center Dr to Lemon St     Primary      28,686     0.765         C
Wanda Rd: Santiago Blvd to Collins     Secondary      14,101     0.564         A
Ave
                                        III-7


City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                             Circulation Element
Results of the segment analysis for the Year 2030 indicate that the majority of
segments will be operating at acceptable LOS A thru LOS C.
In November of 2009 the City of Villa Park initiated discussions with the OCTA,
the County of Orange, and the City of Orange regarding modifying the
classification of VPR in the MPAH. OCTA took the lead on the project and
contracted Austin Foust Associates Inc. to initiated a cooperative study to
determine the effects of downgrading VPR on roadway and intersections within
the study area and what mitigation measures should be implemented to offset
any impacts created.
By July of 2010 the OCTA Board of Directors, County of Orange, and City of
Orange approved an amendment to the MPAH to reclassify Villa Park Road from
a Major Arterial, as shown on Table III-2 - Existing 2008 Roadway Conditions
and Exhibit III-1, to a Primary Arterial as shown on Table III-3 - 2030 Conditions
for Roadways and Exhibit III-4 – Road Network and Classification.
As future volumes increase due to development in adjacent communities
roadways with a LOS of D or worse would need to be improved in order to
encourage regional traffic to use primary roadways and discourage the use of
alternative routes through residential neighborhoods with collector or local street
designations. Exhibit III-4 shows the future roadway network and classifications.
The Regional Circulation map is included as Exhibit III-5 and is available at City
Hall.
Vehicular Improvements
The following would serve to improve segment LOS to acceptable levels of LOS
“C” or better.
    •   Upgrade roadways with improvements that will promote the flow of
        through traffic. This can be done with improvements such as
        synchronization of signals along the route, adding exclusive turn lanes
        where feasible, restrict parking or minimize access during peak hours.
                                          III-9


Villa Park
           Exhibit III-5
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                 Circulation Element
Non-Motorized Transportation
Bicycling and walking are key elements of Villa Park’s planned circulation
system. Maintaining a system of bicycle facilities is important for both recreation
and transportation purposes. Bikeways provide links to schools, civic and
neighborhood shopping centers within the region. The City’s Master Plan of
bikeways is shown in Exhibit III-6. The Plan includes both local trails, bikeways
and regional trails that provide connections to Orange County bicycle routes.
The City uses the following bicycle facility classifications:
   •    Class I (Bike Path/ Regional trail): are facilities at least 8 feet in width that
        are physically separated from vehicular roadways. These facilities can be
        used by both bicycles and pedestrians.
   •    Class II (Bike Lanes): consist of a painted stripe reserving at least five feet
        nearest the curb for bicycle use.
   •    Class III (Bike Routes): are designated only with signs.
The majority of the City of Villa Parks roadways with a collector or above
classification are striped with a Class II bike lane, with the exception of Meats
Avenue. All residential or local streets are considered to be Class III bike routes.
The Regional Non-Motorized Trail map is included as Exhibit III-7.
Truck Routes
The movement of goods and services throughout the City is an integral part of
the economy of the City. Directing truck traffic to specially designated truck
routes minimizes impacts that could occur on local roadways. The City has
designated the following streets as truck routes with weight limitations:
   •    Wanda Road
   •    Villa Park Road
   •    Santiago Boulevard N/S
   •    Cannon Street
The City will monitor and examine dedicated truck routes periodically to ensure
the safety of residents, neighborhoods and pedestrians.
                                        III-12


Exhibit III-
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                              Circulation Element
Transit Service
Villa Park is served by the Orange County Transportation Authority (OCTA).
OCTA provides public transit service, which links major employment centers and
residential areas. Bus stops are provided along Wanda Road and Santiago
Boulevard. In addition to the fixed route bus system, OCTA provides a paratransit
service for frail elderly and special needs persons who are unable to utilize fixed
route buses.
Local and Regional Public Transportation maps are available at City Hall.
Railroads
There are no railroads or stations within the City of Villa Park. The closest station
is located in the City of Orange on Chapman Avenue, west of the traffic circle.
Airports
There are no airports within Villa Park or adjacent to the City. The Orange
County John Wayne Airport (JWA) is located 8.7 miles south of Villa Park.
                                        III-15
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                              Circulation Element
GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
Circulation Goal #1: To provide a comprehensive transportation system that will
                        address future growth and development within the City and
                        in adjacent communities and minimize congestion.
       Circulation Policies:
       C #1:       Work with Caltrans and adjacent jurisdictions to improve the
                   operational performance of highways within and adjacent to
                   the City.
       C# 2:       Maintain a peak level of service at intersections of “D” or better
                   and along roadway segments of “C” or better.
       C #3:       Discourage through traffic on local streets.
       C #4:       Coordinate and cooperate with neighboring jurisdictions and
                   Regional, State and Federal agencies to improve regional
                   access for residents and workers.
       C #5:       Assign street classifications to provide an acceptable level of
                   service based on projected traffic demands, circulation
                   functions and the areas that they are intended to serve.
       Action Programs:
           1.      Support freeway improvements that divert through traffic from
                   local and arterial streets.
           2.      Improve intersection operations by providing traffic signal
                   maintenance and improvement measures such as
                   synchronization of signals, left and right turn lanes, protected
                   left turn phasing.
           3.      Improve roadway operations on major segments by minimizing
                   interruption to traffic flow during peak commute periods with
                   peak hour parking restrictions.
           4.      Provide adequate sight distances for safe vehicular movement
                   on roadways at intersections and driveways.
           5.      Advocate regional arterial roadway alignment planning and
                   construction that will divert regional traffic around the City of
                   Villa Park.
                                         III-16

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                            Circulation Element
           6.      Put in place traffic calming measures on local streets such as
                   chokers, turn restrictions, road narrowing devices, curb
                   extensions and added speed signage to discourage cut-
                   through traffic.
           7.      Maintain Villa Park Road as a Primary Arterial to reflect
                   intended function and operation.
           8.      Encourage the City of Orange to provide additional or
                   enhanced routes to/from new development in East Orange.
Circulation Goal #2: Encourage the use of alternative means of transportation.
       Circulation Policies:
       C #6:       Support bicycle routes that minimize cyclist/motorist conflicts.
       C #7:       Support Regional, State and Federal agencies in providing
                   additional local fixed route bus and para-transit service to the
                   City.
       C #8:       Encourage the use of carpools and van pools whenever
                   possible.
       Action Programs:
           9.      Maintain a bikeway system that provides links to routes in
                   neighboring communities and regional bicycle routes.
           10.     Encourage business and larger employment centers to
                   provide bike racks and safe storage facilities at major parking
                   areas.
           11.     Develop attractive bus stops that are accessible and
                   convenient to use.
                                        III-17
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                      Housing Element
IV. HOUSING
CONTENTS
The Housing Element includes:
   Section                                                              Page
   1. Introduction………………………………………………………………..                              2
   2. Citizen Participation……………………………………………………...                        4
   3. Progress Report………………………………………………………….                              4
   4. Housing Needs Assessment……………………………………………                           6
   5. Sites Inventory and Analysis and Zoning for a Variety of Housing
       Types………………………………………………………………………                                  21
   6. Constraints on Housing………………………………………………….                         27
   7. Quantified Objectives by Income Group……………………………….                 37
   8. Other Topics………………………………………………………………                               38
   9. Goals and Policies……………………………………………………….                           39
   10. Housing Programs……………………………………………………….                            39
                                           IV-1

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                         Housing Element
INTRODUCTION
Purpose of the Element
Providing adequate housing for families and individuals of all economic levels is an important
issue and particular focus for State and local governments. The California Legislature
amended the Government Code in 1980 to require that each local community include in its
Housing Element a specific analysis of its housing needs and a realistic set of programs
designed to meet those needs. This Housing Element carries out the required analysis.
State Housing Law Requirements
The State Government Code describes the Housing Element as follows:
    The Housing Element shall consist of an identification and analysis of existing and
    projected housing needs and a statement of goals, policies, quantified objectives, and
    scheduled programs for the preservation, improvement, and development of housing. The
    Housing Element shall identify adequate sites for housing, including rental housing,
    factory-built housing and mobile homes, and shall make adequate provision for the
    existing and projected needs of all economic segments of the community.
Authority for the Housing Element
Housing elements have been a required part of City General Plans since 1967. The current
Government Code requirements have evolved over the past decades, including two major
milestones:
    1. In 1977, the Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) published
        “Housing Element Guidelines”. The “Guidelines” provided detailed content
        requirements of the Housing Element, and gave HCD a “review and approval” function
        over City’s Housing Element.
    2. In 1981, Article 10.6 of the Government Code was enacted, thereby revising HCD’s
        role from “review and approval” to that of “review and comment” on local Housing
        Elements.
State law requires that the City’s Housing Element be updated every 5 years. However, to
coincide with the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) mandated update, Villa
Park’s Housing Element will cover the 2006-2014 time period. The Element update provides
information on the City’s housing needs, resources and constraints, and revises the goals,
policies, and objectives from the prior Housing Element.
                                              IV-2

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                            Housing Element
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Review
Most Villa Park projects are categorically exempt from CEQA. If a project is exempt from
CEQA, the project proceeds directly to the City Council for review. If the project is not
exempt, an initial study is prepared to identify potential environmental impacts that may be
associated with the project, identify mitigation measures and determine the appropriate
environmental review. If a Negative Declaration (ND) or Environmental Impact Report (EIR)
is required, the City Manager or a City-approved consultant would prepare the document.
The draft environmental document is circulated for public review and comment, as required
by CEQA. If an EIR is required, the City Council holds a public hearing to take public
comment on the draft document. Prior to the public hearing before the City Council on the
project, public notice is made. If a Negative Declaration was prepared, the City Council
adopts it at this hearing. If an EIR was required, the City Manger recommends certification to
the City Council, who would then, adopt the findings and mitigation measures of the EIR and
makes a statement of overriding considerations if it is warranted. For housing projects,
affordability can be the basis for a statement of overriding consideration.
Community Overview
Regional Setting
The City of Villa Park (population 6,251) is located in north-central Orange County,
approximately 15 miles northeast of the Pacific Ocean. Located near 6 major freeways that
connect the City to other locations in Orange, Los Angeles and Riverside Counties, Villa Park
is nearest to the Cities of Anaheim (pop. 345,556), Santa Ana (pop. 354,428), Tustin (pop.
70,871), and almost surrounded by the City of Orange (pop. 138,640).
Although the City has no direct freeway access (frontage), interstate and regional access to
the City is provided predominantly by Interstate-5 also known as the Santa Ana Freeway. In
addition, City connections from the Counties of Orange, San Diego, Los Angeles, Riverside,
and San Bernardino are provided by freeways nearby, including State Route (SR) 57
(Orange Freeway), SR-55 (Costa Mesa Freeway), SR-22 (Garden Grove Freeway) and SR-
91 (Riverside Freeway).
Local Setting
Villa Park is a small, predominantly residential community with few commercial businesses or
professional offices. The City, which has the smallest population in Orange County, is
without a large employment center or central business district. Geographically, Villa Park is
almost completely surrounded by the City of Orange, with only a small amount of
unincorporated Orange County separating the 2 cities on the south side of city limits. Villa
Park contains no large expanses of vacant land or open space, and currently has no sphere
of influence outside of its City Limits. There is no privately held vacant land adjacent to the
City that could be annexed into Villa Park and developed.
                                              IV-3
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                              Housing Element
Physically, Villa Park encompasses 2.1 square miles or 1344 acres of land. Within the City
there is approximately 32.54 acres of vacant land. However, of the 32.54 vacant acres only
approximately 5 acres are developable as the Santiago Creek Recharge Basin occupies a
majority of the vacant land. The basin consists of an un-developable natural feature owned
by the County of Orange. The remaining un-developable vacant land lies primarily within
utility easements.
CITIZEN PARTICIPATION
The citizen participation process included review by the Citizens Advisory Committee, a
period of public comment on the Draft Housing Element, review of the Draft Housing Element
by the City Council, and Public Hearings on the final Housing Element. In order to involve the
public, particularly low-income population and their representatives and/or advocates, the
City completed the outreach efforts listed below:
        The Villa Park City Council formed a Citizens Advisory Committee made up of 5 Villa
         Park residents to work with staff to complete a draft of each Element, including
         Housing. This Committee was integral in analyzing and making recommendations on
         all aspects of the Housing Element.
        The City notified by letter and solicited input from the following groups and non-profit
         housing organizations: County of Orange Housing and Community Development,
         Orange Housing Development Corporation, Orange County Housing Authority, and
         the Affordable Housing Clearinghouse. A copy of the draft was also provided to
         Orange County’s Kennedy Commission for review and comment.
        The City published in a local newspaper a Notice of Availability of the Final Draft
         Housing Element. The notice stated that comments on the final draft document could
         be made to the City during a 30 day period.
        Copies of the Housing Element are available at the local library, City Hall and on the
         City’s web-site.
        Each public hearing held by the City Council was noticed. Notice of each meeting
         involving the General Plan was published in the local newspaper, sent to all
         homeowners’ associations and various State and Local Agencies.
        The City’s notices are made equally available to residents of all income levels
PROGRESS REPORT
A successful strategy for improving housing conditions must be preceded by a progress
report of the prior Housing Elements effectiveness, progress and appropriateness as
described in Section 65588(a) of the Government Code.
                                                 IV-4

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                          Housing Element
Effectiveness
The City’s prior Housing Element was adopted in June of 2001. The quantified objective was
18 new housing units – 11 for the above-moderate income group and 7 second dwelling units
to satisfy the City’s RHNA requirement for very-low, low and moderate income households.
Since adoption of the June 2001 Housing Element, 16 housing units were constructed for the
above-moderate income group. In addition, 13 second dwelling units were constructed
thereby exceeding the quantified objectives.
The second action called out in the City’s 2001 Housing Element was the provision that the
City prepare and make available an inventory and directory of affordable housing resources
available in the City, nearby cities and through the County of Orange and the Orange County
Housing Authority. To satisfy this requirement the City added links to its web page directing
inquiries to the County of Orange, the Orange County Housing Authority and surrounding
cities.
The third action described actions to be taken regarding the development of second units.
During the program period the City developed a flier detailing secondary unit development
within the City and the specific requirements and made available at City Hall and on its web
site. Second unit information was also distributed to homeowners associations, the local
public library, and to senior centers located very near the City. The quantified objective of
developing 7 secondary units within the City was accomplished and exceeded.
The final action described in the City’s 2001 Housing Element stated that the City would
encourage the County of Orange to fund the activities of the Senior Citizen Homesharing
Program.
Progress in Implementation
The June 2001 Housing Element adopted 1 goal and 6 policies. The City’s housing goal is to
continue to meet the statewide goal of a decent home and suitable living environment for all
people.
The City of Villa Park utilized policies such as:
    1. Maintaining a housing stock free of substandard conditions;
    2. Accommodating the special housing needs of the elderly, frail elderly and
        handicapped populations through the development of new second dwelling units;
    3. Meet the needs of low-income persons through the development of new second
        dwelling units;
    4. Continue to comply with State and Federal housing laws and regulations;
    5. Promoting and ensuring open and free choice of housing for all;
    6. Promoting equal opportunity of choice throughout the housing market area for all
        residents regardless of race, creed, national or ethnic origin.
                                               IV-5

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                             Housing Element
Appropriateness of Goals, Objectives, and Policies
The City of Villa Park is confident that the goals, objectives and policies adopted during the
2001 General Plan update provided results demonstrating a successfully implemented
Housing Element. The 2008 General Plan update will continue the aforementioned goals,
objectives, policies and programs. Most of the goals and policies have been retained or
revised to reflect the City’s housing needs, resources and constraints.
Conclusions and Findings
This Housing Element Update documents the efforts of the City of Villa Park to identify and
meet its housing needs for the 2006-2014 planning period. The City of Villa Park promotes
the provision and maintenance of affordable housing. Villa Park seeks to provide housing
opportunities for all income levels and special needs groups despite the limited availability of
developable land and financial resources in the City. The vast majority of remaining
undeveloped land in Villa Park is encumbered by one or more of the following:
      Santiago Creek Recharge Basin consists of approximately 26 un-developable acres.
      Limited stock of single family infill parcels, and/or properties located in areas that can
       be developed further due to topography or other limiting geographical issues.
The City has actively endeavored to overcome these limitations and proposes realistic
strategies to meet its RHNA obligation for the current planning period. Housing strategies
include amending the City’s Zoning Code to ensure consistency with State SB2
requirements.
HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
A successful strategy for improving housing conditions must be preceded by an assessment
of the housing needs of the community and region as required by Government Code Section
65583(a).
Population
Villa Park had a population of 5,999 as per the 2000 Census. This represented a 1.7%
population decrease between 1990 and 2000. The population loss was largely attributed to
the aging of the community and young adults or college students leaving home. Table IV-1
presents a summary of population and housing indicators for 2000 and 2007. During the past
seven years, the population has increased by 252 persons (4%). As verified by city staff,
100% of the population lives in single-family housing units. Although 13 housing units were
added to the supply between 2000 and 2007, the basic population characteristics have
remained relatively unchanged.
                                                IV-6

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                                   Housing Element
Most of the City’s households and housing are located in two census tracts – 758.09 and
758.10. Thirty-two housing units are located in census tract 758.11, 10 are located in census
tract 758.13, and 14 are located in census tract 758.14. Of the1,063 housing units located in
tract 758.09, 38 are located in Orange and 1,025 in Villa Park. Of the 1,019 housing units
located in tract 758.10, 113 are located in Orange and 906 in Villa Park. As a result, some of
the characteristics in each tract may be attributable to housing in Orange and not Villa Park.
                                               Table IV-1
                                            City of Villa Park
                    Population and Housing Indicators – 2000 and 2007
                                                    2000¹          2007²          Change
           Population                               5,999          6,251          +252
           Household Population                     5,978          6,227          +249
           Group Quarters Population                21             24³            +3
           Total Housing Units                      2,008          2,021          +13
           Single Family Detached                   2,008          2,021          +13
           Single Family Attached                   0              0              0
           2-4 Units                                0              0              0
           5+ Units                                 0              0              0
           Mobile Homes                             0              0              0
           Occupied Units                           1,950          1,963          +13
           Vacant Units                             58             58             0
           Persons Per Household                    3.07           3.17           +0.10
Source:               ¹2000 Census of Population and Housing, Table DP-1, Profile of General Demographic
                      Characteristics: 2000
                      ²State Department of Finance, Orange County Population and Housing Estimates,
                      Series E5, January 1, 2007
                      ³State of California Department of Developmental Services
                      Table Constructed by the City of Villa Park
The population projections are based on the housing unit potential. As of March 2008, there
is estimated to be the potential for the development of a maximum of 32 new single-family
residential parcels. Thus, the housing supply would, at build-out, equal approximately 2,053
housing units. Population at build-out is projected to be a 6,321 (2,053 units less
approximately 59 vacant units times 3.17 persons per occupied unit). These calculations do
not take into consideration the potential number of new secondary dwelling units. Table IV-2
indicates the City’s housing growth trends.
                                                   IV-7

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                                     Housing Element
                                               Table IV-2
                                            City of Villa Park
                          Housing Growth Trends – 2000 to Build Out
               Year           Housing Units     Increase          Percentage Increase
               2000¹          2,008             ------        ------
               2007²          2,021             13            1.0%
               Build Out³    2,053              32            1.6%
    Source:            ¹2000 U.S. Census of Population and Housing, Table DP-1, Profile of General
                       Demographic Characteristics: 2000.
                       ²State Department of Finance, Orange County Population and Housing Estimates,
                       Series E5, January 1, 2007
                       ³Build Out estimates based on Villa Park GIS database information.
                       Table constructed by The City of Villa Park
Employment Projections
Villa Park is a small residential community surrounded by the City of Orange. Because the
City has limited opportunity for growth, and because the community is mostly “built-out”,
there is little opportunity for commercial growth. It is assumed that the City exports a majority
of it’s workforce to the larger nearby communities of Orange, Anaheim, Santa Ana, Irvine,
and points beyond. The City currently has one neighborhood-oriented shopping center
comprised of 60,000 square feet of retail/professional space on 10-acres. The Villa Park
Towne Center is the location of the only commercial use within the City. The shopping center
is also the site of City Hall and the Villa Park branch of the Orange County Public Library.
Although the mix of uses at the neighborhood shopping center has changed slightly in the
last 5 years, the occupancy levels have remained unchanged.
Currently, the largest employer within Villa Park is the Orange Unified School District. The
School District operates 4 schools within the city, to include 2 elementary schools, a middle
school and a high school. In Villa Park, the School District employs roughly 225 full-time
employees, and another 75 part-time employees. Remaining jobs are located primarily in the
City’s commercial Towne Centre.
Because the commercial center within Villa Park existed prior to the 2000 Census and there
have been no new shopping centers or schools built within the last 10 years, it is assumed
that the City’s employment has not increased/decreased significantly over the same time
period.
Household Characteristics
The following section summarizes the relationship between household income and housing
costs for both owner and renter occupied units. According to the most recent Census data,
approximately 33% of households in Villa Park are overpaying for their housing (spending
greater than 30% of income on housing cost). Overpayment is more concentrated among
owner occupied households, with 34% of owner households overpaying in comparison to
18% of renter households. Lower income households also experienced a greater incidence
                                                    IV-8

   City of Villa Park
   2010 General Plan                                                                    Housing Element
   of overpayment, with 53% of lower income owner occupied households overpaying for
   housing. As a means of assessing the current housing market in Villa Park, housing sales
   and rentals can be compared with household incomes. With an average sale price of $1.3
   million, monthly mortgage payments in the neighborhood of $8,000, and average monthly
   rental costs of $4,850 in 2007, only above-moderate income households can afford to
   purchase or rent a single-family home in Villa Park.
   Affordable housing needs in Villa Park are met through the construction of secondary
   dwelling units. Secondary dwelling units are permitted to be rented, but secondary dwelling
   units are prohibited from being sold as a residence.
                                                 Table IV-3
                                            Housing Cost as a
                                  Percentage of Household Income
                                        Owner Occupied Units
Income Range     Total Household   % of Total     0-20% of HH        20-29% of HH 30-34% of HH 35+% of HH
                 (HH)              Households     Income             Income       Income       Income
$0-10,000        24                1%             0                  0            0            24
$10,000-19,999   40                2%             0                  0            0            40
$20,000-34,999   88                5%             38                 10           6            34
$35,000-49,999   133               8%             39                 30           14           50
$50,000 +        1,486             84%            737                312          94           343
Subtotal         1,771             100%           814                352          114          491
                                        Renter Occupied Units
Income         Total        % of Total    0-20%      of  20-29% of      30-34% of   35+% of HH Those   Not
Range          Households   Households    HH Income      HH Income      HH Income   Income     Computed
$0-10,000      0            0%            0              0              0           0          0
$10,000-       0            0%            0              0              0           0          0
19,999
$20,000-       13           14%           0              0              0           4          9
34,999
$35,000-       17           18%           4              6              0           0          7
49,999
$50,000 +      64           68%           42             4              0           13         5
Subtotal       94           100%          46             10             0           17         21
       Source:           2000 Census of Population and Housing, Summary Tape File 3, Table H73 and H97,
                         Household income in 1999 by gross rent and monthly owner costs as a percentage of
                         household income in 1999.
                         Table constructed by the City of Villa Park
                                                       IV-9
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                                        Housing Element
                                                     Table IV-4
                                          Percentage of Low-Income
                                    Households Overpaying for Housing
                                              Owner-Occupied Units
   Households with incomes                  Paying 30% or More of HH                     Percent
  less than 80% Area Median                            Income
             Income (AMI)
                    325*                                  175                              53%
                                              Renter-Occupied Units
   Households with Incomes                  Paying 30% or More of HH                     Percent
         less than 80% AMI                             Income
                     35*                                    6                              17%
*Total is approximate
AMI is approximately $65,000
     Source:                 2000 Census of Population and Housing, Summary Tape File 3, Table H73 and H97,
                             Household income in 1999 by gross rent and monthly owner costs as a percentage of
                             household income in 1999
                             Table constructed by the City of Villa Park
                                                     Table IV-5
                                                 City of Villa Park
                                           Household Characteristics
                                                                         Owner        Renter        Total
Number of Existing Households                                              1771            94          1865
Households Overpaying for Housing                                           605            17           622
Lower Income Households Overpaying*                                         175             6           181
Total Existing Extremely Low Income Households                              62**            0          62**
(<30% AMI)*
Total Projected Extremely Low Income Households                              62             0           62
* Based on 2000 AMI
** Total is approximate
     Source:                 2000 Census of Population and Housing, Table H73 and H97, Household income in
                             1999 by gross rent and monthly owner costs as a percentage of household income in
                             1999
                             Table constructed by the City of Villa Park
Housing Stock Characteristics
Housing Stock Condition
The age of housing is sometimes an indicator of potential housing quality problems. Almost
two-thirds of the housing supply was built after 1970. Because there is limited potential for
new units, the average age of the stock will increase in the years ahead; considering the
number of high quality renovations and the community pride of ownership, housing stock
conditions are not expected to drop below a level considered deteriorating.
                                                         IV-10
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                                    Housing Element
                                                 Table IV-6
                                            City of Villa Park
                                Age of Housing Stock by Year Built-
                     Year Built                           Number of Units   Percent
                     1939 or Earlier                                31           1.5
                     1940 to 1949                                   13           0.6
                     1950 to 1959                                   70           3.4
                     1960 to 1969                                  565          27.6
                     1970 to 1979                                1,137          55.6
                     1980 to 1989                                   79           3.9
                     1990 to 1994                                   75           3.7
                     1995 to 1998                                   44           2.1
                     1999 to March 2000                            32            1.6
                     Total                                       2,046         100.0%
    Source:             2000 Census of Population and Housing, Table H34, Year Structure Built.
                        Table construction by the City of Villa Park
Definitions of two substandard housing categories are:
               Deteriorating – not more than 2 intermediate (slight) defects or 1 major defect
               but still providing safe and adequate shelter.
               Dilapidated – several intermediate defects or a critical defect plus extensive
               evidence of neglect or serious damage.
The housing units that are classified as deteriorating generally are considered amendable to
some degree of rehabilitation. Dilapidated housing, however, is in such a state of disrepair
that rehabilitation is no longer economically feasible and the unit should either be removed or
replaced.
When considering historical maintenance of existing housing stock, during the program
period there is estimated to be no housing located in the City considered to have
substandard conditions which would require the replacement of the housing unit. An
estimated 1% or 20 housing units are considered deteriorating and in need of rehabilitation.
The median price of homes in Orange County as of February 2000 was $589,000.
Acxion/DataQuick data indicate that for the Villa Park zip code (92861), the median price in
2007 was $1,300,000. The age of the stock, combined with the high values keeps market
demand high, and consequently applies market pressure for the maintenance of housing
quality.
                                                    IV-11

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                           Housing Element
Overcrowding
Overcrowding is one result of the shortage of interior living space. The overcrowding
measure most frequently used to estimate overcrowded households is a housing unit with
1.01 or more persons per room, excluding bathrooms, halls, foyers, and porches. “Severe”
overcrowding is measured by the number of housing units with 1.51 or more persons per
room. An “overcrowded” housing unit does not necessarily imply one of inadequate physical
condition.
Overcrowding reflects the financial inability of households to buy or rent housing units having
enough space for their needs. Consequently, overcrowding is more appropriately considered
a household characteristic (instead of a housing structural condition) and falls within the
meaning of special housing needs such as large families are so considered. Overcrowding
also may be a temporary phenomenon since some households will move to larger housing
units to meet space requirements.
2006 Orange County Overcrowding Rates
According to the 2006 American Community Survey, the percentage of overcrowded units
countywide was 9%. The 2006 data is provided below in Table IV-7.
                                            Table IV-7
                       Orange County Overcrowding Rates – 2006
                       Persons         per Housing             Number
                       Room                  Units             Percent
                       1.00 or less            888,635             91%
                       1.01 to 1.50             57,632              6%
                       1.51 or more             24,941              3%
                              Total            971,208            100.0%
    Source:         2006 American Community Survey
                    Table constructed by The City of Villa Park
Overcrowding in Villa Park
Overcrowding is not a problem in Villa Park. According to the 2000 Census, 1.5% of all
households lived in units with 1.01 to 1.50 persons per room and less than .2% lived in units
with 1.51 or more persons per room. As with overpayment, the size of the problem does not
reach the thresholds that would require the City to initiate a program.
                                               IV-12

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                               Housing Element
                                               Table IV-8
                                          City of Villa Park
                                  Persons Per Room by Tenure
Persons Per Room             Owner             Renter            Total            Percentage
<1.00                            1,858                 75            1,933            98.2%
1.01 to 1.50                       17                  14              31              1.6%
1.51 or more                       5                    0              5               0.2%
Total                             1880                 89            1,969             100%
     Source:         2000 Census of Population and Housing, Summary Tape File 1, Table H20, Tenure by
                     Persons Per Room
                     Table constructed by The City of Villa Park
Housing Costs
According to data from the California Association of Realtors, overall ownership housing
costs in Villa Park are more than double that of the Countywide median as shown in Table
IV-9. The median value of home sales in December 2007 was approximately $1,300,000,
compared to $618,500 in Orange County. Median home prices in surrounding jurisdictions
range from $468,000 to $800,000.
                                               Table IV-9
                                           Orange County
                           Median Area Housing Sale Prices - 2007
Jurisdiction         ZIP         Median          Percent Change Sales             Percent Change
                     Code                        from 2006                        from 2006
City of Villa Park    92861      $1.3 Million             6.8%            50            -27.5%
City of Orange        92867       $642,250                0.0%           333            -31.3%
City of Orange        92868       $468,000               -8.2%           114            -40.6%
City of Santa Ana 92705           $800,000                0.0%           295            -28.0%
Orange County                     $618,500               -1.9%         27,294           -30.6%
Source:              California Association of Realtors, 2007
                     Table constructed by the City of Villa Park
Home prices in Villa Park have increased over time with the median home price increasing
6.8% in 2007. Compared to the County and surrounding cities, Villa Park was one of the few
cities that experienced an increase in median home prices. Overall the County’s home prices
decreased 1.9% and experienced value changes ranging from decreases of 15.3% to
increases of 15.6% at the City level.
All homes sold in Villa Park were detached single-family residential units. Based on
information gathered from the Southern California Multiple Listing Service (MLS), from
August 1, 2007 to February 29, 2008 there were 18 homes sold within the City of Villa Park.
Of those 18 homes the average sale price was $1,490,500. From January 1, 2007 to
                                                  IV-13

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
February 29, 2008 there are an estimated 17 homes listed as rental properties, of which 6
are available for rent. The average monthly cost of those rental properties is approximately
$4,850.
Housing Units by Type
The California Department of Finance estimated that in 2007 the City had 2,021 housing
units. As shown in Table IV-10, there is a disparity in the totals for each housing classification
calculated by the State and the City. The City does not have a Land Use classification that
permitted multi-family or attached housing, and records and site inspections conducted by
staff confirm that none exist.
                                             Table IV-10
                                         City of Villa Park
                      Housing Supply Characteristics – January 1999
                      As reported by DOF                         As reported by City of Villa Park
  Type of Unit        Number of Units Percent                    Number of Units      Percent
  1 unit, detached           1,992               98.6%                 2,021               100%
  1 unit, attached             18                 0.9%                   0                  0%
  2 to 4 units                 0                  0.0%                   0                  0%
  5+ units                     6                  0.3%                   0                  0%
  Mobile homes                 5                  0.2%                   0                  0%
  Total:                     2,021                100%                 2,021               100%
    Source:          California Department of Finance, Demographic Research Unit, Orange County
                     Population and Housing Estimates, January 1, 2007.
                     Table constructed by the City of Villa Park
Vacancy Rates
Vacancy rates for all housing units in Villa Park have remained steady at approximately 3%
for the last 17 years and are expected to remain relatively consistent over the upcoming
Housing Element implementation term.
Special Housing Needs
Certain population groups are considered to have special housing needs. These groups
include: handicapped persons; the elderly; large households (5+ persons); farm workers;
female householders’ and homeless persons in need of emergency shelter.
In many cases, the needs of these population groups are met in housing specifically
designed for them. The RHNA data shows that none of these groups constitute a significant
segment of the City’s population. This condition, in turn, means that the economies of scale
do not exist to facilitate the development of housing designed specifically for the unique
needs of these populations.
                                                 IV-14

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                            Housing Element
Handicapped Persons
The Federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973, Section 104.3(l) defines a disabled person as “any
individual who has a physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one or more
major life activities, has record of such impairment, or is regarded as having such an
impairment.”
The handicapped population encompasses several distinct groups such as, but not limited to,
the physically handicapped, developmentally disabled, and severely mentally ill. The special
housing needs of these populations are addressed by providing affordable housing costs and
housing with design features that facilitate mobility and independence.
Data on handicapped indicators is limited to the 2000 Census as information was collected
on “mobility or self-care limitations.” In the 2000 Census, persons were identified as having a
self-care limitation if they had a health condition that lasted for 6 months or more and which
made it difficult to take care of their own personal needs, such as dressing, bathing, or
getting around inside the home. Persons were identified as having a mobility limitation if they
had a health condition that lasted 6 months or more and which made it difficult to go outside
the home alone to conduct activities such as shopping and visiting the doctor’s office.
According to the 2000 Census, 467 persons had a mobility or self-care limitation:
               15 persons            5-20 years
               253 persons           21-64 years
               199 persons           65+ years
               Total Population: 5,999
The above data reflects self-reported statistics based on the 2000 Census. A total of 7.7% of
the population is affected by some type of disability. Although, to this date the City has not
received a request for housing for disabled or handicapped persons. However, looking at the
employment status of affected individuals 21 to 64 years of age, 59.3% are employed,
indicating that a strong percentage have ability to support themselves financially.
Elderly
Elderly persons experience 4 main concerns:
    1. Income: People over 65 are usually living on a fixed income.
    2. Health Care: Because the elderly have a higher rate of illness and dependency, health
       care and supportive housing is important.
    3. Transportation: With increasing age and disabilities, many seniors may become
       transportation dependant and require alternatives to the limited fixed route bus
       system. The Orange County Transportation Authority (OCTA) ACCESS system
                                                IV-15

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                                  Housing Element
       provides both curb to curb and door to door special transportation for eligible elderly
       and handicapped persons.
    4. Housing: Many live alone and are cost burdened, and some elderly need appropriate
       supportive housing.
When the 2000 Census was taken, Villa Park’s population was 5,999 persons. An estimated
885 persons were 65 years and over – 14.8% of the population. Table IV-11 shows the
population distribution of all persons 55+ years old. There is likely to be more persons 62+
years given the relative numbers of persons 55-64 compared to the population at 65+ years.
                                              Table IV-11
                                          City of Villa Park
                         Population Distribution – Persons 55+ Years
                 Age Group                    Male             Female        Total
                        55 – 59                293               238          531
                        60 – 61                 75                96          171
                        62 – 64                139               129          268
                        65 – 69                190               235          425
                        70 – 74                152               115          267
                        75 – 79                 39                60           99
                        80 – 84                 20                22           42
                          85+                   24                28           52
                 Total                         932               923         1,855
    Source:            2000 Census of Population and Housing, Table P8, Sex by Age
                       Table Constructed by the City of Villa Park
Senior householders comprise 1 of 9 households. Of the 480 senior householders 65+
years, 465 were owners and 15 were renters. Given the high ownership rates, the
“affordability” needs are not extensive enough to warrant program initiative by the City. This
breakdown is represented in Table IV-12.
                                                  IV-16

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                                Housing Element
                                            Table IV-12
                                         City of Villa Park
                       Age of Householders by Owners and Renters
 Age of Householder       Owner         Renter         Total      Percentage of total households
        15 – 24               0              0               0                   0.0%
        25 – 34               24             6              30                   1.5%
        35 – 44              344            23             367                  18.6%
        45 – 54              488            37             525                  26.7%
        55 – 59              307             0             307                  15.6%
        60 – 64              247            13             260                  13.2%
        65 – 74              356            11             367                  18.6%
        75 – 84               89             4              93                   4.8%
          85+                 20             0              20                   1.0%
         Total              1,875           94            1,969                100.0%
   Source:           2000 Census of Population and Housing. Table H14, Tenure by age of Householder,
                     Table Constructed by the City of Villa Park
Large Families
Large-families households may experience a greater incidence of overcrowding due to a lack
of means to purchase enough space. Even with adequate financial means, the housing
supply may fall short of accommodating all large families because of low vacancy rates.
Large families are defined as those consisting of five or more persons. According to the
2000 Census, 332 of the City’s 1,969 households had five or more persons (16.9%). Of the
332 large families, 303 were owners and 29 were renters. This information is also
represented in Table IV-13.
                                            Table IV-13
                                         City of Villa Park
                          Household Size by Owners and Renters
 Number of Persons in Household         Owners        Renters     Total        Percentage
                   1                       127              25       152                7.7%
                   2                       732               6       738               37.5%
                   3                       326              25       351               17.8%
                   4                       387               9       396               20.1%
                   5                       194              12       206               10.5%
                   6                        60              12        72                3.7%
              7 or more                     49               5        54                2.7%
 Total                                    1,875             94      1,969             100.0%
   Source:           2000 Census of Population and Housing, Table H17, Tenure by Household Size
                     Table constructed by The City of Villa Park
                                                IV-17

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                                Housing Element
The income, overpayment, and overcrowding conditions of large families are difficult to
determine. The City does not anticipate a need to initiate a program given the fact that more
than 95% of large families in Villa Park are home owners.
Farm workers
According to the 2000 Census, 23 people age 16 years and over were employed in the
“agriculture, forestry and fisheries” industry. The total employed persons over the age of 16
were 2,941, so persons employed in this industry accounted for 0.7% of the population. The
2000 Census also reported 0 people age 16 years and over were employed in “farming,
forestry and fishing” occupations.
Farm workers in the past were housed at the Villa Park Orchard Association’s facility, a
facility that no longer exists. When combined, 3 small scale wholesale nurseries currently
occupy approximately 5.3 acres of power line easements within the City. There currently are
no orchards, row crops or other like facilities located in the City that would employ “farm
workers”, indicating that the residents employed in this industry are likely to hold
management positions in agriculture related firms.
Families with Female Heads of Households
Single parent households often require special consideration and assistance due to their
greater need for affordable and accessible daycare, healthcare, and other supportive
services. In particular, female-headed households with children tend to have lower incomes
than other types of households thereby inherently limiting their housing options and access
to supportive services. At the time of the 2000 Census, a female headed 260 of the family
households and 117 of the non-family households in Villa Park, 13.2% of the 1,969 total.
Families and Persons in Need of Emergency Shelter
The definition of homeless, homeless persons and homeless families are:
         Homeless: An individual or family who: 1) lacks a fixed, regular and adequate
         nighttime residence; and 2) has a primary nighttime residence that is a) a supervised
         publicly or privately operated shelter designed to provide temporary living
         accommodations such as welfare hotels, congregate shelters, and transitional housing
         for the mentally ill; b) an institution that provides a temporary residence for the
         individuals intended to be institutionalized; or c) a public or private place not designed
         for, or ordinarily used, as a regular sleeping accommodation for human beings.
         Homeless Person (Individual): A youth (17 years or younger) not accompanied by an
         adult (18 years or older) or an adult without children.
         Homeless Family with Children: A family that includes at least one parent or guardian
         and one child under the age of 19; a pregnant woman; or a person in the process of
         securing legal custody of a person under the age of 19; who is homeless.
                                                 IV-18

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                             Housing Element
        Subpopulations: Homeless persons with service needs related to severe mental
        illness (SMI) only; alcohol/other drug abuse (AODA) only; SMI and AODA; domestic
        violence; AIDS/related diseases; and other special service needs.
The homeless tend to live in areas adjacent to mass-transit facilities such as freeways, train
stations and bus terminals and areas with high concentrations of churches. The fact that
there are no mass-transit facilities or churches in Villa Park is a significant reason that there
is no congregation of homeless persons. Based on the 2000 Census and conclusions from a
number of resources which include: random field surveys conducted by the City Building
Inspector and the City’s Managers Office; no reported cases from the Orange County Sheriff
Department (local office located at City Hall); and, no reported cases from local residents, all
evidence indicates that there are no unsheltered homeless persons in Villa Park.
Enacted on January 1, 2008, Senate Bill 2 (SB 2) set forth requirements for cities and
counties to identify specific sites through zoning ordinances to accommodate a community’s
need for emergency homeless shelters regardless of an actual community’s needs for such
shelters. By definition, an emergency homeless shelter is a use that accommodates a
homeless individual for a period of time up to 6 months. SB 2 also requires cities and
counties to identify zones where special needs facilities and transitional housing are
permitted either by right or with a conditional use permit, and prohibits a city or county from
disapproving applications for shelters and special needs facilities unless specified findings
are made. To address this legislative requirement the emergency homeless shelters will be
permitted in the E-4-20,000 zoning district by right and in the R-1 zoning district with a
conditional use permit.
Analysis of Opportunities for Energy Conservation
In relation to new residential development and especially affordable housing, construction of
energy efficient buildings does add to the original production costs of ownership and rental
housing. Over time, however, housing with energy conservation features will have reduced
occupancy costs as the consumption of fuel and electricity is decreased. This means the
monthly housing costs may be less than what they otherwise would have been if no energy
conservation devices were incorporated in the new residential buildings. Reduced energy
consumption is recognized as one way of achieving more affordable housing costs
The City recognizes that there are several ways to achieve energy conservation in new and
existing housing. The potential for energy conservation in new development is limited when
considering Villa Park’s limited potential for growth. However, all modification to existing
residential structures must meet Title 24 Energy Conservation Standards and the standards
set forth in the 2006 Edition of the Uniform Solar Energy Code.
With no Economic Development or Housing Department it is not financially feasible at this
time for Villa Park to provide incentives to encourage green building techniques and
materials in new and resale homes or facilitate energy conserving retrofits upon resale of
homes. However, it is the intent to actively encourage such techniques and to direct
interested parties to applicable information sources
                                              IV-19

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                              Housing Element
Analysis of Assisted Housing at Risk of Conversion to Market Rate Housing
All housing in Villa Park is comprised of detached single-family units which have been
privately built and financed. Villa Park relies on secondary dwelling units to provide
affordable housing. No government or non-governmental organization assisted housing is
located within the City. Thus, there are no affordable multi-family rental housing units that are
at risk of conversion to market rate housing.
Regional Housing Need Assessment (RHNA)
The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) and the Orange County
Council of Governments (OCCOG) are responsible for the assessment of the region’s
existing and future housing needs, as a 4 year projection. Orange County was allocated a
“housing need” of 82,330 units for the period from January 2006 through June 2014. As
indicated by Table IV-14, Villa Park was allocated 11 units as its “share of the regional
housing need.”
                                            Table IV-14
                                        City of Villa Park
                               Share of Regional Housing Need
                               January 1, 2006 — June 30, 2014
  Income Category                                        Number of Housing Units    Percentage
  Very Low - Less than 50% of County median                              3              27%
  Low - 51%-80% of County median                                        2               18%
  Moderate - 81%-120% of County median                                  2               18%
  Above Moderate - Above 120% of County median                          4               37%
  Total                                                                 11             100%
     Source:                SCAG RHNA 2006, Housing Need.
                            Table constructed by The City of Villa Park
During the time period of January 2006 to August 2008, 8 secondary units were constructed
or had permits issued and 6 single-family homes were constructed or had permits issued.
Options with which second units can accurately be credited to a specific income level are
limited. The City has no Economic Development or Housing Departments that subsidize
second unit development, which could require that the unit maintain affordability. In lieu of
this the methodology the City will be using will involve contacting (example letter attached at
end of element as Exhibit IV-1) second unit owners (those built within the planning period) to
inquire as to the unit’s rental price. Those rental prices will compared to AMI and income
categories defined in Table IV-14. The City will request of future secondary unit developers
an intended rental price; keeping in mind that in all cases providing this information is
completely voluntary. Rental information is detailed in Table IV-15.
                                               IV-20

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                                                        Housing Element
                                                            Table IV-15
                                                         City of Villa Park
                                             Second Unit Rental Information
 Income Category                 Qualifying Rental                           Number of Second Units
                                     Price Range*
       Very Low                           < $979                                              2
           Low                       $998 - $1,566                                             -
       Moderate                    $1,585 - $2,349                                             -
                                                     Total                                    2
* Qualifying rental price range is based on an Orange County Median Income of $78,300, income categories defined in Table IV-14, and
   assumes that the monthly rent is affordable (< 30% of monthly income).
Three secondary units have been allocated to the very-low income need, two to the low-
income need, and two to the moderate income need. All new single-family units have been
allocated to the above moderate income level.
SITES INVENTORY AND ANALYSIS AND ZONING FOR A VARIETY OF HOUSING
TYPES
The State Government Code requirements for sites inventory and analysis and zoning for a
variety of housing types are described in Sections 65583(a)(3), 65583(c)(1) and 65588883.2.
Sites Inventory
The following Exhibits (included as attachments at the end of the element) detail information
related to the Site Inventory:
     -    Exhibit IV-1 is a sample of the letter sent to property owner asking to identify the
          rental value of their secondary dwelling unit.
     -    Exhibit IV-2 indicates developable vacant lots and those with the potential to sub-
          divide into more than four.
     -    Exhibit IV-3 details a listing of properties by parcel number, size, General Plan and
          Zoning designations, and a description of existing uses in spreadsheet format. Those
          parcels shown represent a random sampling from all parcels within the City.
Sites Inventory Analysis of Suitability and Availability
The City’s RHNA, in total and by income level, for the 2006-2014 planning period, has been
met through the development of secondary dwelling units and new single-family units.
Environmental Constraints
Within the City of Villa Park there are two documented environmental constraints to the
development of residential projects:
                                                                  IV-21

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                              Housing Element
    1. The presence of 100-year and 500-year flood plain zones. These constraints are
        mitigated by the City’s participation and application of the Federal Emergency
        Management Agencies (FEMA) National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
    2. Two earthquake faults lie within residential zoning districts. Environmental constraints
        related to earthquake faults located within the City are addressed through the
        application of the most current California Building Codes and the plan check review
        process.
Infrastructure Including Planned Water, Sewer, and Other Dry Utility Supply
Water - Serrano Water District (SWD) serves the City of Villa Park. SWD receives its water
supply from local surface water which is stored in Irvine Lake and groundwater from three
wells located within the City of Villa Park. The District uses 4,200 - 4,400 acre feet of water
annually, which does include customers in the City of Orange.
The SWD owns 50% of Irvine Lake, 25% of the water in the Lake, and is the managing
district for the Lake (facility and recreation). With 43 miles of pipe, 3 wells, a treatment plant,
and two reservoirs, all infrastructure needed to support expected future infill development in
Villa Park is already in place.
Sewer System - The City owns and operates a sanitary sewer system in coordination with
the Orange County Sanitation District for the benefit of the residents of the community. The
system was constructed primarily in the 1960’s and 70’s and is built out. The system consists
of approximately 153,000 linear feet (29 miles) of collector and trunk sewer mains ranging in
size from 8 to 15 inches in diameter. Some of the trunk mains are joint use mains with the
City of Orange. It is estimated there are about 26 operating septic tank systems remaining in
the City.
A “Sewer Service User Charge,” which is assessed on the property tax roll and based on
land use, is for maintenance and rehabilitation of the sewer system within the City. The
Orange County Sanitation Districts, of which Villa Park is a member, assesses a “sewer
hook-up fee” and a “sewer acreage fee” to support the regional treatment facilities,
operations, and new trunk lines.
Storm Drain System - The City operates a drainage system consisting of open channels,
pipe and box conduits and various types of inlet structures. Land use is a significant factor in
the calculation of the development of the system. The total drainage area of the system is 2.5
square miles and includes some areas outside the City boundaries. The City system was
started in the 1960’s and has expanded with development. A key element of the system is
the Center Street Storm Drain that runs from Mesa Drive down to Serrano Avenue and
proceeds down Center Street to Santiago Creek. That portion of the system is owned and
operated by the Orange County Flood Control District. In 1997 the City adopted a Master
Plan of Drainage that identified certain deficiencies in the system. The City is addressing
these on a priority basis as funds permit.
                                                IV-22

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                           Housing Element
Dry Utilities - All areas where future development has the potential to occur are currently
served with electric power, gas, telephone, refuse collection, and other minor utility services.
Realistic Development Capacity Calculation Accounting for Site Improvements and Land Use
Controls
Realistic development capacity is broken down into three categories within Villa Park:
developable vacant land; developable non-vacant land (land that is underutilized); and land
suitable for secondary dwelling units. There is no developable vacant non-residentially zoned
land that allows residential use or developable non-residentially zoned land that can be
redeveloped, and/or rezoned, for residential use.
The methodology used to calculate the realistic development capacity included land use and
zoning controls and site improvement requirements. All vacant and underutilized sites within
the inventory were evaluated for compliance with land use density requirements, zoning
development standards which include lot coverage ratio, floor area ratio, and access
requirements, and site improvements such as streets and curb and gutter. Secondary
dwelling unit development is an accessory use to the primary structure and therefore by
default meets all land use and site improvement standards. Zoning requirements will dictate
the maximum allowable size of the unit.
Within the City there are 5 developable vacant parcels. Of these 5 developable vacant
parcels 1 is capable of being sub-divided into more than 4 lots, 1 has the potential to be sub-
divided into 2 lots, and the remaining are single lot developments. It is estimated that
approximately 11 new lots can be developed from those vacant lots.
Non-vacant underutilized properties are those which have an existing single-family residence
on the property, but the property is large enough to be sub-divided into multiple properties.
Approximately 12 non-vacant underutilized properties are capable of developing further, and
of those, 1 can be subdivided into more than 4 lots. All of the properties lie within the SFR
1.75 du/ac land use designation. It is estimated that approximately 21 new lots can be
developed from those non-vacant underutilized properties
All properties within the City have the potential for the development of 1 secondary dwelling
unit per parcel, respective of the parcel’s square footage. The City has only tracked
secondary dwelling unit construction since approximately 1997. There is no definitive way to
identify exactly how many of the City’s 2,021 properties have existing secondary dwelling
units and how many have potential for future secondary dwelling unit development. Since
1997, 29 secondary dwelling units have been constructed.
Analysis of Non-Vacant and Underutilized Land
Due to the fact that there is little developable vacant land within the City, future growth will
rely heavily on infill development. Approximately 12 non-vacant underutilized properties are
capable of developing further and of those, 1 can be subdivided into more than 4 lots. All
properties within the City have the potential for the development of 1 secondary dwelling unit
per parcel, respective of the parcel’s square footage.
                                             IV-23

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                             Housing Element
Identification of Zoning Appropriate for Housing for Lower Income Households
The City of Villa Park satisfies its low income housing requirements through the development
of secondary dwelling units. All residentially zoned land within the City can be developed with
either an attached or detached secondary dwelling unit ranging in size from 640-1200 square
feet; the ultimate square footage allowed is based on the overall lot size.
By allowing for such use in the E-4 and R-1 zones, which includes more than 2,000
residential properties, and considering analysis of secondary unit development consistency
throughout past Housing Element cycles, adequate capacity to meet Villa Park’s very-low
and low income needs have been and will continue to be satisfied.
As was noted in the Elements effectiveness analysis 13 second units were developed during
the prior housing elements planning period, all of which were permitted by-right.
Second units have proven to be a very valuable housing resource for the City. With 30% of
the population exceeding 55 years of age, but maintaining a desire to remain in Villa Park, it
has been very common within the City for homeowners to construct second units to live in
and allow their children to take over the primary residence. It is also very common for
residents to construct second units as a housing alternative for elderly or student family
members or for live-in-care providers.
With regard to an incentive program, the City of Villa Park is considered built-out and with its
budget and size does not have an Economic Development or Housing Department, nor is
there an opportunity for either in the foreseeable future.
The City would like to stress that it feels that there is no shortfall of adequate sites to meet
the needs of lower and moderate income housing units.
Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types
Multi-family Rental Housing
Multi-family is a classification of housing where multiple separate housing units are contained
within one building. The most common multi-family housing is apartment buildings. Prior to
and since the City’s incorporation in 1962 there is no zoning that permits the establishment of
multi-family housing. Multi-family zoning as a stand alone zoning district and in conjunction
with current commercial zoning was considered during this housing element planning
process. With extensive discussion and analysis it was determined by City staff, with public
participation through the Citizens Advisory Committee, that current housing policies and
zoning that do not provide for multi-family development have and will continue to provide
ample low-income housing opportunities and that there is no need for further consideration
during this housing element planning period.
                                               IV-24

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                              Housing Element
Housing for Agricultural Employees (Permanent and Seasonal)
Housing for agricultural employees is low-income housing available without requiring any
special requirements. With no agricultural land within the City of Villa Park and little in the
surrounding area there is no identifiable need for Villa Park to provide housing specific to
agricultural employees.
Emergency Shelters
An emergency shelter is housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that
is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. In compliance with
recently adopted Senate Bill 2, emergency shelters will be permitted within the E-4 zoning
district and will be subject to those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the
same type in the same zone, and will be permitted within the R-1 zoning district by obtaining
a Conditional Use Permit. By allowing for such use in the E-4 and R-1 zones, capacity to
meet Villa Park’s need for at least one year-round emergency shelter is satisfied.
Transitional Housing
Transitional housing is buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated
under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of
the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in
time, which shall be no less than six months. In compliance with recently adopted Senate Bill
2, transitional housing will be permitted within the E-4 zoning district and will be subject to
those restrictions that apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone, and
will be permitted within the R-1 zoning district by obtaining a Conditional Use Permit. By
allowing for such use in the E-4 and R-1 zones, adequate capacity to meet Villa Park’s need
for transitional housing is satisfied.
Supportive Housing
Supportive housing is permitted in the E-4 and all R-1 residential zones. Supportive housing
is housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is
linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the
housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and,
when possible, work in the community. By allowing for such use in the E-4 and R-1 zones,
adequate capacity to meet Villa Park’s need has been satisfied.
The City will comply with all State Law requirements with regard to residential care facilities
intended to house seven or more persons.
Single-room Occupancy
The City of Villa Park currently has no multi-family land use or zoning classifications and the
zoning ordinance has no provisions with which single-room occupancy can operate. As a
City that is considered built-out, has no opportunity to annex, and having a relatively small
                                                IV-25

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                             Housing Element
potential for redevelopment, single-room occupancies are not a viable affordable housing
unit type; therefore, no programs are planned for the current housing cycle.
Factory-built/Manufactured Housing
Factory built/Manufactured housing is a type of housing unit that is largely constructed and
assembled in a factory and then transported to sites of use. Factory built/Manufactured
housing, as permitted by State law, is allowed in the E-4 and all R-1 residential zones and
must follow the City’s Site Plan Review process. By allowing for such use in the E-4 and R-1
zones, adequate capacity to meet Villa Park’s need has been satisfied.
Mobile Homes
Mobile homes are large trailers, fitted with parts for connection to utilities, that can be
installed on a relatively permanent site and that is used as a residence. No property with the
City is zoned to permit the permanent establishment of a mobile home(s) for residency.
Mobile homes are permitted as a residence during construction of a fixed single-family
dwelling.
Second Units
A secondary unit is considered "secondary" or "accessory" to the primary residence on the
parcel. It normally has its own entrance, kitchen, bathroom and living area. All E-4 and R-1
zoned land within the City, which equates to more than 2,000 parcels, can be developed with
either an attached or detached secondary dwelling unit. Secondary dwelling unit sizes range
from 640-1200 square feet, depending on the properties gross lot size, and must follow the
City’s Site Plan Review process.
According to State Government Code §65852.1, the City may issue a:
        “…conditional use permit for a dwelling unit to be constructed, or which is attached to
        or detached from, a primary residence on a parcel zoned for a single-family residence,
        if the dwelling unit is intended for the sole occupancy of one adult or two adult persons
        who are 62 years of age or over, and the area of floor space of the attached dwelling
        unit does not exceed 30 percent of the existing living area or the area of the floor
        space of the detached dwelling unit does not exceed 1,200 square feet.”
According to State Government Code §65852.150:
        “The Legislature finds and declares that second units are a valuable form of housing
        in California. Second units provide housing for family members, students, the elderly,
        in-home health care providers, the disabled, and others, at below market prices within
        existing neighborhoods. Homeowners who create second units may benefit from
        added income and an increased sense of security”.
                                                 IV-26

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                           Housing Element
Adequate Site Alternatives
By all estimates, the City of Villa Park will meet the quantified objectives for the number of
housing units for each income level, as set by the Southern California Association of
Governments (SCAG) final Regional Housing Need Assessment plan, therefore eliminating
the need to include discussion of adequate site alternatives.
CONSTRAINTS ON HOUSING
State Government Code requirements for analysis of constraints on housing are described in
Section 65583(a) (4) and (5).
Analysis of Governmental Constraints
Land Use Controls
Land use controls which establish the range and diversity of housing types maintained in
Villa Park include the General Plan and Zoning Code. More specifically, the Land Use
Element establishes the principal residential land use categories to be encouraged in the
community. The Zoning Code, in turn, establishes regulations affecting the uses, density
and size of housing permitted in different districts of the City.
Land Use Element: The residential land use categories include:
               R-1         3.0 dwelling units per acre
               R-1         2.5 dwelling units per acre
               E-4         1.75 dwelling units per acre
Zoning Code: Nine zoning districts implement the residential land use categories:
               R-1          13,500 square feet
               R-1          12,000 square feet
               R-1          10,000 square feet
               R-1          9,500 square feet
               R-1          8,500 square feet
               R-1          8,400 square feet
               R-1          8,000 square feet
               E-4          20,000 square feet
Some of the lot sizes allowed by the City’s residential zones are similar to those of other
cities in Orange County. For instance, residential development is permitted on lots of 8,000
to 9,000 square feet. These lot sizes indicate that the Zoning Code does not impede the
development of entry-level housing. Moreover, the City does not impose a minimum housing
unit size in the R-1 and E-4 Zone Districts. The primary difference between the residential
zones is the minimum lot size. In addition to lot size, the residential zones have the
development standards described on the next page.
                                              IV-27

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                            Housing Element
                          All R-1 Zones                      E-4 Zones
  Minimum Lot Width       None                               None
  Front Yard Setbacks     20 ft.                             30 ft.
  Side Yard Setbacks      5 ft.                              10-20 ft.
  Rear Yard Setbacks      25 ft.                             25 ft.
  Building Heights        32 ft.                             32 ft.
  Parking                 2 garage stalls                    2 garage stalls
In 1962, at the time of incorporation, a single “100-E4-20,000 Small Estates” Zone was
adopted for the entire City. In the ensuing years, it became evident that this singular zoning
district was more detrimental than beneficial to the City. For this reason, a change in zoning
was adopted in order to achieve a well balanced community and more effective land use
transitions.
The zoning change created a transitional zone for the City with a small westerly section
zoned for 8,000 square foot lots at a density of not more than three residences per acre
adjacent to a 12,000 square foot zone with a density of 2.5 residences per acre. This action
provided a gradual transition into the 20,000 square foot small estate zone with a density of
1.75 units per acre.
Along the westerly City border, there are approximately 78.82 acres zoned three dwelling
units per acre. Adjacent to this section, on the easterly side of the zone, there are
approximately 57.05 acres with a density of 2.5 dwelling units per acre. These two zones
establish a gradual transition from the City of Orange into the 1.75 density small estate zone.
The north and easterly portions of the City are entirely zoned for 20,000 square foot small
estate lots.
In addition to the above, the City has a Planned Community Zone (PC), and although there
are no existing parcels of property currently with the PC Zone designation, the zone does
exist and provides for a diverse group of potential land uses, including single family
residential developments, multiple housing developments, professional and administrative
office areas, commercial centers, or any public or semi-public use or combination of uses
through the adoption of a development plan and text.
The City also has a second dwelling unit ordinance that facilitates the development of
housing at below market costs, meeting the needs of special populations and low-income
persons. Second unit development standards include:
        •  Sleeping quarters and kitchen and bathroom facilities independent of the principal
           dwelling unit.
        •  Floor area shall not exceed 1,200 square feet (SF), if detached.
        •  Floor area shall not exceed 30% of the existing living area of the main structure if
           attached, but can be no larger than 1,200 SF.
                                              IV-28

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                            Housing Element
The City adopted the current second unit ordinance to encourage low-income housing
development. Since the 2001 Housing Element was adopted the City has processed
requests for second units in a timely and efficient fashion. Second units follow the same
process of planning, building, and engineering review as do all development projects. The
City’s small size prevents it from being able to offer assistance or incentives, but does allow
development projects such as second units to process rapidly, in turn minimizing costs and
creating an option for each residential parcel.
After adoption of the prior Housing Element, 11 second units were built and those units
currently serve a variety of low-income housing needs. The City will continue to facilitate the
development of second units on existing developed lots.
Building Codes and Their Enforcement
Villa Park has adopted the Uniform Building Code and other model codes such as electrical
and plumbing. These are standardized codes adopted by most cities throughout the State of
California. The City does not impose (on the basis of unique local conditions) requirements
or standards more stringent than those incorporated in the code, with the exception of the fire
code, as recommended by the Orange County Fire Authority. The following codes were
adopted by the City Council:
              2007 Edition of the California Building Code
              1997 Edition of the Uniform Housing Code
              2007 Edition of the California Mechanical Code
              2006 Edition of the Uniform Solar Energy Code
              2007 Edition of the California Plumbing Code
              2007 Edition of the California Electrical Code
              1997 Edition for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
              2006 Edition of the Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code
              2007 Edition of the California Fire Code
Site Improvement Requirements
Most cities require site improvements as a part of the normal development process. As land
is subdivided and built upon, the City requires streets, curbs and gutters, street trees, and
other related improvements. In keeping with the rural character of the area, no street lights
are required and sidewalks are avoided. The City of Villa Park does have a Master Plan of
Recreational Trails and in cases where undeveloped segments of the trail front the property
curb, gutter, fencing and other improvements are required. The improvements required by
the City are permitted by State law and are not extraordinary. They are necessary for
purposes of assuring public health and safety in residential communities.
Infrastructure Constraints
The availability of infrastructure is critical to affordability for development of new housing.
The City has all infrastructure in place necessary to develop approved vacant and
underutilized land. Because the City is largely built-out, most of infrastructure is sized to
                                                IV-29

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                           Housing Element
accommodate existing uses. Expansion of residential inventory or density over that specified
in the City General Plan would require major new infrastructure development and would
increase development costs and reduce housing affordability.
Public Services and Facilities
Villa Park is served by the following public utilities:
Water:                                                  Serrano Water District
Sewer
         Collection                                     City-owned system
         Treatment                                      O.C. Sanitation District
         Sewer Maintenance District #1                  City System
Storm Drainage                                          City Maintained System
Refuse Collection and Disposal                          Villa Park Disposal
Electric                                                Southern California Edison
Gas                                                     The Southern California Gas Co.
Telephone                                               AT&T
Cable Television                                        Time Warner
The City of Villa Park provides sewer facilities and there is adequate capacity to handle
future development. The Serrano Water District furnishes water facilities. According to
District officials, there is an adequate water supply for current and projected domestic use
and fire flows. The natural runoff from Irvine Lake is supplemented by local ground water.
The storage capacity within the system is more than 600 million gallons.
2007 – 2008 FY Fees and Exactions Required of Developers
Fees and Exactions required of developers are used to support a variety of functions which
include checking submitted plans, paying local facility management fees, special road
assessments, and public service related fees for other agencies such as school districts and
utility providers. Table 15 on page IV-31 shows permit issuance fees for a prototype home in
Villa Park. Permit fees are based on the construction of a new four bedroom, 3 bathrooms,
3,500 square foot two-story home, with an 800 square foot 3-car garage and a 400 square
foot patio.
                                              IV-30

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                                   Housing Element
                                             Table IV -15
                                          City of Villa Park
                            Permit Issuance Fees: Prototype Home
                         Building Valuation Project Cost Breakdown
                                 New Living Area           New Garage Area New Porch/Patio Area
Square Footage:                        3,500                       800                  400
Cost Per Sq. Ft.:                        $96                       $26                  $16
Sub- Total Valuation:                $336,000                    $20,800               $6,400
Miscellaneous Costs:                      -                          -                    -
Total Project Valuation:             $363,200
Plan Check Fee:                       $1,930
                               Permit Fee Breakdown
             Building Permit Fees                              Assessed Per Project          $2,950
            NPDES Inspection Fee                                  $100 Per Permit             $500
            Business License Fee                                 $50 Per Contractor            $50
               Site Plan Review                                   $150 Per Project             $150
 Orange Unified School District School Fee
                                                        $2.63 Per Sq. Ft. of Living Area     $9,205
              (New Sq. Ft. > 500)
            Sewer Connection Fee                                  For 4 Bedrooms              $5377
                  Street Bond                                 $575 ($500 Refundable)
                                                                                               $575
         (Any Const. > 300 Sq. Ft.)
            Villa Park License Tax                       $100 + $10 Per Bedroom Over
                                                                                               $120
          (New Construction Only)                                       Two
            Install a Parkway Tree
                                                               Evaluated Per Project
         (Any Const. > 300 Sq. Ft.)
    Plumbing, Mechanical, and Electrical                                                    $400 +/-
  Total Permit Fees Due =          $19,327 +/- (Includes School Fee and County Sewer Fee)
       Source:        Table constructed by the City of Villa Park
Local Processing and Permit Procedures
Due to the fact that there is very little vacant land within Villa Park and the age of the majority
of the existing housing stock is less than 40 years, development activity in the City is not
extensive and limited primarily to remodeling of existing single-family dwellings, in-fill
development, and construction of second units. All development applications, including
second units, are ministerially reviewed by the City’s Planning, Building, and Engineering
Departments. Any exceedance of second unit development standards would require a
Variance permit. All Secondary Dwelling Unit applications are also reviewed by the
Community Development Committee within one-month after submittal to evaluate potential
privacy issues for adjacent properties. In most cases landscape screening is required to
minimize the height of a second unit, since they are permitted to reach 15’. Most
development applications are processed completely within two months.
                                                  IV-31

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                                Housing Element
Housing for Persons with Disabilities
SB 520 Compliance
Pursuant to Senate Bill 520-Chesbro (SB520), this section analyzes potential and actual
constraints upon the development, maintenance, and improvement of housing for persons
with disabilities; discusses local efforts to remove governmental constraints that hinder the
locality from meeting the need for housing of persons with disabilities; and identifies
programs that remove constraints or provide reasonable accommodations for housing
designed for persons with disabilities.
Villa Park endeavors to accommodate disabled access and to comply with SB520
requirement. The majority of Villa Park was developed without sidewalks, with the only
sidewalks located on the larger public streets and near schools. Roads with sidewalks
include portions of:
     •   Lincoln Street
     •   Santiago Boulevard
     •   Center Street
     •   Serrano and Taft Avenues
     •   Nichols, Wanda and Villa Park Roads.
The following are responses to questions of the “SB 520 Analysis Tool”, promulgated by
HCD:
    1. Does the locality have any processes for individuals with disabilities to make requests
        for reasonable accommodations with respect to zoning, permit processing, or building
        laws?
        Response #1: The City Building Official strictly enforces Americans with Disabilities
        Act (ADA) requirements on new and rehabilitated developments. There are no
        anticipated zoning restrictions with respect to individuals with disabilities needing
        reasonable accommodations.
    2. Describe the process for requesting a reasonable accommodation.
        Response #2: The applicant is asked to submit the request to the City in writing. If the
        request is within the administrative limits of the official, a written ruling will be issued.
        If it is beyond the administrative limits, a variance could be applied for and processed.
    3. Has the locality made efforts to remove constraints on housing for persons with
        disabilities, such as accommodating procedures for the approval of group homes,
        ADA retrofit efforts, an evaluation of the zoning code for ADA compliance or other
        measures that provide flexibility?
                                                 IV-32

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                           Housing Element
       Response #3: Villa Park’s procedures for approval of group homes are consistent
       with State requirements. Other issues arise so rarely in Villa Park, if at all; they would
       be handled on a case-by-case basis, within applicable State and Federal law.
   4. Does the locality make information available about requesting a reasonable
       accommodation with respect to zoning, permit processing, or building laws?
       Response #4: Villa Park provides information as requested, and posts the information
       at its public planning and building counter, as well as on it’s website at
       www.villapark.org.
   5. Has the locality reviewed all of its zoning laws, policies and practices for compliance
       with fair housing law?
       Response #5: The City’s codes are compliant with applicable State and Federal law.
       If issues arise and are brought to the City’s attention, then those issues would be
       resolved on a case-by-case basis.
   6. Do parking standards and requirements address disabled access?
       Response #6: The City’s codes are compliant with all applicable State and Federal
       laws regarding ADA parking requirements.
   7. Does the locality restrict the sitting or separation of group homes? How does this
       effect the development and cost of housing?
       Response #7: As indicated under response #3, above, Villa Park’s procedures for
       approval of group homes are consistent with State requirements. There is no
       indication there is any effect on the cost and development of housing in Villa Park.
       There are few group homes in Villa Park, albeit the City may not be aware of all group
       homes within the City.
   8. What zones allow group homes other than those covered by state law? Are group
       homes over six persons also allowed?
       Response #8: All residential zones within Villa Park allow group homes not covered
       by State law with a Conditional Use Permit. Those covered by state law, including
       permitting, are not handled by Villa Park.
   9. Does the locality have occupancy standards in the zoning code that apply specifically
       to unrelated adults and not to families? Do the occupancy standards comply with Fair
       Housing Laws?
       Response #9: The definition of “Family” enforced in Villa Park is that found in the
       Uniform Building Code (UBC) pertaining to number of persons based on square
       footage of the structure: "Family " shall mean an individual or two (2) or more persons
                                             IV-33

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                           Housing Element
       living together as a single housekeeping unit in a single dwelling unit.
   10. Does the land-use element regulate the siting of special needs housing in relationship
       to one another? Specifically, is there a minimum distance required between two (or
       more) special needs housing?
       Response #10: No.
   11. Does the locality allow group homes with fewer than six persons by right in single-
       family zones? What permits, if any, are required?
       Response #11: Yes. None.
   12. How does the locality process a request to retrofit homes for accessibility (i.e., ramp
       request)?
       Response #12: A standard building permit request is followed.
   13. Does the locality have a set of particular conditions or use restrictions for group
       homes with greater than 6 persons? How do they affect the development of housing
       for persons with disabilities?
       Response #13: Refer to responses #3 and #8 above
   14. What kind of community input does the locality allow for the approval of group homes?
       Is it different than from other types of residential development?
       Response #14: Small-family group homes (those < 6) are permitted by right and do
       not require local approval. Large family group homes, although not permitted by City
       Code, are not expressively prohibited either, and are handled through the conditional
       use permitted process.
   15. Does the locality have particular conditions for group homes that will be providing
       services on-site? How may these conditions affect the development or conversion of
       residences to meet the needs of persons with disabilities?
       Response #15: Villa Park does not have particular conditions for group homes that
       will be providing services on-site as long as they have less than six occupants. For
       those homes with more than six occupants conditions would be applied during the
       Conditional Use Permit approval process.
   16. Has the locality adopted the Uniform Building Code? What year? Has the locality
       made amendments that might diminish the ability to accommodate persons with
       disabilities?
       Response #16: No, beginning in 2008 the City of Villa Park adopted the 2007
       California Building Code. No.
                                               IV-34
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                           Housing Element
    17. Has the locality adopted any universal design elements in the building code?
        Response #17: No.
    18. Does the locality provide reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities in
        the enforcement of building codes and the issuance of building permits?
        Response #18: Yes, see above.
Analysis of Non-Governmental Factors
The City of Villa Park recognizes that adequate and affordable housing for all income groups
strengthens the community. Many factors can work to encourage or constrain the
development, maintenance, and improvement of the City’s housing stock. These include
market mechanisms, government codes, and physical and environmental constraints. These
factors include the potential market constraints posed by the availability of financing, price of
land, and construction costs. The analysis of these factors is presented below and in the
next few pages.
Availability of Financing
Interest rates affect homeownership opportunities in Villa Park and Orange County. As a
snapshot of the current market, in April 2008, the average jumbo interest rate on resale
single-family homes was 7% on a 30-year fixed rate loan with a 20% down payment. On the
median home in Villa Park costing approximately $1,194,000, the monthly interest and
principal payment would be $6,350. Any reduction in the cost and interest rate to finance a
home will help fuel both first time home buying as well as households that want to trade up
based on a substantial increase in the equity of their home. Anytime we experience an
increase in demand, coupled with a constrained supply, most likely a rapid escalation of
housing costs will result, especially in Orange County.
Table IV-16 uses Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data to summarize 3 levels of loan
activity: conventional loans as people purchased existing homes located in the 2 primary
Villa Park census tracts; refinancing by existing homeowners; and applications for home
improvement loans. Given that the majority of housing prices in Villa Park in 2006 exceeded
FHA loan limits, there was no FHA loan activity. The denial rates are slightly higher for
conventional home purchases, slightly lower for refinancing loans, and relatively the same for
home improvement loans when compared to aggregate Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA)
percentages.
                                              IV-35

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                                     Housing Element
                                                Table IV – 16
                                              City of Villa Park
                                        Home Loan Denials – 2006
Census Tract                   Conventional                Refinance                Home Improvements
758.09                         23% of 52 loans             19% of 139 loans         25% of 20 loans
758.10                         31% of 81 loans             13% of 165 loans         27% of 22 loans
Total                          28% of 133 loans            16% of 304 loans         26% of 42 loans
MSA Percentages                21% of 89,221               21% of 150,265           25% of 20,907
         Source:            Home Mortgage Disclosure Act Aggregate Reports by Census Tracts, 2006; Table 1
                            Table constructed by the City of Villa Park
Table IV-17 uses Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data to summarize loan denials
per income group for MSA/MD: 42044. What this table best illustrates is that a higher
percentage of applications from lower income groups were denied than from higher income
groups. The median income as a percentage of the MSA/MD (Metropolitan District) median
for tracts 758.09 and 758.10 were 185% and 186% respectively, as reported by the 2006
HMDA aggregate report.
                                                Table IV – 17
                                              City of Villa Park
                                               MSA/MD: 42044
                                    Mortgage Lending Rates – 2006
    Applicant                   Total                Loans              Applications        % Denied
 Income Group*            Applications**           Originated             Denied
       < 50%                   14,879                4,842                5,298                36%
   >50% - 80%                  44,808                19,936               11,563               26%
  >80% - 100%                  48,742                25,150               10,387               21%
  100% - 120%                  57,146                30,658               11,594               20%
       >120%                  518,725               279,612              107,136               21%
        Total                 684,300               360,198              145,978               21%
     * Percent of Area Median Income (AMI)
     ** Total Applications for Convention Home-Purchase, Refinance, and Home Improvement Loans in
     MSA/MD: 42044 (Santa Ana-Anaheim-Irvine, CA)
         Source:            Home Mortgage Disclosure Act Aggregate Reports by Income, 2006; Tables 5-2, 5-3,
                            and 5-4
                            Table constructed by the City of Villa Park
Land Costs
Another key component in the cost of development is the price of raw land and any
necessary improvements. In Villa Park, the virtual non-existence of vacant sub-dividable
residential land combined with a high demand for such development keeps land costs high.
Based on the most recent sales, none of which include vacant lots, the per lot land cost
                                                      IV-36

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                           Housing Element
within the E-4 zone average in April 2008 was estimated to be $1.1 million. Land costs of
this magnitude make the development of affordable housing in the remaining vacant lots
highly unlikely.
Construction Costs
Generally construction costs vary widely according to the type of development, with multi-
family housing generally being less expensive to construct than singe-family homes.
However, there is wide variation within each construction type, depending on the size of the
unit and the number and quality of amenities provided. The International Conference of
Building Officials in 2005/2006 established that the average cost of good quality construction
is $96 per square foot for single-family homes. These costs are exclusive of the costs of land
and soft costs, such as entitlements, financing, etc. A reduction in amenities or the quality of
building materials (above the minimum acceptable for health, safety, and adequate
performance) could result in lower sales prices. Another factor affecting construction costs is
the number of units built at one time. As the number increases, overall costs generally
decrease as builders can benefit from the economies of scale.
QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES BY INCOME GROUP
State law requires that the Housing Element state quantified objectives, by income group, for
the construction, rehabilitation, and conservation/preservation of housing.
                               Extremely Low     Very Low   Low     Moderate  Above
                                                                               Moderate
Construction                   2                 3          2       2         4
Rehabilitation                 0                 0          0       0         20
Conservation/Preservation      0                 0          0       0         0
TOTAL                          2                 3          2       2         24
With regard to new construction, the City already has met the 4-unit need for the above
moderate-income group. In addition, second dwelling units have met the need for the 2
moderate, 2 low-income housing units and the 3 very low-income housing units (a
description of how each unit’s income level was assigned can be found on Page 20).
It is estimated that approximately 1% of the City’s housing stock have some level of
deterioration which requires rehabilitation. These approximately 20 homes still provide safe
and adequate shelter and are valuable to the City’s above moderate income level.
The Conservation objective refers to maintaining existing affordable housing through
measures such as providing or continuing rent subsidies (e.g., Section 8
certificates/vouchers) and implementing land use controls during the program period. There
are no Section 8 assisted households in the City.
The City will promote the continued maintenance and use of the 8 second units that were
developed during the time period of the prior Housing Element period. In this context, the
                                             IV-37

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                              Housing Element
City will enforce the Zoning Code provisions that prohibit the change in use or demolition
without the required permits.
Therefore, the remaining quantified objectives for the 2006-2014 RHNA program period are:
       0 units for above moderate income households
       0 second units for moderate-income households
       0 second unit for a low-income household
       0 second units for very low-income households
In addition, the City will process development applications on remaining developable vacant
lots and those that are sub-dividable.
OTHER TOPICS
Relationship to Other Elements
The City’s General Plan is comprised of 7 State mandated elements (open space and
conservation have been combined) and one optional element. The mandated elements
include: Land Use, Circulation, Housing, Open Space/Conservation, Noise, and
Seismic/Safety. The General Plan also includes an optional Growth Management Element.
The Housing Element is most closely correlated to the Land Use Element.
Coastal Zone
Construction, demolition and conversion of housing for lower and moderate income
households in the coastal zone does not apply to the City of Villa Park as it does not lie
within a coastal zone.
Priority Water and Sewer Service
As described in the sites inventory analysis of suitability and availability, development in Villa
Park is limited to infill development and all portions of the City are adequately served with
sewer and water service.
                                             IV-38

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                              Housing Element
GOALS AND POLICIES
This portion of the Villa Park Housing Element describes the housing strategy to be
implemented by the City during the 2006-2014 program period. The housing strategy
consolidates the State housing law requirements pertaining to goals, policies, objectives, and
programs described in Section 65583 (b) of the Government Code.
Housing Element Goal: The City’s principal goal is to contribute to meeting the
statewide goal of a decent home and suitable living environment for all people.
       Housing Policies:
       H #1:     To maintain a housing stock free of substandard conditions.
       H #2:     To accommodate the special housing needs of the elderly, frail elderly and
                 handicapped populations through the development of new second dwelling
                 units.
       H #3:     To meet the needs of low-income persons through the development of new
                 second dwelling units.
       H #4:     To continue to comply with State and Federal housing laws and regulations.
       H #5:     To promote open and free choice of housing for all.
       H #6:     To promote equal opportunity of choice throughout the housing market area
                 for all residents regardless of race, creed, national origin or ethnicity.
2006-2014 HOUSING PROGRAMS
The programs contained in this section of the Housing Element describe specific actions the
City of Villa Park will carry out over the eight-year Housing Element cycle to satisfy the
community’s housing needs and meet the requirements of State law.
Adequate Sites
Program: Provide adequate sites to meet State requirements and the Regional Housing
           Need assessment
           1. The City of Villa Park anticipates substantially maintaining its present land use
              designations, but will review and make appropriate changes, if any, to its land
              use designations, if determined necessary by the City Council to ensure that
              the City retains its ability to provide sufficient capacity to meet its regional need
              and also provide sites to accommodate all income levels. Existing land use and
              zoning has and is expected to provide sufficient capacity and sites to meet its
              regional need and the needs of all income levels.
                                                IV-39

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                            Housing Element
              Responsible Agencies and Officials:
              Villa Park’s City Manager’s Office and Planning Department
              Time Frame:
              Efforts are ongoing.
           2. The City will implement programs to address the following housing types:
              a. Emergency Shelters - Currently, Villa Park’s Zoning Ordinance does not
                  specify zones where emergency shelters are allowed. This program
                  commits the City to designating the E-4 Zone as a zone where emergency
                  shelters will be permitted by right under standardized and objective
                  procedures that are no more restrictive than those for similar residential
                  uses. This program also commits the City to permitting emergency shelters
                  in all R-1 districts with Conditional Use Permit Approval. Conditions for the
                  use permit will be standardized and objective and will not impede the
                  development of a homeless shelter. In addition, the City will consider
                  participation in any regional effort to provide these facilities. This is in
                  compliance with Senate Bill 2.
              b. Transitional Housing - Currently, Villa Park’s Zoning Ordinance does not
                  specify zones where transitional housing is allowed. This program commits
                  the City to designating the E-4 Zone as a zone where transitional housing
                  will be permitted by right under standardized and objective procedures that
                  are no more restrictive than those for similar residential uses. This program
                  also commits the City to permitting Transitional housing in all R-1 districts
                  with Conditional Use Permit Approval. Conditions for the use permit will be
                  standardized and objective and will not impede the development of
                  transitional housing.
              c. Housing for Farm Workers - The City recognizes that State law prohibits
                  cities from imposing conditional use permit requirements on housing for six
                  or fewer employees if family housing of the same type in the same zone
                  does not require a use permit. Current zoning permits housing of this type
                  without a special use permit; however, due in large part to high land prices
                  within Villa Park and a lack of a significant local agricultural industry no
                  specific farm worker housing programs are planned for the current housing
                  cycle.
              d. Single-Room Occupancy - The City of Villa Park currently has no multi-
                  family land use or zoning classifications with which single-room occupancy
                  can operate. As a City that is considered built-out, Villa Park has no
                  opportunity to annex, and having relatively no potential for redevelopment,
                  single-room occupancies are not a viable affordable housing unit type;
                  therefore, no programs are planned for the current housing cycle.
                                              IV-40

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                           Housing Element
              e. Second Units - The City included requirements for second dwelling units
                  within the Zoning Code. Per the Zoning Code, a second unit is an attached
                  or detached residential unit on the same parcel or parcels as the primary
                  unit, which provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more
                  persons. The unit includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating,
                  cooking, and sanitation.
              Responsible Agencies and Officials: The City Manager’s Office and Planning
              Department.
              Time Frame: The City will implement programs a. and b. by December 2010.
              All others have already been implemented.
Housing for Various Income Levels
Program: Assist in the development of adequate housing to meet the needs of extremely-
           low, very-low, low, and moderate-income households.
           Program Actions:
           3. The City of Villa Park will implement a Density Bonus Ordinance pursuant to
              Government Code Section 65915.
              Responsible Agencies and Officials:
              Villa Park’s City Manager’s Office and Planning Department
              Time Frame:
              The City will implement a Density Bonus Ordinance by December 2010.
           4. The City of Villa Park will publish information on its web-site and distribute
              information to homeowner associations, to the local public library, and to senior
              centers located near the City regarding all available Federal, State and Local
              programs which offer assistance in the development of housing for extremely-
              low, very-low, low, and moderate-income households.
              Responsible Agencies and Officials:
              Villa Park’s City Manager’s Office and Planning Department
              Time Frame:
              Affordable housing assistance information is currently available by accessing
              the City’s housing program through a link on the web-site and will be distributed
              annually to homeowner associations, to the local public library, and to senior
              centers located near the City beginning in June of 2011.
           5. Regulatory concessions in the form of expedited processing are available to
              affordable housing proponents.
                                             IV-41

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                           Housing Element
              Responsible Agencies and Officials:
              Villa Park’s City Manager’s Office and Planning Department
              Time Frame:
              The City will continue its current efforts working with project proponents to
              expedite the processing of affordable housing projects.
           6. The City of Villa Park does not have a Redevelopment Agency and therefore
              has no low and moderate (L&M) income housing Fund.
Governmental Constraints
Program: Minimize governmental constraints to the development, improvement, and
           maintenance of housing, particularly affordable housing or housing accessible to
           persons with disabilities.
           Program Actions:
           7. With respect to land use controls, building codes and required site
              improvements there are currently no significant governmental constraints to the
              development or maintenance of housing in the City. The City of Villa Park will
              continue to monitor its land use controls, Building Codes and required site
              improvements to identify and remove constraints to the development or
              maintenance of housing, particularly affordable housing or housing accessible
              to persons with disabilities.
              Responsible Agencies and Officials:
              Villa Park’s City Manager’s Office and Planning Department
              Time Frame:
              The City will continue its current efforts to work with project proponents to
              identify and eliminate governmental constraints.
           8. With respect to fees and exactions, there are currently no significant
              governmental constraints to the development and maintenance of housing in
              the City. The City of Villa Park annually reviews its fee schedule to ensure that
              its fees and exactions promote the development and maintenance of housing,
              particularly affordable housing or housing accessible to persons with
              disabilities.
              Responsible Agencies and Officials:
              Villa Park’s City Manager’s Office and Planning Department
              Time Frame:
              The City will continue to review its fee schedule annually to identify and
              eliminate governmental constraints related to fees and exactions.
                                              IV-42

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                            Housing Element
           9. The City of Villa Park will continue to educate the public on how to complete the
               development approval process and otherwise facilitate building permit and
               development plan processing for residential construction, particularly affordable
               housing or housing accessible to persons with disabilities.
               Responsible Agencies and Officials:
               Villa Park’s City Manager’s Office and Planning Department
               Time Frame:
               The City will continue its current efforts to provide material at the City Hall
               counter and on the web-site and work with project proponents on an ongoing
               basis.
           10. The City of Villa Park will expedite project review of residential developments
               with a handicapped-accessible or elderly component.
               Responsible Agencies and Officials:
               Villa Park’s City Manager’s Office and Planning Department
               Time Frame:
               The City will continue its current efforts to provide material at the City Hall
               counter and on the web-site and work with project proponents on an ongoing
               basis.
Existing Affordable Housing Stock
Program: Encourage the conservation and maintenance of the City’s existing affordable
           housing stock.
           Program Actions:
           11. The City of Villa Park will commit to educating the public regarding the need for
               property maintenance and rehabilitation, code enforcement, crime watch,
               neighborhood conservation and beautification, and other related issues. The
               City will educate the public by including a link on its web site and providing
               handouts indicating resources and programs available to encourage housing
               stock maintenance and rehabilitation.
           Responsible Agencies and Officials:
           Villa Park’s City Manager’s Office and Planning Department
           Time Frame:
           A web site link and handouts will be made available by June of 2011.
           12.The City of Villa Park will advocate and facilitate the rehabilitation of
               substandard residential properties by homeowners and landlords, utilizing a
                                               IV-43

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                           Housing Element
               City code compliance program, when necessary, to improve overall housing
               quality and conditions.
           Responsible Agencies and Officials:
           Villa Park’s City Manager’s Office and Planning Department
           Time Frame:
           Activities are ongoing.
Equal Housing Opportunities
Program: The City of Villa Park will advocate against discrimination in the sale, rental, or
           financing of housing based on race, religion, sex, marital status, ancestry, national
           origin, color, familial status, or disability.
           Program Actions:
           13. The City will make available information on fair housing laws and rights on the
               City’s web-site. The City staff will have information on agencies that provide
               fair housing services in Orange County.
           Responsible Agencies and Officials:
           Villa Park’s City Manager’s Office and Planning Department
           Time Frame:
           Handouts will be made available beginning June of 2011.
Units At-Risk
All housing in Villa Park is detached single-family units which has been privately built and
financed. Villa Park relies on secondary dwelling units to provide affordable housing. No
government or non-governmental organization assisted housing is located within the City.
Thus, there are no affordable multi-family rental housing units that receive governmental
assistance that are at risk of conversion to market rate housing.
Energy Efficiency
Program: The City of Villa Park will encourage the utilization of green building techniques
           and promote energy audits and participation in utility programs.
           Program Actions:
           14. The City will make available information on green building techniques, energy
               audits, and utility programs on the City’s web-site.
           Responsible Agencies and Officials:
           Villa Park’s City Manager’s Office and Planning Department
           Time Frame:
           Activities are ongoing.
                                                 IV-44

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                       Housing Element
Sources of Information
A number of data sources were utilized to create the Villa Park Housing Element. These
resources include:
      City of Villa Park General Plan; April 1991
      City of Villa Park General Plan Housing Element June 2001
      City of Villa Park Municipal Code
      City of Villa Park building permit records
      City of Villa Park Global Information System (GIS) Database
      Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) Regional Housing Needs
       Assessment (RHNA)
      2007 California Department of Finance Population and Housing data
      2000 and 1990 U.S. Census Reports
      Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) - Home Mortgage
       Disclosure Act – 2006 MSA/MD Aggregate Reports
      Southern California Multiple Listing Service (MLS)
Various other informational sources were referenced where appropriate. These informational
sources are cited where they appear within the text.
                                              IV-45

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                             Housing Element
                                        Exhibits
Exhibit IV-1: Second Unit Letter
Exhibit IV-2: Sites Inventory
Exhibit IV-3: Developable Vacant Parcels and those capable of being sub-
                divided into four or more
                                          IV-46
        City of Villa Park                                                           Exhibit IV-1
        17855 Santiago Boulevard, Villa Park, California 92861-4187                       www.villapark.org
         (714) 998-1500 • Fax: (714) 998-1508
November 26, 2008
Name
Street
Villa Park, California 92861
REGARDING:                   SECONDARY UNIT AT
Dear Mr. & Mrs. Name:
The City of Villa Park is currently undertaking the task of updating its General Plan. An integral
part of that process is the update of the City’s Housing Element. In short, the State of California
and the Southern California Association of Governments assesses the need for low-income
housing every five years and, in turn, produces a Regional Housing Needs Assessment for each
City.
I know that at this time you are probably wondering how this affects you. Villa Park does not
have a large demand for affordable housing. State law however permits agencies, like Villa
Park, to count secondary units as low-income housing opportunities. Many of these secondary
units are not just used for friends or family in town on vacation or in-law quarters. This option
has allowed the City to achieve Housing Element certification by the State for at least the last
ten years.
New to this Housing Element is a requirement to provide a methodology as to how units are
attributed to a specific income category (i.e. extremely-low, very-low, or low income); this is
where you as an owner of a secondary unit come into play. The City is asking that the attached
form be completed and returned. I would like to stress that this information will remain
confidential and no personal information will be included in the Housing Element. In no way is
providing this information required, but as I mentioned, certifying this document is a prominent
achievement and possible with your help. Additionally, this information will assist Villa Park
maintain our current residential zoning without further interference from the State.
Should you have any questions regarding this letter please contact me at (714) 998-1500.
Sincerely,
CITY OF VILLA PARK
Jason Carson
Associate Planner
Attachment: Second Unit Information Form
                               BRAD REESE, Mayor • JIM RHEINS, Mayor Pro Tem
                   DEBORAH PAULY, Councilwoman • W. RICHARD ULMER, Councilman

City of Villa Park                                                                      Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                Housing Element
                                        Sites Inventory
                                2006-2014 Housing Element
General Plan Land Use Code: SFR - 1.75 DU/AC
APN         PARCEL SIZE      LAND USE         ZONING                       EXISTING USE
372-351-22 20055.6039096000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-561-15 21206.1313074000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-28 21062.1525494000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-681-08 20705.3218952000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-17 20053.6540260000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-391-03 20099.6016764000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-412-04 20779.5857814000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-411-08 38238.0811090000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-491-19 32707.6020674000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-491-20 48184.4052128000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-423-01 22044.7213283000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-511-14 19879.3445953000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-553-01 47136.9903494000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-411-07 25866.0047294000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-423-02 21631.7383768000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-411-05 21124.7715820000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-261-06 20080.4255925000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
363-584-02 20041.3364487000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-441-07 20697.1423994000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-441-06 23268.5073115000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-731-13 20847.4205748000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-441-05 21806.7927803000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-442-17 22597.5489333000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-731-14 12888.1602963000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-731-02 20954.4381266000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-442-02 24486.2938354000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-072-03 19627.8353201000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-072-02 20386.6880725000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-732-01 19814.0393618000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-442-03 22089.5936872000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-431-08 55263.7660768000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-731-12 20521.4384161000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-731-03 20067.7581862000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-431-11 22276.2238448000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-401-16 24708.1036046000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-442-14 19328.3137053000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-442-04 28637.7097909000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-442-07 20107.9990602000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-732-02 21328.7078045000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-401-17 20066.6500318000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-401-15 20544.4877089000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-731-11 21569.3761948000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-442-10 20141.8255124000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-731-04 20314.8604423000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-431-10 22852.7102247000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-431-09 24489.7734163000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac  E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 1
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
372-401-20   28385.2202978000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-431-12   22454.5761971000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-442-05   50372.3932049000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-072-08   54079.5549762000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-072-10   29897.7701959000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-442-13   23546.4741245000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-442-08   20209.2464245000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-442-09   19799.0228341000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-401-09   22392.8110262000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-731-10   20421.4508855000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-732-03   21009.3010247000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-442-11   20254.1246538000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-442-06   19981.5631776000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-431-07   23610.5183122000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-731-05   20120.9706815000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-731-06   21474.7791702000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-731-09   20442.4251254000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-401-18   20050.8149079000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-41   34723.6097941000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-401-19   19970.4200747000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
363-581-12   21361.0528312000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-442-18   19566.8586829000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-442-12   20030.1007432000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-442-19   20610.0114025000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-732-04   20988.7210786000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-362-01   23059.0140248000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-363-09   26098.6460752000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-363-01   20320.1939778000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-401-07   25616.5264911000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-401-02   28546.9830219000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-401-01   29953.6585644000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-431-14   22429.9777818000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-431-13   20320.4851920000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-731-07   21156.9446203000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-401-12   20295.3820981000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-431-06   21249.9653630000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-731-08   21073.0685269000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-732-09   18947.5554008000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-362-04   19620.8073294000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-401-03   26879.0231263000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-401-05   26061.0870999000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-15   20210.6376872000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-363-08   26099.4009232000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
363-584-03   19725.2543687000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
363-584-04   19998.3487536000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-401-06   24238.0026698000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-401-11   20547.3474873000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-363-02   20072.9771496000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-401-04   24436.9341567000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-531-01   28208.0891784999 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-16   20602.3121557000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-362-02   21688.4033104000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                                Page 2
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
372-732-05   23316.3331314000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-431-05   20514.5777833000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-431-15   20748.1640822000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-431-16   20887.8206060000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-363-07   25846.9487009000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-362-03   19980.8120874000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-732-10   21040.7038491000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-531-02   23781.0020224000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-17   24322.2681277000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-732-06   24569.9779565000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-732-07   20777.8052887000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-363-12   25612.5294249000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-431-04   19767.5140666000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-27   21645.6436212000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-363-03   20202.7347677000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-363-11   28482.2566103000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-14   25063.4051487000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-531-03   21204.2108089000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-28   22303.3683976000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-732-11   28390.0212832000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-14   35509.6143115000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-402-07   20175.2524984000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-402-01   20826.4251198000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-732-14   41094.2106527000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-432-03   20035.4486447000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-432-01   20119.8233006000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-732-15   41279.4234988000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-402-08   20658.9071846000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-432-02   20514.4255391000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-732-16   39064.2265967000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-732-17   39070.1547940000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-402-09   20788.1045752000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-732-20   23523.8266122000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-18   23370.6821258000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-27   26134.0012101000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-431-03   19922.4594094000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-402-18   20199.9213810000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-13   19798.0402265000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-531-04   19652.4771540000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-732-12   47499.5563817000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-531-16   20097.4894585000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-363-10   28239.0590643000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-402-02   36375.3377214000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-432-04   20505.4962242000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-531-15   20555.5647895000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-402-06   18452.0372720000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-432-05   20360.3602033000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-13   27246.1680131000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-402-11   22256.8800708000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-05   21915.0095168000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-02   21421.8209102000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-531-05   19558.5300770000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                                Page 3
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
372-432-06   22465.3784398999 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-402-10   20111.1882155000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-19   21417.3108351000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-431-02   20377.1125967000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-32   27112.0084118000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-15   20702.1771337000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-531-06   20637.8118970000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-34   26751.2389048000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-35   18924.9879357000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-402-17   19721.5123258000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-531-14   19765.0432035000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-12   21114.9362197000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-12   20517.4873612000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-06   22810.7459366000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-402-12   20020.8077494000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-03   23745.9875471000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-402-03   20582.7143674000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-431-01   22063.0333894000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-20   19725.0707200000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-402-04   20277.3502680000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-531-10   19504.2857942000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-402-14   19928.0735876000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-402-05   20437.8527995000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-16   19929.0663394000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-432-08   20509.0409338000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-432-09   20176.1778040000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-432-07   18959.2144256000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-531-11   20385.2647008000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-31   20630.4545845000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-33   19594.7863414000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-561-03   19013.9215344000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-681-01   23651.7470364000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-561-07   31466.4365683000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-531-13   20075.2849835000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-11   20376.2568832000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-531-09   20733.6677725000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-26   19354.3699114000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-07   21854.8346168000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-29   20673.9644165000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-25   21152.3829782000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-11   19993.9580922000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-21   20332.8055745000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-17   21210.3926192000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-402-15   22874.8521301000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-19   19839.6688883000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-19   23136.7773235000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-30   20286.6027082000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-561-02   29768.5924134000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-531-08   27547.8183068000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-09   19636.0748262000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-681-02   56351.7254550000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-531-17   34384.5224233000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                                Page 4
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
372-681-09   20133.0339741000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-31   19013.0297661000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-49   27423.4879295000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-521-28   54930.6330478000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-08   20171.3735244000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-10   21757.1085535000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-391-01   19995.0651808000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-08   27533.6763428000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-18   20060.4633240000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-412-06   43606.1026033000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-10   20578.0599493000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-561-14   20743.9620258000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-27   24105.5910098000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-521-13   23726.3614550000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-07   20329.3590499000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-29   19876.7882670000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-47   19535.3403735000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-521-29   34517.5029394000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-10   19928.6214935000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-18   19998.9432003000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-521-14   22218.8106454000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-681-03   44620.9244551000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-391-02   19990.2720794000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-09   21897.9609667000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-412-05   20431.4016541000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-09   20015.3250858000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-23   20050.9569293000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-681-04   53185.8837829000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-412-08   20257.8993097000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-422-04   25030.5191840000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-422-03   28614.9214530000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-20   21308.2171683000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-06   20083.5649537000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-521-21   27175.4699184000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-412-09   20670.0940901000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-042-23   28888.2375574000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-48   20758.6901030000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-531-07   22551.3540288000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-28   20229.2220078000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-21   19973.9833008000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-561-24   20251.6496970000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-521-04   35507.3591011000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-11   19750.8927529000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-08   19595.0023158000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-042-02   19642.3990436000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-561-16   20000.2094367000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-29   36164.6779375000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-45   53609.2007163000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-551-14   45283.1905889000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-351-24   23322.0444549000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-681-05   47191.5610103000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-042-35   34081.6848845000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                                Page 5
City of Villa Park                                                                      Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                Housing Element
372-392-05 20309.6410334000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-561-23 20244.3789595000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-361-22 21567.6010300000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-561-17 28924.3009315000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-361-27 20202.8159784000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-412-10 19840.2887611000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-412-03 20252.6172280000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-042-36 30015.6200043000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-042-03 19728.7432440000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-392-12 20114.5736716000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-391-04 19950.5267575000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-361-07 20179.9477986000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-551-15 21683.3164955000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-422-08 39742.8878221000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-561-22 23080.3723454000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-681-06 81067.8947160000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-422-07 36746.3179759000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-521-30 31088.7385639999 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-561-10 29389.4710191000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-392-16 19983.5421853000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-562-01 31729.7123846000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-521-22 62863.5424029000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-681-07 117222.3396300000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-042-42 26780.0162648000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-551-06 31656.6001753000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-042-24 19752.5663959000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-392-04 29656.9390351000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-412-11 19601.3125992000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-361-25 19872.5827319000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-412-17 54923.3912570000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-361-23 20367.0760275000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-042-43 23346.4813658000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-561-18 22735.3461118000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-042-50 39100.7676231000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-392-30 20625.5605701000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-361-26 20166.4398003000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-042-34 23054.6200698000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-412-02 20080.3742962000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-042-04 19598.6950094000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-391-05 20230.9348877000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-361-06 20856.7613382000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-424-16 21799.2470687000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-561-21 20510.2760375000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-392-15 19520.9671484000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-521-25 41310.8648338000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-391-06 20040.5010352000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-501-01 39190.1769544000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-561-19 20096.2068229000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-551-07 31220.8985286000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-561-20 25256.2617230000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-562-02 33879.3692732000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-412-12 21367.1917178000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 6
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
372-042-37   21747.6266175000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-361-24   20502.7678078000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-521-09   28114.4638799000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-042-25   28056.4650786000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-562-11   20767.1634810000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-424-15   20832.0571001000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-511-17   24556.8854227000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-283-01   22042.6942689000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-521-06   53831.7199901000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-551-16   22276.0020916000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-551-08   33628.3377643000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-042-33   23788.3741248000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-412-01   20116.5168107000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-511-18   20848.6634759000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-511-24   27023.8700477000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-511-23   23424.0604236000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-042-05   20377.2068574000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-424-14   19909.3588948000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-521-20   28919.3029986000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-501-08   40220.2063308000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-03   19094.4555941000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-283-02   23108.3539370000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-561-25   27071.1773713000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-501-07   39655.7077069000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-412-13   21036.3599386000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-541-24   12758.3567451000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-424-01   21545.1457023000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-501-05   39886.6654673000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-042-39   20171.1481634000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-552-10   40152.8405441000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-501-06   40110.1522161000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-511-34   20909.0965675000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-511-35   32359.3701711000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-511-28   21784.3841870000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-511-16   19803.1865543000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-551-17   20545.8542946000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-424-13   20253.1441327000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-562-09   20085.0151316000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-042-32   21501.2722263000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-511-29   19961.6323869000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-501-04   44476.5901541000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-424-02   20021.1321759000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-02   19779.1257356000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-412-16   23032.2648335000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-042-16   24220.4842831000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-042-11   24355.3765819000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-511-19   21046.2319176000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-511-22   19865.5365623000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-392-01   23248.8150399000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-042-06   20074.1406444000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-562-10   40225.2934997000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-412-14   19654.8104711000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                                Page 7
City of Villa Park                                                                      Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                Housing Element
372-411-03 29277.0318588000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-562-05 21129.5238357000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-541-14 36812.4419516000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-412-15 20718.9032684999 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-424-03 23270.1206903000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-36 21483.4804961000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-541-13 29990.4725065000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-552-06 20583.5899506000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-424-12 21330.2467452000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-501-02 58697.1471977000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-551-18 23692.8451398000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-042-31 21769.4204229000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-25 20690.0635942000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-042-40 20298.4180050000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-552-02 23289.9207290000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-411-04 23120.4391071000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-552-05 26993.9171505000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-15 19831.6859004000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-541-23 22295.0848636000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-37 20626.0600929000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-27 20596.8687643000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-30 20059.9697695000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-042-07 19867.5532628000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-682-01 27711.6966901000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-562-07 20457.7492980000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-501-03 44543.7990627000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-121-18 25911.7099967000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-121-27 20569.1123047000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-121-28 20271.2806287000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-121-19 22396.1186129000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-281-01 160817.7255090000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-121-20 21405.3291226000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-042-15 21581.1333065000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-552-03 23923.4615414000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-042-12 21548.7094583000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-552-04 24705.8619004000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-21 20026.4732023000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-20 20245.4137656000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-552-07 22709.4907443000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-042-30 21235.3600059000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-042-41 20415.8743657000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-424-04 22178.4578206000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-424-11 20277.2024174000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-26 19762.4672579000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-042-08 20256.9354232000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-541-17 32463.2134651000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-541-15 30355.3061576000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-541-21 30326.8125996000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-121-29 27328.1848524000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-491-13 21173.0538113000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-562-06 20331.1032218000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-121-17 20215.1540394000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 8
City of Villa Park                                                                      Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                Housing Element
372-541-20 42043.8525989000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-541-11 22220.7777547000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-491-12 21793.1497880000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-042-14 21586.6806869000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-042-13 21715.2137953000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-491-14 24708.7602906000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-032-22 20626.4744020000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-033-16 20026.7541883000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-411-06 20934.8021304000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-602-11 473450.0211980000 School           E-4 Small Estate Residential School
372-411-09 74129.6423945000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-541-08 37701.8153691000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-553-05 30813.3804475000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-13 20150.8897126000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-424-10 20405.5368086000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-424-05 20476.0689676000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-491-05 151668.2147250000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Vacant
372-042-09 20125.2645073000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-552-08 63548.5992759000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-562-08 20603.2065070000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-121-21 19964.1219327000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-031-01 21217.2383212000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-01 20144.9973501000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-02 19982.1806317000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-03 19949.7243451000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-05 19771.5742373000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-04 20110.3622738000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-06 20213.1092121000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-07 20160.1500795000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-08 20107.3552034000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-09 20241.2140454000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-10 20518.3770724000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-11 20419.9782955000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-121-30 27029.8567747000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-032-23 21848.8151694000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-491-15 20709.9716185000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-033-15 20884.0871898000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-553-07 30715.7374387000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-034-01 21523.9039849000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-032-15 21334.3726821000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-511-12 21390.1571090000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-491-01 51213.4639888000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-121-16 19999.7308590000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-424-09 20077.3167178000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-424-06 20339.9349857000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-423-03 35591.7504935000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-281-11 22442.1693287000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-281-10 22200.2796811000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-121-31 26842.1724186000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-281-02 20033.4027387000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-491-18 36461.7715556000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-031-02 21259.0950190000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 9
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
372-121-22   20029.5968974000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-541-09   39401.8827713000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-032-24   20305.9673187000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-541-16   25403.4827960000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-541-10   20103.6025415000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-281-12   20831.9164080000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-491-10   22159.1798172000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-033-14   21117.6393203000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-491-11   23068.0225208000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-281-09   20595.0187006000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-121-32   26726.2544152000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-032-14   21677.5336889000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-034-02   21903.0300177000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-541-07   24295.7814004000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-424-08   25068.7692983000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-424-07   23526.0675757000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-121-15   20452.9826711000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-541-04   19505.6594972000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-031-03   21154.6474732000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-291-01   20091.4069009000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-291-03   19872.4640997000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-291-02   19999.9339565000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-553-08   35926.6879255000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-291-05   20022.4490787000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-291-04   19968.8279244000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-291-06   19910.0602032000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-291-07   19800.7297226000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-291-08   20462.1466043000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-291-09   20625.7596923000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-592-05   31048.2149564000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-121-33   36957.3549540000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-281-03   20016.7420488000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-121-23   19904.0257903000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-032-25   20732.6906840000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-541-25   19903.0683485000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-491-17   27681.7681408000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-033-13   21221.7838841000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-491-16   20604.0860027000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-032-13   21428.4677764000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-034-03   21559.4085999000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-491-09   24499.5581943000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-291-10   19711.0501209000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-121-14   19917.2828230000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-031-04   21199.7800023000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-281-13   20304.7095496000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-281-08   19878.4036198000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-251-22   23490.5503226000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-251-21   24194.1858836000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-491-22   26446.3141937000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-491-23   24400.7283530000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-033-12   19547.0356739000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-032-26   23238.0415140000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 10
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
372-121-04   28677.5346626000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-121-24   19593.3491621000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-292-11   19667.3978232000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-292-16   19764.4556656000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-292-15   19458.6723745000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-292-14   19261.2657423000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-292-12   19365.3690891000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-292-13   19586.6758978000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-033-10   20380.1446751000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-121-06   22562.1448090000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-032-28   19142.6215492000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-451-03   19838.1843094000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-121-03   20923.2033716000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-121-11   21273.9520061000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-033-06   19790.2031308000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-251-16   45253.9185933000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-031-07   22847.8743062000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-451-02   17455.9325079000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-461-02   24768.8017073000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-291-12   20355.5289471000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-462-07   17862.6852634000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-033-09   21061.5589981000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-03   20298.3788618000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-032-32   21562.5425520000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-251-11   27603.7520828000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-462-04   21843.5503055000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-032-29   22417.6863968000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-121-07   21044.1420619000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-16   23190.1513784000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-15   19424.4280621000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-251-20   23630.0232384000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-491-21   27895.0899233000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-031-09   20563.4256887000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-121-10   21038.1447092000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-034-06   23273.7088032000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-121-09   19573.8606022000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-282-01   19549.0437029000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-282-02   20546.5996660000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-282-03   20139.4754733000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-251-07   46650.2398895000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-282-04   20130.9100142000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-41   20113.6418554000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-40   19906.9790352000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-26   20383.2394731000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-051-05   20494.7782862000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-192-09   21325.3075716000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-191-19   19981.4131803000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-191-10   20196.1967536000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-191-17   20266.4281743000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-191-18   20542.4730679000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-051-08   20377.2442233000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-191-09   20491.8012537000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 11
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
372-052-03   20152.0669138000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-055-01   20352.9813754000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-052-07   20226.9766938000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-051-18   20073.7949813000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-051-19   21898.0469728000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-051-17   20034.2674167000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-33   11745.8932560000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-04   21172.0536147000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-05   21055.0563593000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-06   24976.3871577000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-201-03   20448.1334591000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-201-06   20287.1196931000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-201-05   19915.1866996000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-202-12   25199.0209398000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-291-22   22814.0230616000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-291-13   20159.9184406000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-202-15   21472.8924788000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-202-13   20155.4793607000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-202-14   20054.5258895000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-201-04   20347.4955602000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-201-05   20073.6483303000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-201-06   19776.3328827000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-491-07   20464.6955700000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-281-04   19975.3235313000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-292-08   20093.9598405000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-292-07   19956.4610676000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-031-04   19656.6133587000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-491-06   25423.5196099000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-292-06   20021.0581314000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-292-01   19947.9446689000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-292-02   19864.0873897999 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-292-03   19446.2922749000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-031-05   21146.9420437000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-292-05   19890.4860727000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-292-04   20122.5420529000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-461-09   20749.6826124000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-491-03   52042.5602287000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-121-13   20893.5464165000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-461-10   20575.7759478000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-032-12   21494.8864182000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-034-04   21739.3004569000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-121-05   23266.7086713000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-281-14   20593.1994476000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-461-15   29811.7583491000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-461-01   27668.5919935000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-281-07   20063.5024705000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-461-03   45001.6771414000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-461-11   22460.0518220000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-461-12   24720.4475983000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-461-16   25440.9097710000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-462-01   19602.2811464000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-033-11   20464.9625997000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 12
City of Villa Park                                                                      Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                Housing Element
372-032-27 20056.3843623000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-121-25 22249.5701348000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-031-05 19749.4816684000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-462-02 20704.0513757000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-121-12 22269.1253482000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-031-06 21568.1218171000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-291-11 20006.0650399000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-491-04 20040.7691599000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-451-04 111390.0680940000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-451-30 30018.5259834000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-251-03 13386.6225567000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-281-05 19886.3056414000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-292-09 19677.2168299000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-281-15 20016.5364583000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-281-06 20037.4937276000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-462-03 20463.7403417000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-034-04 25429.6370733000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-292-10 19528.0447216000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-032-33 20726.5751774000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-291-13 21032.6656851000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-461-14 22957.5415872000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-241-17 20379.4769770000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-031-08 20430.6686420000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-033-07 20019.9674310000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-462-06 25785.0477445000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-291-20 20560.9899248000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-592-04 27059.9486937000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-291-19 20710.7275519000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-121-08 20017.0579397000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-241-04 20460.2365398000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-291-14 20417.1659607000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-291-15 20470.0272863000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-291-18 20392.4200543000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-291-16 20359.3124181000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-462-05 26362.3281702000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-291-17 20759.8066715000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-032-31 22191.5667650000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-121-02 22410.7947336000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-033-08 19958.5115716000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-451-01 23624.7708126000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-032-30 21037.0560621000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-251-10 25068.5065462000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-471-07 44752.8101313000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
378-101-09 29339.8393150000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
378-101-10 29129.1886065000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-111-10 20243.2168068000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-241-18 20199.0532991000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-111-11 19895.5047570000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-251-12 30671.5387198000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-451-12 26868.0782190000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-161-19 20144.8179414000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
372-161-21 20364.5647077000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential  Single Family Residential
                                                                                              Page 13
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
372-161-20   20143.0406792000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-112-01   19987.7967111000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-22   20618.7517194000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-32   20349.4510179000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-31   20719.9310155000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-29   20838.7355857000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-30   20567.6106465000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-28   20161.1125332000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-451-07   34449.0609245000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-112-02   20193.5175136000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-112-03   19493.7604609000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-221-07   21014.2570248000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-251-08   19695.1880844000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-221-06   21168.7602857000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-06   20603.1877199000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-251-09   20474.2859367000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-13   20165.9470498000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-19   19980.6855411000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-162-45   18061.3427236000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-29   31754.7827381000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-221-01   26248.8830420000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-111-08   20127.1090875000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-261-10   20308.6501914000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-261-11   19830.7448526000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-261-12   20211.1225752000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-06   27161.0848223000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-23   21303.2607046000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-251-13   20640.3344040000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-451-08   18993.0167080000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-07   19583.3678315000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-09   19919.3164140000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-08   19794.9271871000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-33   19441.4853397000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-261-22   19944.7081190000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-261-09   20263.1652464000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-05   29514.0642443000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-27   19891.6378127000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-26   20166.5887506000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-261-08   21498.8316981000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-25   20286.2941183000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-24   19789.7012161000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-07   20043.0827450000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-451-16   21123.9700462000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-28   28666.8899676000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-111-17   20487.1791130000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-111-16   25015.7422486000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-111-07   21061.9863670000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-113-02   20743.1113124000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-12   20304.1015640000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-221-05   19997.4571723000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-36   19635.4755868000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-111-02   17794.8532795000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 14
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
372-111-18    2205.8632922300 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-35   19583.5430684000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-34   19076.0860370000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-20   19971.4770682000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-461-26   19835.6439118000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-113-03   20796.1992274000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-113-05   20207.8151650000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-113-04   20554.0951778000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-10   20596.4932127000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-261-13   19623.4715706000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-251-14   23138.0438018999 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-451-17   24876.5692230000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-09   48434.9240319000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-14   24852.7366680000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-05   36963.8907149000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-02   18833.0267179000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-451-22   30088.0333296000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-261-17   44878.9558175000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-261-27   21999.4355390000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-261-16   31514.6069614000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-12   32779.3366798000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-03   24709.0923557000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-261-24   19915.7476025000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-11   19898.7568823000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-111-21   21805.5514395000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-111-20   23662.2589615000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-21   19581.0370041000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-261-30   23770.2000944000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-11   20167.3768687000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-451-10   20102.4571747000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-15   21119.8079820000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-26   23806.5077404000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-221-03   31953.3732333000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-113-11   19696.9119597000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-451-21   21604.1422878000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-111-04   20093.3050903000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-03   19777.0277262000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-113-06   19634.7994442000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-113-07   19855.7023582000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-113-08   19729.9312251000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-113-09   19831.1249129000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-261-14   19732.6049329000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-113-10   20011.5237442000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-02   23432.7504217000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-111-05   20094.1265861000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-09   20439.0217381000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-13   18060.6518327000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-261-26   20979.6366538000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-10   20049.1394998000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-22   22282.4048310000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-111-22   21428.7490264000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-16   49263.8086073000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 15
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
372-261-25 19842.3822475000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-451-23 20791.6720568000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-451-24 23664.6610544000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-111-19 19882.1592364000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-472-25    2399.6911606200 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-31 46666.4289714000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-221-02 27841.8075119000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-161-14 12274.7103381000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-472-22 24593.2836358000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-472-32 25914.5609242000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-181-03 20183.1978232000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-472-21 20022.0274828000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-161-04 21181.8693661000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-472-01 26008.1223737000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-181-04 20483.0450285000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-472-20 20072.3456742000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-472-19 22563.0697948000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-472-18 42356.4065466000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-181-02 19540.9974751000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-181-01 20187.2340117000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-451-25 30269.6435730000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
370-022-07 41113.7190985000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-092-01 20912.8580885000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-091-27 20293.6434200000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-091-16 19295.9094439000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-091-15 22149.9554737000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-091-14 20439.1292566000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-091-07 19935.8242393000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-091-06 19935.8165867000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-091-05 20362.6910909000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
370-021-23 45777.7217507000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-091-28 19881.4720105000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-091-29 20013.6104525000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-472-17 44603.9165720000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-451-28 21555.1891140000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-461-23 18271.4031944000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-221-12 570631.0287140000 School            E-4 Small Estate Residential School
372-451-26 20405.2487992000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-451-27 20318.0848478000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-101-10 20802.5160234000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-101-09 20352.9852258000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-101-08 20443.6517475000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-141-01 16898.2821532000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-101-07 20894.4837383000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-101-05 20520.3169381000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-101-06 30855.4974352000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-101-04 20488.2893095000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-101-03 20471.2106629000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-101-02 20464.4206627000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-101-22 20214.6951847000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-101-23 42523.4892107000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
372-171-10 19818.5398517000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential   Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 16
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
372-171-08   19904.7506572000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-09   20057.9996805000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-07   19845.1671169000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-31   20490.4379257000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-32   19982.9803578000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-20   20099.8159200000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-182-12   37588.5551091000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-181-05   19297.9074625000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-021-10   35866.9942387000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-31   20342.5240361000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-30   20750.9626046000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-092-02   20840.7735108000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-021-13   15435.3513223000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-26   20501.4494188000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-11   20050.8652193000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-06   20281.6832222000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-021-12   22412.4184489000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-182-11   21502.6699456000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-21   20246.6006750000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-30   20153.1742702000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-182-04   21894.0640870000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-08   19811.1309384000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-04   20239.3673977000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-33   19772.4902406000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-182-10   25757.3730712000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-17   20362.6078171000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-13   20456.3051208000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-021-11   21462.0270502000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-181-15   20912.0555136000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-181-06   19962.6185967000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-021-14   19937.8161380000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-101-11   20196.5993940000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-101-12   20109.4762802000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-101-13   19880.6624937000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-101-14   20023.8608654000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-101-15   20036.2311704000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-101-16   20175.9246908000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-101-17   19976.3164290000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-101-18   19960.8939683000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-101-19   20124.9014847000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-101-20   20084.9955665000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-101-21   20151.2252671000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-12   20164.4606658000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-05   20109.8056487000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-15   21497.6343772000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-14   24492.7630721000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-29   20108.9006226000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-22   19965.1862794000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-021-09   22667.1410357000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-181-14   20108.1867339000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-022-03   27277.7939304000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-34   19959.1112357000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 17
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
372-182-13   19952.5770212000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-182-03   20576.7164144000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-021-18   20238.7382410000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-021-17   20184.1337699000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-25   20502.6102140000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-32   20096.5470992000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-35   20556.0058783000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-13   20153.5008283000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-04   20101.9136283000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-23   20097.7868650000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-28   20065.2795670000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-182-14   20001.0080808000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-181-07   20216.9125011000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-022-10   25594.0931889000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-022-05   19878.4580467000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-182-02   20107.4051947000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-021-08   20939.9702291000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-35   19617.2854106000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-181-12   20606.1050818000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-182-16   22261.0429331000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-03   19741.7035758000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-16   22893.9625831000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-27   20438.8212959000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-24   20054.1216931000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-24   20146.6152925000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-17   25008.6005116000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-102-11   19659.6173048000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-102-10   19770.8522659000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-102-09   19809.4747959000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-102-08   20180.8278846000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-102-07   20006.8416369000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-102-06   20211.4026509000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-102-05   19980.4130742000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-093-02   20090.5796741000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-102-04   20160.1941794000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-102-03   19949.5810297999 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-102-02   20131.8619846000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-182-08   20257.4957859000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-102-01   20014.5727189000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-19   21334.0427518000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-022-09   24328.3897378000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-11   21184.3985560000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-18   14823.5936610000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-182-15   20705.4391577000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-10   20004.1701680000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-02   20171.6286246000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-33   20074.9312938000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-34   20039.2395801000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-181-13   19979.3013998000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-182-01   19671.6425140000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-021-07   20433.9410604000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-36   19811.8580668000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 18
City of Villa Park                                                                     Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                               Housing Element
370-021-19 20271.6714861000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-02 20027.7006904000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-26 20613.2721224999 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-25 20736.3290108000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-021-20 19747.3484026000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-021-22 23700.4333189000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-471-04 19710.6312727000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-471-03 20719.2449234000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-14 20269.2803695000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-471-05 21304.7769342000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-471-02 20528.9111246000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-05 21377.3479545000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-30 41742.6505757000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-111-15 38204.1502112000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-111-14 19563.8432426000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-111-13 19553.0964527000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-111-12 20694.6378770000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-111-09 19536.9410341000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-141-01 408681.3958269990 School          E-4 Small Estate Residential School
372-261-07 19671.1349640000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-221-09 43559.9393668000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-221-08 27398.0337693000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-451-09 19807.4059306000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-04 25482.1085439000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-261-23 19704.8895913000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-12 21607.9812975000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-113-01 20072.4066024000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-27 25520.9841138000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-111-06 20484.8446755000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-221-04 24097.1287088000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-08 20116.1788381000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-472-13 20141.6434750000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-15 24627.6028809000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-161-10 47188.6964709000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-093-01 20927.1436933000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-182-09 20271.9447755000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-021-16 20516.3536344000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-18 20241.1457657000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-12 20714.2492044000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-09 19977.3949981000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-091-03 20255.4540226000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-021-15 20744.0359371000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-192-10 22880.2053461000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-39 22074.9660137000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-191-20 21037.7078460000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-42 21912.5821700000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-051-06 20714.2529271000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-082-02 21174.0562503000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-083-07 21416.1787919000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-083-02 20058.2175161000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-081-24 20871.2704306000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-02 23377.9112402000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                             Page 19
City of Villa Park                                                                     Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                               Housing Element
378-191-03 19818.8342812000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-101-06 21118.9517618000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-171-37 10860.5478076000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-021-21 20251.5807757000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-192-11 22458.3604553000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-191-04 20856.4887893000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-191-21 20422.1550009000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-191-02 20175.5140617000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-191-03 19074.9852542000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-191-01 20372.1653753000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-053-01 20439.9737380000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-052-09 20210.8040125000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-052-01 19736.9662557000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-051-13 21319.0322020000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-051-07 20191.1974097000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-051-12 19924.2265024000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-051-11 19762.2371089000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-051-10 26846.5687567000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-14 21750.2238850000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-13 21206.7507225000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-12 20702.0721493000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-11 20591.3509964000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-10 20095.8354126000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-09 20919.3044964000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-08 20730.8984525000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-07 20615.0523790000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-06 20825.8655712000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-05 20179.4449576000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-28 23613.3589062000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-37 21421.2227503000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-38 22115.4576585000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-43 22146.9622780000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-232-02 ################ School           E-4 Small Estate Residential School
372-051-14 22204.5874726000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-051-09 19840.3081938000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-191-05 20662.8095400000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-052-02 19806.6652237000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-052-08 20715.4862968000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-27 20476.2742652000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-191-06 20342.3387479000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-191-07 20306.4894674000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-191-08 20461.8628476000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-054-01 20695.3825518000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-36 21424.8353383000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-18 20339.1781022000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-17 20596.7755298000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-19 20323.9511764000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-20 20303.1282582000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-21 19822.7390132000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-22 20024.8597927000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-23 19892.3258093000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-051-15 21109.4922668000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                             Page 20
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
372-051-16   20277.4555914000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-24   19889.7712762000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-25   20190.1170379000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-16   21381.1616430000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-061-15   21924.7771476000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-192-08   20401.3997289000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-03   20882.6476439000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-192-06   30305.5122866000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-051-04   20175.3398804000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-062-09   20087.1130510000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-062-10   20272.0141811000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-062-08   20351.6079683000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-062-07   20014.5343589000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-062-06   20287.8717263000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-062-05   20565.0383359000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-062-04   20253.2048877000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-062-03   20421.7431555000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-062-02   20209.7350718000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-062-01   20071.9546133000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-062-11   19844.9242788000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-07   20759.0011042000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-052-04   19728.0564870000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-052-06   20366.1056031000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-051-20   20568.6317350000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-192-02   20264.1199077000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-192-03   20054.2770257000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-192-04   20041.6844685000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-192-05   19511.7470956000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-062-12   21106.0964629000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-051-21   20218.7569484000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-192-01   20161.9166935000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-051-22   20355.9972965000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-055-01   20265.2275248000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-051-23   20278.2671769000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-192-07   19800.8905958000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-24   20211.1086583000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-22   20901.8052616000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-084-04   20594.7739310000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-19   20174.4934882000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-18   20810.3768208000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-17   12793.5422990000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-081-17   20183.4620087000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-30   25448.0853892000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-31   20894.7846338000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-20   21262.5853302000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-19   21105.5720157000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-10   24158.1605058000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-09   20637.8889148000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-082-01   21672.6655754000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-083-08   21712.4343147000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-083-01   20186.6548317000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-081-23   30720.8942781000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 21
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
372-081-22   21686.9576567000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-081-21   22326.5588770000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-081-20   21028.7893836000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-17   20147.5277077000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-16   20130.0467445000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-15   20047.2054370000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-14   19925.4345496000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-23   21203.5784894000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-22   20204.9324281000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-21   20443.2631316000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-20   19762.2321980000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-18   19978.4093485000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-19   20316.6143620000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-25   20294.4414939000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-21   20905.3061786000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-20   20262.0211769000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-08   19823.1162039000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-21   19764.3536413000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-13   19957.8523996000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-081-16   20103.2686264000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-11   20234.2187872000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-18   20552.0796057000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-29   20650.3655803000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-08   20171.0169441000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-32   24343.2187727000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-24   20382.4560177000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-09   20085.4946378000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-28   20663.2002588000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-09   19827.7780880000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-10   19974.1399600000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-11   20168.4948215000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-12   20487.8513698000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-081-15   19850.4208641000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-084-03   20436.9173875000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-084-01   21682.7164689000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-22   20267.5526140000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-23   20529.9893105000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-084-02   20849.4956342000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-17   19977.7155918000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-15   21291.1284813000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-12   20139.7391206000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-25   21026.6289688000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-33   20713.2815178000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-32   20480.4110977000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-31   20371.6278898000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-07   20360.1388374000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-27   20369.0785172000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-33   25081.2631996000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-082-03   20967.7453879000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-162-44   16992.9015967000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-083-06   21473.9653754000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-083-03   20340.7101218000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 22
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
372-081-25   20032.3006346000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-26   20380.9388774000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-08   21936.9089041000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-084-05   20395.8446007000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-23   20621.7751985000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-05   23009.5611042000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-04   19786.5698628000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-03   20176.3911569000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-02   60361.8920070000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-081-14   20346.8767317000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-31   22332.7710166000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-28   20183.8141920000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-16   21264.8799847000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-13   20107.8732823000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-26   19971.1304299000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-07   28251.9735577000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-30   22099.0542476000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-084-07   20472.5463338000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-084-08   20716.3116113000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-084-09   16174.2311459000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-06   19525.5496609000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-27   21053.1693809000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-082-04   19818.6835145000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-083-05   20211.0786562000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-24   20268.0519864000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-083-04   20298.6206866000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-34   21160.6557379000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-084-06   20498.2307514000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-081-26   20085.0136051000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-15   27875.5721437000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-14   22376.4406318000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-081-13   20216.6518747000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-28   19491.8610693000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-29   22536.0187987000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-201-25   20154.0526513000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-36   20483.8646314000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-30   23243.8773478000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-35   20342.4622825000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-071-29   21125.5936341000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-11   16666.0304820000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-12   12047.8534100000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-151-13   14406.3256956000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-291-01   20408.9856331000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-291-02   19909.2210645000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-291-03   18240.4587149000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-192-12   25294.9308192000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-192-11   36125.4486860000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-192-09   20409.1029142000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-191-06   20119.9548579000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-191-01   20191.3188281000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-191-07   23101.1096242000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-191-08   19693.6413784000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 23
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
370-291-04   18741.1530640000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-101-08   19921.8209653000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-102-01   26097.0472293000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-091-23   19743.7375908000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-093-01   25371.9531519000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-01   27782.9575466000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-40   32750.8092718000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-32   20074.2177304000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-33   26090.9921910000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Vacant
378-082-01   20192.1286381000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-02   21511.0599981000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-03   22667.8527191000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-04   22793.0087538000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-05   19176.7039050000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-31   21528.5011697000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-32   23889.1014747000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-17   20010.3227657000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-27   19903.9326081000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-13   20384.5574154000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-14   20041.2283026000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-15   20377.8512012000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-16   19895.3089899000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-051-01   20059.8519646000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-093-03   23531.2767181000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-093-02   22530.5257876000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-192-08   20514.1083263000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-192-13   28764.1093538000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-191-02   20060.1668994000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-102-02   22453.8914358000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-091-22   19607.3700083000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-101-07   21309.4094503000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-28   21708.3875558000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-29   34952.7916491000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-33   20044.4389499000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-06   14642.7832591000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-082-02   20222.3675332000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-051-02   19794.1497995000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-30   20645.5802022000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-291-05   21438.9483628000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-12   20395.4053927000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-191-09   19871.0763909000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-08   21106.7708927000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-192-17   21821.3839199000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-291-10   19005.3449179000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-192-07   20596.4062627000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-191-05   19757.3320912000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-291-06   19695.5356502000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-291-09   18841.4313533000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-291-08   18178.7922774000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-102-03   20379.9551616000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-192-14   35712.6366080000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
370-291-07   18330.7949859000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 24
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
378-091-21   19999.0470616000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-29   21043.1423113000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-31   20173.0072883000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-34   20399.4441515000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-32   34737.6499931000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-093-04   20028.0396584000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-093-05   20037.9282841000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-093-06   19690.2355871000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-07   14776.5237325000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-051-03   20207.4193796000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-06   20730.1581805000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-05   20307.6093504000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-192-16   20183.1924246000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-04   20476.4565241000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-34   19953.0141498000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-07   22848.9626033000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-082-03   20170.2187679000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-192-15   22225.7533262000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-11   20624.2871059000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-101-02   18951.0186192000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-101-03   21715.1393793000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-102-04   20133.7073558000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-192-06   20579.1132221000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-091-20   19848.1320399000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-26   28560.0986816000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-24   28089.2258854000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-25   27633.6858043000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-101-05   22769.1103253000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-101-04   20241.2338557000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-191-10   19937.1822431000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-08   14465.4358138000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-461-21   17251.3193224000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-191-04   19915.4279629000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-051-04   20053.7655969000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-03   22158.5927945000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-06   22119.1276166000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-35   28430.5604615000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-102-05   20301.1747173000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-10   19643.8444698000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-192-05   20706.6583750999 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-091-19   21220.7137893000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-35   19733.9709433000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-37   19741.5090183000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-38   20342.4768208000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-27   20788.4726214000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-37   20284.3414253000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-36   20247.1665070000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-16   14896.6213716000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-07   21680.9371734000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-36   19964.4550878000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-03   19595.0698455000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-091-17   19602.5952818000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 25
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
378-091-16   19765.6509937000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-091-15   20360.7193349000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-091-18   21537.2681338000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-22   21452.8258157000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-23   20518.5145718000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-192-04   20059.0917985000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-20   20053.4126037000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-21   21006.0635969000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-102-06   20174.7949456000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-09   22679.4895135000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-04   37609.6950745000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-02   20261.4962559000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-192-03   21062.4293635000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-192-02   20175.5768212000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-192-01   19793.6758453000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-103-01   20904.7222054000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-052-08   21512.7633106000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-103-20   30153.0284037000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-17   14486.4762479000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-102-07   22570.5115722000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-091-13   22125.6039015999 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-091-14   20012.2811534000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-091-07   27253.6586510000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-091-06   20843.2653700000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-13   22277.9482927000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-14   41212.4462051000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-16   20391.9339064000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-17   20309.5005253000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-18   39713.9046753000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-20   20981.5561261000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-19   20542.1545277000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-071-18   21002.7332387000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-33   19921.3773010000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-22   20130.3703836000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-34   20294.0550028000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-07   21478.9827177000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-35   19905.0382964000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-06   20250.9667973000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-05   22256.7745725000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-04   21695.5687015000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-103-05   19373.3506820000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-103-18   11341.7841035000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-103-06   29819.7408171000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-03   20433.1917974000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-092-08   19986.3349463000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-091-12   20654.3813800000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-091-08   20087.8055188000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-39   20445.6835647000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-09   21250.7418109000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-38   21831.9695035000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-36   20048.9295565000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-10   20447.6976211000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 26
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
378-061-11   20303.5327659000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-37   20794.6569665000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-092-01   19898.7340554000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-072-07   19835.2436773000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-103-12    9825.2563558200 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-22   21188.0545000000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-21   20848.1866336000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-23   20416.0309874000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-561-26   91572.7749916000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-20   20825.6866289000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-24   20487.2142619000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-092-10   21964.0155919000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-103-08   11449.1217225000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-091-11   19098.5552549000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-091-10   20558.5661143000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-14   42003.3185004000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-13   20294.4049151000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-02   19933.2831299000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-12   20134.6646577000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-41   22666.5093565999 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-42   22430.9980823000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-43   21083.6158733000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-092-02   21965.0589164000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-072-04   25472.1846581000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-29   22049.4763346000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-47   20013.3091859000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-092-09   25364.1164504000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-01   21753.5138353000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-46   20123.7718951000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-44   20054.3276594000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-092-03   23127.4014797000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-19   20474.4711791000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-20   19932.2627887000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-061-45   20265.0488814000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-092-04   20264.3716367000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-092-05   18953.4169839000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-081-30   23078.2812403000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-202-01   20107.9655019000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-202-09   20330.5882302000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-202-24   21369.9187891000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-201-16   20129.7050018000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Vacant
378-201-15   20187.5409477000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-202-19   23653.0981857000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-041-10   23698.5868239000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-041-11   21721.5270045000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-291-27   17910.6038484000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-291-01   18105.0306765000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-041-05   19659.4781018000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-291-03   17373.7424065000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-291-04   18081.0014021000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-202-18   21585.3998625000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-202-20   20252.9449911999 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 27
City of Villa Park                                                                     Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                               Housing Element
378-201-02 20153.1389318000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-201-14 19661.2844665000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-041-08 24799.7402378000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-202-10 20307.2964564000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-291-26 21516.7144750000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-202-23 19952.5526801000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-041-06 21307.0183207000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-201-17 23687.5657644000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-201-03 19975.2465598000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-201-13 20159.2176922000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-041-07 20333.3711217000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-202-17 21618.9147423000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-22 21523.8344931000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-01 20035.3818332000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-08 21393.7564535000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-261-03 20022.1133875000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-16 20899.0696846000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-19 26500.7645328000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-202-21 20494.5831960000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-202-22 20189.9769869000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-201-04 19859.8556004000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-201-02 19733.5644648000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-201-07 19821.4739944000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-291-23 21739.8189393000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-291-12 21373.2483417000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-291-11 22166.4759598000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-202-11 20296.2724261000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-041-16 381716.1899160000 School          E-4 Small Estate Residential School
378-291-10 21220.6097194000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-202-26 24356.8527576000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-291-09 20658.8418261000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-291-21 21986.2981629000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-211-08 20221.5773633000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-211-01 20385.7964174000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-291-14 20750.3059003000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-01 20372.7516959000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-09 27822.4986933000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-08 21759.2815003000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-291-24 21019.8311561000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-041-17 21825.9474470000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-041-14 21936.8871378000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-07 22570.6752592000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-211-07 19968.1766099000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-211-02 20118.4435886000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-10 24911.3533104000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-02 20017.2514562000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-291-15 20820.5812592000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-291-16 12352.5097340000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-291-08 20314.2358891000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-06 20319.3928519000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-11 25376.4121003000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-211-06 20262.3967019000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                             Page 28
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
378-211-04   19810.5543225000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-211-03   20019.9078465000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-03   19994.8740624000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-05   20044.2512399000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-13   20865.7848840000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-12   20111.1556388000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-041-20   18984.1032906000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-211-05   20138.7280514000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-04   20387.1883175000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-26   19986.3304389000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-27   20330.7692969000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-01   20150.1560369000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-02   20066.7122842000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-03   20530.2618984000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-04   20492.8969830000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-05   20484.8920045000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-06   20392.6824465000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-07   20284.1782547000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-08   20327.6232168000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-09   20151.3846148000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-24   21510.7846160000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-23   21415.3870568000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-15   21073.4806292000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-16   19266.6144192000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-17   19552.9810758000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-18   19939.6152857000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-19   19881.5482432000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-20   20216.8011846000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-212-21   20496.6338136000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-16   20478.1431390000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-15   20055.8571774000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-14   20234.7764174000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-13   20042.2422692000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-12   19935.8201181000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-11   20270.4627440000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-10   20085.5746840000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-17   34353.5175133000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-09   21977.0266608000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-12   40677.2509205000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-11   20930.2271194000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-10   21850.3197545000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-08   17859.4718469000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-36   10425.7111418000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-18   23115.9524646000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-242-01   20211.9832552000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-242-02   20055.9209958000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-242-04   20087.8436624000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-242-05   20081.1122151000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-242-03   20263.3603096000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-242-06   20826.4390763000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-242-07   20007.1016226000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-13   20379.3393230000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Vacant
                                                                                               Page 29
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
378-221-14   22362.7271341000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-15   22049.1572453000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-20   21850.0158221000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-24   20303.2799214000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-241-19   19850.6426441000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-02   19745.7117118000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-03   20010.7786287000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-04   19860.6204414000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-05   19921.4606378000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-06   20021.7119854000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-07   21372.2959309000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-261-01   20200.1236116000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-16   22269.3147729000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-19   23247.6719125000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-26   23634.1955388000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-261-02   20029.4949978000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-30   23131.1825098000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-17   23072.1686942000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-18   33507.5268844000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-09   20383.3636946000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-11   19775.2963617000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-10   19988.5206332000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-12   20177.7264400000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-13   20223.5235344000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-14   20169.8495447000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-33   26390.4481330000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-261-04   20086.5504699000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-34   22115.6364289000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-20   25984.2879592000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-21   20961.3788700000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-23   32808.8325238000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-15   26255.0463349000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-22   20157.5424940000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-261-05   20076.4970127000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-29   30646.1204137000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-261-06   19836.4198746000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-421-01   23970.2586828000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Vacant
378-251-24   27686.1146686000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-17   20878.4223303000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-25   24651.2395241000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-261-07   19980.7314399000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-26   26711.9181249000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-27   26747.4900990000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-261-19   20453.7085010000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-261-08   20185.0394499000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-18   22323.6365084000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-28   23717.1074096000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-261-09   20065.8373323000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-261-10   19975.8211138000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-29   22067.0456237000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-30   21811.1243732000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-251-31   24364.1831068000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 30
City of Villa Park                                                                       Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                                 Housing Element
378-262-01   25520.6261567000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-262-02   23467.9897982000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-461-22   15980.0305652000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-041-21   21107.6811454000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-041-22   21505.3476273000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-041-19   18346.2240737000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-461-25   19386.4000680000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-461-24   19754.8613297000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-451-32   22176.7950928000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-451-33   25145.7694407000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-461-07   15168.9621988000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-501-12   43836.7907692000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-501-14   69752.5257160000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-421-06   20852.1155314000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-421-04   25744.7303330000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-421-05   20119.2092513000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-421-03   22440.7446205000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-521-31   20122.9764777000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-521-26   40265.2755355000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-402-20   21697.5493718000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-261-31   25907.3611673000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-261-01   21722.4752860000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-32   23541.6687855000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-31   20857.9069535000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-33   20528.6626226000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-28   23810.3231008000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-251-19   19540.7493091000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-27   20867.8192789000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-251-23   19004.4637802000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-34   20178.4182622000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-242-02   27254.3708782000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-242-03   10933.0231280000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-251-18   19327.1780592000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-251-17   17000.0357363000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-30   20915.3293565000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-241-29   21648.2500201000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-561-27   20513.3601412000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-561-04   19282.5137465000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-561-28   30878.4036792000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-561-29   35464.7564541000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-441-08   20564.1449106000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-441-09   19290.1576415000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
372-442-01   17099.9395783000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
378-221-25   20162.0328708000 SFR - 1.75 du/ac E-4 Small Estate Residential Single Family Residential
General Plan Land Use Code: SFR - 2.5 DU/AC
APN         PARCEL SIZE       LAND USE         ZONING                       EXISTING USE
378-231-13 12269.7411249000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac    SFR: R-1 12,000 SF           Single Family Residential
378-231-12 17847.0110222000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac    SFR: R-1 12,000 SF           Single Family Residential
378-231-14 12541.4574677000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac    SFR: R-1 12,000 SF           Single Family Residential
378-231-26 21379.5690082000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac    SFR: R-1 12,000 SF           Single Family Residential
378-231-06 20123.7288505000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac    SFR: R-1 12,000 SF           Single Family Residential
                                                                                               Page 31
City of Villa Park                                                            Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                      Housing Element
378-231-25   13455.4082786000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-11   12378.8907185000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-24   11897.3486698000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-15   12056.7251173000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-10   11807.0768159000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-05   20165.1959775000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-23   12120.8389664000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-09   13586.5665515000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-03   19195.7048721000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-07   11442.9038417000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-19   12156.7806913000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-20   12642.6046235000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-16   12275.9723819000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-32   14449.3130486000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-33   12195.9439876000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-36   12098.2675700000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-35   13170.9628322000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-27   19995.1258983000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-01   17385.2001801000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-37   11891.1669408000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-31   12606.7896093000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-29   12467.9857746000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-28   20060.8728672000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-231-30   13580.1733580000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-013-13   11020.4026935000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-013-15   12109.9933912000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-23   12069.8458195000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-22   12322.9046658000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-013-14   12930.7810341000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-013-12   12373.0125899000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-21   20283.0691164000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-39   10814.3252572000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-013-11   11752.1658091000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-18   12162.9571476000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-19   11916.3169410000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-20   20224.8876101000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-38   12198.8159298000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-013-10   12406.2473930000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-37   12470.1523253000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-35   11975.7680422000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-36   11718.2218875000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-34   19842.0774836000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-013-09   12309.3459044000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-30   12156.9405378000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-31   12232.2257513000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-32   12259.9148215000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-33   20089.1331819000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-013-08   12129.9016722000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-013-07   11916.7849210000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-27   12038.2930659000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-26   12082.4112065000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-29   12204.1767291000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
                                                                                    Page 32
City of Villa Park                                                            Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                      Housing Element
378-011-28   12118.4596755000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-011-25   20160.3819054000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-013-06   12250.1837962000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-012-11   12327.4507359000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-012-12   12276.5874923000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-012-13   12444.8589603000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-012-10   12636.3976218000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-013-05   12255.3331530000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-013-04   12030.0227831000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-012-14   22131.9213077000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-013-02   11885.8895702000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-012-05   23769.9949470000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-012-04   13344.2842868000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-012-03   12451.8183092000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-012-02   12404.4155852000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-012-01   12304.0253926000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-013-01   12079.8264082000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
372-481-27   13575.2188980000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,500 SF Single Family Residential
372-481-26   14238.7459917000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,500 SF Single Family Residential
372-481-28   13650.5545166000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,500 SF Single Family Residential
372-481-29   13478.5723409000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,500 SF Single Family Residential
372-481-30   13361.7916038000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,500 SF Single Family Residential
372-481-25   18998.4908445000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,500 SF Single Family Residential
372-481-32   14824.7364066000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,500 SF Single Family Residential
372-481-19   13589.9911417000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,500 SF Single Family Residential
372-481-18   13876.5112985000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,500 SF Single Family Residential
372-481-10   18991.9952669000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,500 SF Single Family Residential
372-481-09   13662.4562380000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,500 SF Single Family Residential
372-481-08   13575.5156795000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,500 SF Single Family Residential
372-481-07   13611.9986335000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,500 SF Single Family Residential
372-481-03   23621.1315902000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,500 SF Single Family Residential
372-481-06   13537.6493591000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,500 SF Single Family Residential
372-481-05   13617.8203258000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,500 SF Single Family Residential
372-481-04   18648.6006776000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,500 SF Single Family Residential
372-481-11   18736.2317643000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,500 SF Single Family Residential
372-141-02   12851.1538716000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-012-08   12271.5005095000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-012-07   11942.3739375000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-012-06   12711.2192599000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-013-03   11976.0909073000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
378-012-09   12359.1176708000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
372-141-23   11966.9154567000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
372-141-21   12041.6250897000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
372-141-22   13177.6046357000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
372-141-20   20499.0328518000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
372-141-03   12082.4795381000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
372-141-19   20285.1221494000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
372-141-18   11931.1624998000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
372-141-17   13104.0377111000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
372-141-16   12241.7690334000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
372-141-05   12116.9183448000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
372-141-14   13118.1412598000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF Single Family Residential
                                                                                    Page 33
City of Villa Park                                                                   Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                             Housing Element
372-141-13   12131.9604518000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-141-15   12117.4980869000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-141-12   20140.1554648000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-141-10   12081.3091283000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-141-11   20058.3835457000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-141-09   12202.2979927000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-141-08   12128.0551665000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-141-07   13810.2818951000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-141-06   13487.2146728000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-481-01   13499.2321644000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-481-23   14363.3635695000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-481-24   17762.0439398000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-481-22   13680.8361302000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-481-21   13659.9445174000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-481-20   13571.1499819000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-231-21   11998.6746340000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-231-18   12098.9084520000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-481-13   14079.4326791000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-481-14   13702.6171820000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-481-15   13777.7988817000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-481-16   13604.7898733000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-481-17   13760.8798242000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-481-12   14291.0009881000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-481-02   13723.4836605000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 13,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-231-09   11738.5366106000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-231-17   12577.5595419000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-231-22   12342.0096091000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-231-08   12082.3451459000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-231-04   19777.6072206000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-122-01   12413.0439048000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-122-07   12151.1347662000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-122-08   11956.0805198000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-122-09   12007.9641404000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-122-10   12277.5223372000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
372-141-04   12108.3748206000 SFR - 2.5 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
General Plan Land Use Code: SFR - 3.0 DU/AC
APN         PARCEL SIZE       LAND USE        ZONING                    EXISTING USE
378-333-54    8757.3618758100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-55    9434.3149819300 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-60 10306.7052886000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac   SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-61 11743.3213608000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac   SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-42 16047.5439484000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac   SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-41 16295.5869677000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac   SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-264-11 14294.1274108000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac   SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-264-08 13320.4530891000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac   SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-264-10 11918.7941408000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac   SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-264-09 11785.7918821000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac   SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-264-07 10014.6954247000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac   SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-131-37    9811.1026745800 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-38    9895.6598231300 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-36    9898.6802516700 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
                                                                                           Page 34
City of Villa Park                                                                   Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                             Housing Element
378-264-06   10928.8093880000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-131-40   25345.2866687000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-39   11154.1702166000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-31    8582.4907045200 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-32    8659.6621253100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-33    8517.4760237900 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-34    8763.3913050100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-35    9157.8373306000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-264-04   10000.3424827000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-261-14   20341.2049082000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-261-16   12053.0492477000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-261-15   12237.8646311000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-264-03    9981.4375661100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-131-27    9175.8502765800 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-261-17   11964.4040242000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-261-18   12153.5588528000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-131-30    8620.0995733200 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-29    8637.9048272900 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-28    8246.2618746400 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-26   10678.0641832000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-264-02   10123.1095074000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-264-01   10158.3902104000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-131-21    8622.0627810300 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-22    8664.1559978700 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-23    8536.0251992100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-24    8953.3323290100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-25   11188.5169796000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-261-20   20436.6056620000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-261-21   12440.0105823000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-261-22   13629.0693091000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-131-16   11017.3226095000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-20    8405.2283199700 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-19    8581.9395294000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-18    8218.2237677700 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-17    8765.5184463000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-263-07    9946.0133806400 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-263-06   10325.1926583000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-261-25   20249.3469222000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-261-23   12283.6020369000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-261-24   11660.8380081000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-264-05   11007.5851102000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-131-11    8376.3565919400 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-12    8728.7452166000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-13    8425.9469800700 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-14    8477.2755502600 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-15   11055.4808649000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-07    8416.2788686400 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-263-05   10049.8657388000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-261-31   20047.3159270000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-263-02   10104.8596249000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-131-01    8583.5149316800 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-02    8578.0782252100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
                                                                                           Page 35
City of Villa Park                                                                   Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                             Housing Element
378-131-03    8636.1167562500 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-04    7953.7339492900 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-05   12129.0468826000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-261-29   12088.5976442000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-261-30   11788.5582269000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-131-08    8227.4979580700 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-263-03   10057.2436582000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-123-07    7997.7706568800 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-123-06    8762.7506088100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-123-05   10225.3790306000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-123-04   10163.9925035000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-123-01    8490.7413054300 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-123-02    8042.4458485300 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-123-03    7808.2836490400 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-123-09    9818.1928315500 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-123-10    9863.9242028800 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-123-11    9906.9283993300 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-123-12    9965.5768237100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-123-13   10035.2055938000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-123-14   10002.5560604000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-123-08    9243.2370942700 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-123-15    9949.3588335900 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-241-22   12132.1902763000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-241-21   11945.3214840000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-121-17    8090.1949160100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-121-05    7981.9489564700 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-121-08    8264.2100900300 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-124-07    9884.6609336300 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-122-22   10083.3243005000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-122-15   10115.1541613000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-122-14   10107.8672406000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-124-06   10157.6150642000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-122-06    8644.1472924000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-121-18    9732.3662224000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-121-06    7912.1533624700 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-121-07    8145.6169117700 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-241-28   11954.9741734000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-241-29   12331.0619903000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-241-30   19606.0397700000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-241-23   20099.6374034000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-122-05    7940.6250181200 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-124-05    9897.9407422200 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-122-21   10006.7362188000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-122-16    9989.1379252400 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-121-16    8070.0073282200 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-121-09    8338.7664810600 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-121-04    7945.4593761100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-122-13    9940.1120149100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-121-15    8191.3650016400 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-124-04    9959.1462112600 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-122-04    7829.4777466500 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-122-12    9849.2689997000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
                                                                                           Page 36
City of Villa Park                                                                   Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                             Housing Element
378-121-10    7092.2297994500 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-122-11   10104.1945485000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-122-02    8150.5049346800 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-122-19   11499.0894154000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-122-18   10412.6065876000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-124-03   10837.2690142000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-124-09   15567.2412495000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-121-14    8049.1994267100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-124-10   13029.4861622000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-241-25   11974.6046607000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-241-24   20484.9158309000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-121-03    8136.9175630200 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-122-17   10007.3948245000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-122-20   10099.7814858000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-124-08   12160.1717552000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-122-03    8015.7817776300 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-121-02   12738.6032148000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-124-02   19970.7193876000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-124-01   20039.6580599000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-121-01   13582.9464420000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-121-11   19932.0978381000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-121-12    8122.6025247000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-27    8164.7201584000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-01    8166.9523467300 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-04   14008.4207948000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-261-27   11948.4989670000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-261-28   12342.0956724000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-131-10    8514.0905637500 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-131-09    8743.3954299200 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-263-08   10131.0382192000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-333-58   13584.6541728000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-45    9240.4166242300 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-40    9247.7254015400 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-69    9625.6268587800 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-39    9148.5594178300 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-46    9324.5841213400 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-51    9229.2971461200 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-52    8662.7916472200 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-57   10418.1885604000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-63   15070.3328299000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-59    8740.5429733900 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-41    8475.5293564000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-44    8377.3923479400 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-38    8364.8353933100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-35    8546.9502752300 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-47    8639.4343309300 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-56    8274.7273995500 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-50    8494.9802220100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-30   12287.5750496000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-58   10382.1046972000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-51   10972.3825048000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-50   10684.1469363000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
                                                                                           Page 37
City of Villa Park                                                                   Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                             Housing Element
378-333-53    8135.4754097800 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-62   10588.9170692000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-37    8731.7940732700 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-36    8846.7376147800 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-42    8954.5077033500 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-43    8855.0470217900 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-22    7703.3037568900 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-18    8599.6331890000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-12    9611.2816034300 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-23    8439.5233632700 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-07   12183.1974766000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-17    8475.0228147300 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-32   11891.8809171000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-57   10634.3201411000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-49    9217.0573810400 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-52    9989.0366225500 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-31   12288.9337129000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-48    9009.6745344000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-333-49    8973.0983075200 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-48   10391.3824497000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-56   10376.7998721000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-53   10355.6419925000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-55   10557.7194542000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-54   10449.4576782000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-46   10340.1807812000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-34   11869.9510581000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-40    9737.3839605400 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-39   10990.6113353000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-33   12192.4871239000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-45   10334.4652460000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-35   11996.0255153000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-41    9563.2476071600 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-38   10233.3557978000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-44    9769.9506097100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-36   12033.4982854000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-42   10184.8947969000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-37   10693.2743345000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-031-43    9723.1825119000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-112-01   11710.8277857000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-111-41   11159.5664899000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-111-38    9285.1826076200 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-111-39    9479.2809735100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-111-37    9580.2922173700 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-111-40   10620.2337552000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-32   12133.9107579000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-33    8792.8320980000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-34    8760.5702707500 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-35    8790.8677902100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-36    8895.0545006800 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-42   11726.3625806000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-121-13    8071.0061088200 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-263-01    9762.7325015400 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
                                                                                           Page 38
City of Villa Park                                                                   Exhibit IV-2
2010 General Plan                                                             Housing Element
378-131-06   11722.9810379000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-263-04   10062.8347993000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-261-26   19923.5091032000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 10,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-111-10   11769.0076782000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-19   11395.4531881000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-20    9934.3898335300 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-21   10249.7010565000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-11   10612.4705734000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-08   13276.3778920000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-111-13    9412.1686122000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-24    8413.1289191200 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-16    8754.9518555300 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-06   11933.4174355000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-111-14   10399.4549411000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-25    8257.5621859200 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-15    9368.9877115100 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-05   13196.5320648000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 12,000 SF        Single Family Residential
378-111-26    8308.5883007400 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-03   14261.8536263000 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 9,000 - 9,500 SF Single Family Residential
378-111-02    9004.7874356600 SFR - 3.0 du/ac SFR: R-1 8,000 - 8,500 SF Single Family Residential
                                                                                           Page 39
  City of Villa Park
   2010 General Plan
       Exhibit IV-3
Developable Vacant and
 Sub-dividable Parcels
     Legend
   Developable Vacant
   Parcels
   Sub-dividable Parcels (>4
   Parcels)
       CITY OF VILLA PARK
       17855 SANTIAGO BOULEVARD
       VILLA PARK, CALIFORNIA 92861
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                             Open Space/Conservation Element
V. OPEN SPACE/CONSERVATION
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
General Plan Legislation
The Open Space and Conservation Elements were first required to be part of
City and County General Plans in 1970. The focus of this legislation was to
underline the importance of protecting open spaces and recreational areas to
serve the population for years to come.
Purpose and Function
The Open Space Element designates “open space land”, which is defined by
Section 65560(b) of the Government Code, as “any parcel or area of land or
water which is essentially unimproved and devoted to open space use.” Open
space use, in turn, is defined to encompass four principle categories: natural
resources; managed production of resources; outdoor recreation; and public
health and safety.
The Conservation Element is required for the purposes of establishing a
management plan for natural resources to prevent waste, destruction or neglect.
This element of the General Plan is concerned with the conservation,
development and utilization of natural resources such as water, soils, rivers,
harbors, wildlife, minerals, and other natural resources.
Relationship of Other General Plan Elements
Within the 2010 General Plan, a Land Use designation was added for Open
Space and land within the City has been assigned the Open Space designation.
The Conservation Element overlaps those categories of the Open Space
Element which deal with “open space for the preservation of natural resources”
and “open space for the managed production of resources.” As a result of this
overlap and interdependence, the two elements have been combined, which is
permitted under State Law.
INVENTORY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
Open Space
The significance of the extensive rolling terrain located in the northeasterly
portion of the City and the physical influence of Santiago Creek on the
environment relative to community development has been carefully assessed.
The sparsely developed rolling hills in the eastern and northern sections provide
natural barriers accented by landscaping, to help preserve the appearance of a
rural, uncluttered City. The primary factor in the City’s setting are the estate-sized
                                         V-1

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                            Open Space/Conservation Element
lots which allow for dense landscaping, mature trees, and private recreational
spaces on private property. With approximately 99% of the City developed, it
becomes increasingly important to maintaining existing development standards
and focus on environmental enhancement.
There are four schools, shown in Exhibit V-1, with outdoor playgrounds totaling
approximately 80 acres. There is a competition size swimming pool at Villa Park
High School which was funded jointly with the City of Orange, the Orange Unified
School District and the City of Villa Park. This pool is utilized as a community
recreational facility and for school activities. Villa Park High School has four
lighted and four un-lighted tennis courts that are available for public use during
non-school hours.
The City has a Master Plan of Recreational Trails, also shown in Exhibit V-1,
and approximately 50% of the trail system is complete with paths and split rail
fencing in some areas and sidewalks in others. The City will continue to develop
the trail system, linking areas in the northeast with areas in the southwest of the
City to facilitate pedestrian recreational use. In coordination with regional and
local recreational trail master plans the City has added a fill-in link along that
portion of Meats Avenue that lies within Villa Park, that when developed will allow
residents to connect to the City of Orange trail and the County of Orange trail
systems.
Additional property within the City, located within the Santiago Creek Recharge
Basin, and also public right-of-way along Wanda Road, commonly known as the
Wanda Greenbelt, have been designated as Open Space. These Open Space
areas can be found on Exhibit V-2.
Conservation
The community of Villa Park relies upon reliable sources of clean water and a
safe environment to maintain a high standard of living, both of which are subject
to the constant threat of human interference. Through land use controls and the
environmental review process, the City can do its part to ensure clean water
supplies and a safe environment.
                                         V-2
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan
     Exhibit V-1
Recreational Trails
  & School Sites
   Legend
 Proposed
 Undeveloped
 Sidewalk
 Decomposed Granite (DG)
 DG and Recreational Fence
 School Sites
     CITY OF VILLA PARK
     17855 SANTIAGO BOULEVARD
     VILLA PARK, CALIFORNIA 92861
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan
    Exhibit V-2
Open Space Land
   Legend
   Open Space
   Santiago Creek
    CITY OF VILLA PARK
    17855 SANTIAGO BOULEVARD
    VILLA PARK, CALIFORNIA 92861
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                             Open Space/Conservation Element
ISSUES AND OPPORTUNIES
Issues
   •   There are no public areas of sufficient size and character to develop as
       active park sites.
   •   Water storage within the region is significantly depleted due to recent
       years of low rainfall amounts.
   •   Land development activity may contribute to the degradation of water
       resources within the region.
Opportunities
   •   The City has a Master Plan of Recreational Trails to provide recreational
       opportunities within the City and provides for off-road linkages to the
       Santiago Creek Green Belt and the Orange County system of recreational
       trails including the Santa Ana River trails, the Orange County Regional
       Parks, and nearby Grijalva Park in the City of Orange.
   •   Extensive former sand and gravel mining operations along Santiago Creek
       adjacent to the southeast boundary of the City are utilized for water
       reclamation and flood control purposes by the County of Orange and the
       Orange County Water District. This provides passive open space benefits
       to the city. The current uses are consistent with goals of the Santa Ana
       River/Santiago Creek Greenbelt Plan adopted by the County of Orange
       and the cities of Villa Park and Orange.
   •   Passive open space can be enhanced through the use and addition of
       landscaped medians and parkways.
   •   The large residential lots in Villa Park and adherence to the maximum lot
       coverage standard provide substantial private open space.
   •   Eighty acres within the City’s 2.1 square mile area are dedicated for public
       school purposes as follows:
            o  Villa Park High School – 40 acres
            o  Cerro Villa Middle School – 20 acres
            o  Villa Park Elementary – 10 acres
            o  Serrano Elementary – 10 acres
       The school sites provide large areas of multi-purpose open space for
       recreational uses by the community including track and field, swimming,
                                          V-5

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                            Open Space/Conservation Element
       tennis, baseball, soccer, basketball, Physical Activity and Recreation
       (PAR) courses, and community sponsored events.
   •   As part of completed residential developments in the City of Orange,
       development of recreational trails in the northeasterly portion of Villa Park
       will be coordinated with those in the City of Orange and the County of
       Orange.
   •   Explore feasibility of landscaping/beautification of entrances to the City
       adjacent to the Santiago Creek Greenbelt:
       1) The slopes visible from Villa Park Road east of Lemon Street and;
       2) The slopes visible from Collins Avenue east of the City limits.
                                        V-6

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                          Open Space/Conservation Element
GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
OS/Conservation Goal #1:      Maintain the City’s environmental quality through
                              the preservation and enhancement of open space
                              within and adjacent to the city.
       OS/Conservation Policies:
       OS/C #1:    Look to maximize existing open space facilities for
                   recreational uses.
       OS/C #2:    Pursue grant funding to complete recreational trail system
                   and recreational amenities where feasible.
       OS/C #3:    Continue coordination with surrounding Cities and the
                   County for the preservation of open space within Villa Park
                   and the regional area.
       OS/C #4:    Continue to work with the City of Orange and the County of
                   Orange to develop a linked regional recreational trail system.
       Action Programs:
              1.   Complete the master planned recreational trails and feasible
                   recreational amenities with available grant funding and City
                   funding.
              2.   Enhance the Wanda Greenbelt open space area to promote
                   passive recreational and botanical uses.
              3.   Work cooperatively with the Orange Unified School District
                   to continue active recreation uses with minimal impacts to
                   residential neighborhoods.
              4.   Develop recreational trail heads with PAR course amenities.
OS/Conservation Goal #2: Maintain a balance of active and passive open
                              space areas.
       OS/Conservation Policies:
       OS/C #5:    Utilize easements and linear parkways to provide open
                   space.
       OS/C #6:    Encourage the addition of roadway medians and plantings of
                   street trees to preserve and enhance rural feeling.
                                       V-7

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                           Open Space/Conservation Element
       Action Programs:
              6.   Complete landscaped median, recreational trail, and bike
                   lanes project on Lemon Street from Villa Park Road north to
                   Valley Drive.
              7.   Complete landscaped median project on Taft Avenue, east
                   of Center Drive.
              8.   Finalize the street tree program.
              9.   Continue to develop a water sensitive and drought tolerant
                   landscaping program for medians and greenbelt areas to
                   minimize costs and maximize functionality as open space.
OS/Conservation Goal #3: The City will continue to recognize and consider
                              environmental issues in all aspects of land use
                              planning, with special emphasis on groundwater
                              resources,      surface    water    quality,   and
                              environmental pollution.
       OS/Conservation Policies:
       OS/C #7:    Protect significant groundwater recharge areas to ensure
                   continued recharge of local groundwater basins.
       OS/C #8:    Continue to cooperate with water supply agencies to protect
                   the quantity and quality of local groundwater supplies.
       OS/C #9:    Promote water conservation principles and policies for use
                   by the City and those living, working, and operating a
                   business within the City and those developing land within the
                   City.
       OS/C #10:   Control surface runoff water discharges into the storm drain
                   system through enforcement of the City’s National Pollution
                   Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit.
       Action Programs:
              10.  Coordinate drainage plans for development within the City to
                   ensure that major groundwater recharge areas are
                   protected.
              11.  Maintain publicly owned open space along Santiago Creek
                   to ensure that the existing recharge areas are preserved.
                                       V-8

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                          Open Space/Conservation Element
              12.  Continue to comply with State and Federal regulations for
                   monitoring of domestic water supplies.
              13.  Continue to promote existing and also consider adopting
                   new water conservation policies and principles for use by the
                   City, its residents and businesses, those working within the
                   City, and those developing land within the City.
              14.  Continue to require project-specific Water Quality
                   Management Plans (WQMPs) for qualifying projects,
                   pursuant to the City’s NPDES Program.
              15.  Encourage the use of Low Impact Design principles for all
                   Private and Public New Development and Significant
                   Redevelopment Projects
                                       V-9

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                     Seismic and Safety Element
VI. SEISMIC AND SAFETY
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
General Plan Legislation
In 1970, the State made the Seismic and Safety Element a mandatory element of
the General Plan. The provision for a Safety Element was partly a reaction to
damaging wildfires that occurred in September and October of 1970. Following
the San Fernando Earthquake in 1971, the State Legislature enacted legislation
requiring counties and cities to adopt a Seismic Safety Element as part of the
comprehensive General Plan. In 1984, there were revisions in General Plan
legislation pertaining to these two elements. The Seismic Safety and Safety
Elements were combined into a single element that contained essentially the
same information previously included in the two elements.
According to §65302(g) of the Government Code, the Safety Element is
described in the following terms:
        A Safety Element for the protection of the community from any
        unreasonable risks associated with the effects of seismically induced
        surface rupture, ground shaking, ground failure, tsunami, seiche, and dam
        failure; slope instability leading to mudslides and landslides; subsidence
        and other geological hazards known to the legislative body; flooding; and
        wildland and urban fires. The Safety Element shall include mapping of
        known seismic and other geologic hazards. It shall also address
        evacuation routes, peak load water supply requirements, and minimum
        road widths and clearances around structures, as those items relate to
        identified fire and geologic hazards.
Purpose and Function
The purpose of the element is to identify hazards within Villa Park and initiate
precautions to protect the safety of the community. The Element is principally a
preventative planning document that will reduce natural and manmade hazards
to acceptable levels of risk.
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
Some community safety concerns overlap or are associated with the issues
considered by the Open Space and Land Use Elements. According to
Government Code §65590(b)(4), the Seismic and Safety Element is linked to the
implementation of a local open space plan. For instance, as a means of
protecting public health and safety, open space land may be set aside for these
purposes in circumstances that need special regulation and management.
Undeveloped land devoted to open space use may include area set aside
because of hazardous conditions such as earthquake fault zones, unstable soil
areas and flood plains. In addition, a community’s Land Use Element usually
                                          V-1

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                      Seismic and Safety Element
incorporates the findings and recommendations relative to public safety and open
space lands.
INVENTORY OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
Geologic and Seismic Hazards
Orange County, situated on the California south coastal plain, covers an area of
782 square miles. It is bounded by Los Angeles and San Bernardino Counties to
the north, Riverside County to the East, San Diego County to the south, and the
Pacific Ocean to the west. Folding and faulting of the earth’s crust during the
Tertiary Period produced topographic features visible today. The western portion
of the County is a series of broad sloping plains (Downey and Tustin Plains)
formed from alluvium transported from the mountains by the Santa Ana River,
Santiago Creek and other local streams. The Puente/Chino Hills, which identify
the northern limit of the valley, extend for 22 miles and reach a peak height of
1,780 feet. To the east and southeast of the valley are the Santa Ana Mountains,
which have a peak height of 5,961 feet. North of the City of Villa Park are the
Peralta Hills, exceeding a height of 1,500 feet. To the south is the Lomas de
Santiago ridgeline with elevations as high as 1,700 feet.
The City of Villa Park is located in the low foothills on the west flank of the Santa
Ana Mountains, and is southeast of the Santa Ana River. Within its southeastern
boundary runs a portion of Santiago Creek. The majority of the community is
located in older sedimentary rock overlaid with alluvial material deposited by the
Santa Ana River and Santiago Creek. The eastern portion of the community
consists of volcanic rock deposited in the late Miocene time.
The El Modena and Peralta Hills Faults are nearest to Villa Park. Both are
smaller north-northwest trending reverse faults located in the west flank of the
Santa Ana Mountains, about two miles northeast of the El Modena Community.
The El Modena and Peralta Hills faults are approximately 6 miles in length. Little
impact is anticipated from these faults. With no recent record of activity,
prevailing scientific thought is that neither is anticipated to be capable of
generating significant earthquakes.
There are several other faults that could potentially affect Villa Park. The fault
systems are listed below and shown in Table VI-1.
                                         V-2

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                     Seismic and Safety Element
                                      Table VI-1
                                    Local Faults
               Fault                   Approximate Distance From Villa Park
              Whittier                               8.5 miles N.E.
           Los Alamitos                               10 miles S.E.
               Chino                                  11 miles N.E.
             San Jose                                  13 miles N
        Newport/Inglewood                            14.0 miles S.E.
           Sierra Madre                                23 miles N
             Red Hills                                25 miles N.E.
    San Jacinto/Coyote Creek                         34.0 miles N.E.
           San Andreas                              38.0 miles N.W.
          San Fernando                               52 miles N.W.
Most of the loss of life, injuries, and damages that occur during an earthquake
are related to the collapse of hazardous buildings or structures. Villa Park
continues to apply the most recent Building Codes that in turn assist in reducing
hazards from earthquakes.
Slope Stability
Slope stability in the area is affected by three interrelated factors. These include
surface and subsurface water, geologic structure and rock types, and the degree
of slope. Water moving over or under the land surface erodes, steepens, and
undercuts slopes, thus removing lateral support. Much of the City’s surface flows
are directed to subsurface stormdrain infrastructure. Stability is also dependent
on the specific properties and combination of materials forming the slope.
Moderate slopes occur in the northeastern portion of the City. Exposure to such
hazards can be increased with the urbanization of hilly areas. Development
densities in this area are low and grading plans were required to address slope
and surface water issues. Finally, extensive landscaping assists in the reduction
of surface erosion.
Erosion
Land erosion is a natural process by which soil is removed from one area and
transported to other areas largely by means of wind, gravity, and moving water.
If water moves over level areas, little physical damage occurs to structures.
However, if the flow of water is constricted or the slope is steepened, the velocity
increases and deep gullies may result. Accelerated erosion within an urbanized
area can cause damage by undermining structures, depositing silt, sand, or mud
in roads and streets, and blocking storm sewers. In Villa Park this threat has
been greatly reduced through code based development, landscape
requirements, and storm drain infrastructure improvements.
                                         V-3

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                      Seismic and Safety Element
Flooding
Hazards associated with flooding can result from two sources. The first potential
source of flooding would be a natural occurring weather event and the second
would be the result of a failure at a water storage facility such as a water storage
tank or dam. Locally there is one in-ground storage facility with no threat to the
City. Those in the surrounding area have little to no potential impact to the City
based on the direction of flow and drainage improvements.
The City’s participation in the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), a
component of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), has
mitigated the potential for flood hazards in new development/substantial
improvement construction by requiring corrective and preventative measures.
These measures take a variety of forms and generally include requirements for
zoning, subdivision or building, and special-purpose floodplain ordinances.
The City of Villa Park has areas designated as one-hundred and five-hundred
year storm risk areas, which are the maximum levels of water expected to occur
after the inundation of an area (exhibits detailing these areas are available at City
Hall). Mitigation measures implemented by City Ordinance require all new
construction or substantial improvement within the Flood Zone AO (AO – 100-yr
Special Flood Hazard) Area to have a finished floor elevation constructed one
foot above the hundred-year storm level. Additionally, the City continues to make
improvements to its storm water collection system, thereby removing surface
flows and channeling water to nearby basins.
Fire Hazards
Fire hazards are the likelihood of an area burning and how it burns. In the past
the most significant fire hazard was wildland exposure northeast of the City limits.
Based on topography, fuel loading, and critical fire weather frequency (Santa Ana
Winds), the area of the City adjacent to this exposure was considered a high risk
fire hazard area. However, single-family residential development within the
region has replaced that wildland area to the northeast and Villa Park is no
longer listed as a Threat on the Federal Register’s Communities at Risk List.
Risk from other types of fire hazards has also been reduced within the City. The
age and condition of the majority of the existing housing stock, the type of
construction, requiring roofing materials to have a minimum class “A” rating, and
the absence of major industrial or commercial structures greatly reduce the risk
of fire hazards. In the event of a fire, current emergency response providers state
that services are provided 80% of the time within 7 minutes 20 seconds from
receipt of call to on scene arrival. Villa Park also utilizes a highly successful core
of volunteer fire fighters to supplement and support fire services.
                                           V-4

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                      Seismic and Safety Element
Dam/Reservoir Inundation
Villa Park Reservoir, at an elevation of 581 feet, is an earthen reservoir located
upstream from the City of Villa Park on Santiago Creek, was created for flood
control purposes for water flow from Irvine Lake. Santiago Reservoir, at an
elevation of 804 feet, creates Irvine Lake and functions as a reservoir for our
area. It is an earthen reservoir that was built in 1933.
During years with heavy precipitation, release gates in Santiago Reservoir can
be operated to prevent water from overflowing the face of the dam. Villa Park
Reservoir then meters these heavy flows to prevent flooding of low lying areas
downstream. Normally there is no water behind Villa Park Reservoir. Villa Park
could be affected by failure at either of the reservoirs on Santiago Creek.
However, these facilities are maintained and safety-inspected to ensure their
integrity and that risks are minimized.
Hazardous Materials
Transportation of hazardous materials and flammable liquids along the arterial
highways of Villa Park represents only a slight hazard as there are few users
within the City and arterial transportation routes make up a very small portion of
all transportation routes within the City. Truck limits and permit requirements limit
use on any residential streets. There are no industrial developments within Villa
Park and only one small commercial center that may attract such materials.
Contract Police and Fire services have in place emergency response plans if a
hazardous materials situation were to occur in Villa Park.
Climate Change
The scientific community has documented that increasing levels of greenhouse
gases (GHGs) in the earth’s atmosphere are contributing to rising global average
temperatures. The most abundant GHG is carbon dioxide (CO2), which is a bi-
product of fossil fuel combustion. CO2 is removed from the atmosphere through
sequestration by vegetation and dissolution into the ocean. Carbon sequestration
is the absorption or removal from the air of carbon dioxide by plants or other
natural processes. These sequestration processes happen naturally, but human-
generated emissions have outpaced these removal processes, resulting in
excessive GHG concentrations accumulating in the atmosphere, and leading to a
subsequent trend of unnatural global warming.
Aircraft Traffic
The Orange County John Wayne Airport (JWA) is located 8.7 miles south of the
City of Villa Park. As of 2008, over 950 planes (commercial aircraft and general
aviation) fly in and out of JWA each day using a single runway. In June 2007,
395 were jet aircraft.
                                          V-5

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                      Seismic and Safety Element
According to reports prepared for the John Wayne Airport, Villa Park does not lie
within the “crash zones” of the airport. These areas surround the immediate
landing and take-off zones. However, the concentration of small private aircraft in
the vicinity increases the risk of mid-air collisions.
Military air traffic, air traffic associated with regional agencies and helicopter
traffic in particular present safety hazards in terms of both noise and potential
aircraft failure as flight patterns are often within the immediate vicinity of Villa
Park and surrounding communities. Noise concerns are discussed in the noise
element. The City monitors all developments regarding the expansion of John
Wayne Airport and through City Council action, will respond accordingly to any
change proposed.
The Community Emergency Response Team
The Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) program was developed in
California in the mid-80s as a way to train people to better prepare for emergency
situations in their communities. Since then, it has become a national model for
helping people respond to emergencies. When emergencies happen, CERT
members can give critical support to first responders and provide immediate
assistance to victims. CERT members can also help with non-emergency
projects that improve the safety of the community. The Villa Park CERT program
is designed to augment the overall emergency response for the City. The Villa
Park CERT team conducts periodic training, executes training drills, and helps
educate the residents on safety preparedness items.
ISSUES AND OPPORTUNITIES
Issues
         •      Ground shaking may occur as a result of movement along any one
                of Southern California’s large regional faults such as the San
                Andreas, Newport-Inglewood, or Whittier-Elsinore. Movement along
                any of these fault zones has the potential to damage in Villa Park.
         •      Expansive soil conditions require specialized grading techniques or
                foundation treatment to control uplift characteristics of these
                materials. Settlement due to structural loading within areas
                underlain by compressible materials, such as thick topsoil, alluvium,
                and/or terrace deposits is a potential problem within the lower
                elevations of the community.
         •      The 2003 settlement agreements with John Wayne Airport
                regarding passenger limitations and curfews will expire respectively
                in 2015 and 2020.
                                           V-6

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                       Seismic and Safety Element
       •      Scientific data indicates that global climate change is affecting
              natural process such as the water cycle and sequestration, which
              are resulting in depleted water supplies and increased CO2 levels in
              the atmosphere.
       •      With the loss of El Toro as a potential site for a second airport in
              Orange County, John Wayne Airport will sustain the burden of
              being the single airport to meet the increasing demand for air
              transportation services.
Opportunities
       •      Villa Park is in the fortunate position that all of its structures are
              non-critical facilities having a relatively low profile, thereby reducing
              the probability of damage to life and property.
       •      The City maintains the most current development standards within
              its ordinances, codes, and requirements pertaining to the above
              mentioned hazards. Primary codes relating to this element are the
              Uniform Building Code, Uniform Fire Code, Fire Prevention Codes,
              Grading Ordinance, Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance, and
              State Health and Safety Codes.
       •      The City’s fire, police, public works department and emergency
              organizations are all well rated and take advantage of new
              methods, equipment, and techniques in the performance of their
              duties. The City maintains an active Community Emergency
              Response Team and emphasizes emergency preparedness.
       •      Local water storage is adequate in quantity and well located. Fire
              hydrant distribution meets or exceeds all applicable codes.
       •      The street circulation system is adequate to handle any necessary
              deployment of emergency vehicles and evacuation of residents.
                                           V-7

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                     Seismic and Safety Element
GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
Seismic and Safety Goal #1: Protect life and property from geologic
                                hazards.
       Seismic and Safety Policies:
       S & S #1:   Continue to coordinate with the State and agencies within
                   the County to assist in the mitigation of geologic and seismic
                   hazards.
       S & S #2:   Continue to participate in the Orange County Emergency
                   Management Organization (OCEMO) and its program to
                   maintain an Emergency Operating Center radio network.
       Action Program:
              1.   Continue to implement the most current seismic
                   requirements of the California Building Code with periodic
                   updates.
              2.   Require geotechnical studies to be prepared for
                   development projects located in areas containing known or
                   suspected geologic hazards, consistent with the guidelines
                   established by the State of California Division of Mines and
                   Geology.
Seismic and Safety Goal #2: Protect life and property from the hazards of
                                flooding.
       Seismic and Safety Policies:
       S & S #3:   Enforce the requirements of the Federal Emergency
                   Management Agency (FEMA) to mitigate flood hazards.
       S & S #4:   Support Orange County Flood Control District and Army
                   Corp of Engineers efforts to monitor and upgrade regional
                   and local flood control facilities.
       S & S #5:   Educate the public about flood related hazards.
       Action Program:
              3.   Continue to require compliance with FEMA standards of
                   flood proofing for substantial improvement projects located
                   within the 100-year floodplain.
                                      V-8
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                  Seismic and Safety Element
              4.   Make available flood hazard and response information to
                   residents when requested and if applicable via electronic
                   methods.
Seismic and Safety Goal #3: Protect life and property from water related
                                hazards as a result of seismic rupture of
                                dams/reservoirs.
       Seismic and Safety Policies:
       S & S #6:   Annually request and review California Department of Water
                   Resources – Division of Safety of Dams (DSOD) inspection
                   reports for both Villa Park and Santiago Reservoirs.
       S & S #7:   Continue to prepare, review, revise, and update emergency
                   response plans and programs between the City,
                   dam/reservoir owners/operators, and Federal, State, and
                   local agencies responsible for dam safety and disaster
                   response.
       Action Program:
              5.   Provide available emergency evacuation information to the
                   public.
Seismic and Safety Goal #4: Protect life and property from fire.
       Seismic and Safety Policies:
       S & S #8:   Maintain adequate level of fire services.
       S & S #9:   Maintain an Insurance Service Organization (ISO) rating of 3
                   or less.
       S & S #10:  Continue to identify and evaluate new potential fire hazards,
                   fire hazard areas, and fire prevention strategies and
                   practices.
       S & S #11:  Continue to adopt and honor agreements with adjacent
                   communities for mutual automatic aid assistance.
       Action Program:
              6.   Continue to implement the current requirements of the
                   California Building Code related to fire protection in all
                   construction.
                                       V-9

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                    Seismic and Safety Element
              7.   Make available fire hazard safety information for resident
                   and developers in electronic format.
              8.   Actively promote the installation of smoke detectors in all
                   dwelling units.
              9.   Review the City’s ability to reduce square footage
                   requirements for fire sprinkler installation and retrofit.
Seismic and Safety Goal #5: Protect life and property from risks
                               associated with the transportation of
                               hazardous materials.
       Seismic and Safety Policies:
       S & S #12:  Assess any risks involved in the transportation of hazardous
                   materials within the City.
       Action Program:
              10.  Support the efforts of the City’s fire protection service
                   provider to enforce State “right-to-know" laws.
              11.  Ensure travel routes through the City for vehicles
                   transporting hazardous materials are clearly delineated.
Seismic and Safety Goal #6: Maintain an adequately manned police force
                               and relevant crime prevention programs.
       Seismic and Safety Policies:
       S & S #13:  Support neighborhood meetings and community programs
                   on crime prevention and education.
       Action Program:
              12.  Continue to implement “Neighborhood Watch” programs,
                   involve the efforts of the City’s police services provider, and
                   encourage increased volunteer service in community watch
                   programs.
Seismic and Safety Goal #7: The City will prepare for and adapt to the
                               effects of climate change and promote
                               practices      that     decrease       the     City’s
                               contribution to climate change.
                                      V-10

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                   Seismic and Safety Element
       Seismic and Safety Policies:
       S & S #14: Evaluate the potential effects of climate change on the City’s
                   human and natural systems and prepare strategies that
                   allow the City to appropriately respond and adapt.
Seismic and Safety Goal #8: The City will recognize and work to minimize
                               safety impacts associated with the operation
                               of John Wayne Airport.
       Seismic and Safety Policies:
       S & S #15: Participate in the Corridor City Coalition (Coalition) with the
                   intent to protect the City from effects of air traffic utilizing
                   John Wayne Airport.
Seismic and Safety Goal #9: The City will recognize and work to mitigate
                               the safety hazards associated with civilian
                               and military air traffic.
       Seismic and Safety Policies:
       S & S #16:  Work with FAA, Orange County Airport officials and other
                   agencies to establish aircraft corridors which minimize the
                   exposure of Villa Park residents to air traffic related hazards.
       S & S #17:  Work with military and other government officials to minimize
                   the impact of military helicopter and airplane traffic on Villa
                   Park residents.
                                      V-11

            City of Villa Park
            2010 General Plan                                                   Noise Element
            VII. NOISE
            INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
            General Plan Legislation
            The State of California has mandated that each County and City prepare a Noise
            Element as part of its General Plan. Section 65302(f) of the California
            Government Code requires that the Noise Element recognize the guidelines
            established by the Office of Noise Control in the Department of Health Services,
            and analyze and quantify current and projected noise levels for all noise sources.
            According to the California Government Code, noise contours shall be used as a
            guide for establishing a Land Use Element that minimizes the exposure of
            community residents to excessive noise.
            Purpose and Function
            The purpose of the Noise Element is to provide information on current and future
            noise levels in the City and provide the basis for the creation and enforcement of
            noise-associated standards and codes. These actions protect the health and
            wellbeing of persons living and working in Villa Park.
            Noise is often identified as unwanted sound. Although sound is measurable,
            noise is subjective; the effects on people range from annoyance and
            inconvenience to temporary or permanent hearing loss. Every day, people are
            subjected to a multitude of sounds at home or in the work place. The relationship
            between measurable sound and human irritation is the key to understanding
            noise impacts; Table VII-1 provides examples of noise creating activities and
            resulting effects.
                                                    TABLE VII-1
     Common Outdoor                Common Indoor Activities          A-Weighted     Subjective   Effects of
          Activities                                               Sound Level dBA  Loudness        Noise
       Threshold of Pain                                                 140
                                                                                     Intolerable
        Near Jet Engine                                                  130
                                                                                          or
                                                                         120                       Hearing
                                                                                     Deafening
    Jet Fly-Over at 1,000 ft          Rock Band Performance              110                         Loss
        Loud Auto Horn                                                   100
    Gas Lawn Mower at 3ft                                                90         Very Noisy
Diesel Truck at 50 ft, at 50 mph         Food Blender at 3ft              80
                                                                                                   Speech
  Noisy Urban Area, Daytime           Vacuum Cleaner at 10ft              70
                                                                                        Loud     Interference
    Heavy Traffic at 300 ft             Normal Speech at 3ft             60
     Quiet Urban Daytime               Large Business Office             50
                                                                                                     Sleep
    Quiet Urban Nighttime         Theater, Large Conference Room         40           Moderate
                                                                                                 Disturbance
                                            (Background)
  Quite Suburban Nighttime                     Library                   30
     Quiet Rural Nighttime         Bedroom at Night, Concert Hall        20             Faint
                                            (Background)                                           No Effect
                                    Broadcast/Recording Studio           10
                                                                                     Very Faint
 Threshold of Human Hearing      Lowest Threshold of Human Hearing         0
                                                        VII-1
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                    Noise Element
Perceived Noise Levels
The A-weighted decibel, commonly abbreviated as dBA, has been devised to
relate sound to the sensitivity of the human hearing system. This scale is
calibrated to the faintest sound audible and has approximately the same
frequency response as the human hearing system. A listener usually judges an
increase in sound level of 10 dBA as a doubling of sound.
Environmental noise descriptors are generally based on averages, rather than
instantaneous noise levels. The most commonly used figure is the equivalent
level (Leq). Leq represents a steady sound level containing the same total
energy as a time-varying level over a given measurement interval. Leq’s may
represent any desired length of time; however, one hour is most commonly used
in environmental work. Consequently, Leq’s will vary depending on the time of
day. In traffic noise measurements, the noisiest hour of the day is considered the
benchmark of a road’s noise emissions; therefore, the peak hour Leq is the noise
metric used by Caltrans for all traffic noise analyses.
Peak hour noise levels, while useful, do not completely describe a given noise
environment. Noise levels lower than peak hour may be disturbing if they occur
during times when quiet is most desirable, namely evening and nighttime hours.
To account for this, the Community Noise Equivalent Level is utilized. The
Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) is the weighted average of the
intensity of a sound, with corrections for the time of day, over 24 hours.
Measured and Forecast Noise Levels
The sound from an individual source decreases with increasing distance. The
amount of sound reaching the receiver is affected by barriers between the source
and the receiver (such as windows, walls, landscaping, and buildings),
atmospheric conditions (such as wind, temperature, and humidity), and the
number of sources emitting sound.
Automobiles are the primary source of surface noise in Villa Park. Noise
associated with passenger vehicles is generated by the engine, tires, and
exhaust system. Noise varies with road conditions and speed. Generally,
automobile noise is greater at high speeds than at low speeds; therefore, this
noise peak may not occur at maximum traffic volume.
Transportation noise in Villa Park is greatest along arterial highways. Existing
2008 CNEL noise contours are shown in Exhibit VII-1. Noise referral zones are
those areas that define a CNEL level of 60 decibels. According to the State of
California Office of Planning and Research General Plan Guidelines, an
acoustical study may be required in cases where noise-sensitive land uses are
located in areas of 60 dBA CNEL or greater. Any land use that is exposed to
                                         VII-2

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                    Noise Element
levels higher the 65 dBA CNEL will require noise mitigation measures. The City
of Villa Park defines 60 dBA CNEL as the level at which planning for future land
uses should consider acoustical impacts. Noise sensitive land uses include
residences of all types, rest homes, hospitals, places of worship, and schools.
There are no industrial or railroad facilities within Villa Park to generate noise.
The Orange County John Wayne Airport is located 8.7 miles south of the City
and no portion of the City is located within the 65 dBA CNEL noise contours of
the airport. Although there were approximately 1,000 commercial and general
aviation flights using the airport in 2008, flight paths are at heights which do not
transmit excessive sound (see Urban Crossroads technical report for
measurement details) provided that aircraft comply with operational standards
established by civilian and military authorities.
Future (year 2030) noise contours are shown in Exhibit VII-2. These contours
are based upon the traffic forecasts shown in the Circulation Element. The
increased traffic volume leads to a slightly enlarged footprint for the 60 and 65
dBA noise levels.
                                        VII-3


City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                    Noise Element
ISSUES AND OPPORTUNITIES
Issues
   •   Vehicular traffic is the primary noise generator in Villa Park.
Opportunities
   •   Routing regional traffic onto surrounding arterial roadways rather than
       through Villa Park would reduce noise levels on residential streets.
Objective
   •   Maintain a residential noise environment consistent with the Noise
       Insulation Standards of the California Administrative Code, which sets
       forth construction standards to provide a suitable living environment.
                                         VII-6

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                                Noise Element
GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
Noise Goal #1:     Continue to provide acceptable noise environments for
                   residential land use.
       Noise Policies:
       N #1:       Continue to apply noise considerations into the community
                   planning process to prevent noise/land use conflicts.
       N #2:       Minimize through traffic in residential areas by promoting
                   peripheral routing.
       N#3:        Promote, where appropriate, sound attenuation measures.
                   These may include the use of berms and wall barriers, the
                   placement of buildings away from the noise source, or a
                   combination of sound attenuation measures.
       Action Programs:
           1.      Continue to enforce the City Noise Ordinance.
           2.      Require that any new commercial uses adjacent to noise
                   sensitive uses must be designed with noise mitigation
                   measures to reduce the noise associated with truck deliveries
                   and stationary equipment such as pumps, compressors, and
                   air conditioning units.
           3.      Require that all commercial loading facilities be located,
                   designed, and used to minimize noise at adjacent noise
                   sensitive areas.
                                        VII-7
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                 Growth Management Element
VIII. GROWTH MANAGEMENT
INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND
General Plan Legislation
On November 6, 1990, Orange County voters passed a referendum known as
“Measure M”, a revised Traffic Improvement and Growth Management
Ordinance. In order to be eligible to receive new Measure M transportation
revenues, the Measure required that each jurisdiction incorporate a Growth
Management Element into its General Plan.
Purpose and Function
The purpose and function of the Growth Management Element is to direct that
growth and development be based upon the City of Villa Park’s ability to provide
an adequate circulation system and public facilities pursuant to the Orange
County Division, League of California Cities “Countywide Traffic Improvement
and Growth Management Plan Component.”
Relationship to Other General Plan Elements
A major goal of the Growth Management Element is to ensure that the planning,
management, and implementation of traffic improvements and public facilities are
adequate to meet the current and projected needs of the City of Villa Park.
Although a high priority, this goal must be achieved while simultaneously
maintaining consistency among the other elements of the General Plan as
required by State Law. Therefore, the Growth Management Element does not
replace or supersede any of the other General Plan elements. Instead, the
Element addresses, amplifies, and supports traffic level of service and public
facility standards that are included in other General Plan elements, and
establishes new standards where necessary. The Element also serves to
augment development mitigation, development phasing, and annual monitoring
discussions in other General Plan elements.
The Growth Management Element is implemented through various coordinated
programs developed to support and carry out its goals, objectives, and policies.
In addition, this Element has been crafted to minimize duplicative Measure M and
Congestion Management Program (CMP) requirements.
The Growth Management Element express’ the City of Villa Park’s most current
growth management policies. Consequently, although certain General Plan
elements overlap, the Growth Management element provides a key resource
document for growth management concerns.
                                      VIII-1

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                     Growth Management Element
The Growth Management Element achieves consistency with other General Plan
elements through the pursuit of common major goals such as traffic level of
service and public facilities development as implemented through the specific
directives that follow:
        1.    The Maps contained in the Land Use, Circulation, and Open Space
              and Conservation Elements shall provide General Plan policy
              guidance for implementing public facilities planning.
        2.    Major City of Villa Park public facilities shall conform to the adopted
              Noise and Seismic and Safety Elements.
        3.    Innovative financing, funding and implementation programs serving
              to minimize infrastructure costs, as well as housing costs, are in the
              Housing Element.
        4.    Regional transportation facilities are mapped in the Circulation
              Element.
        5.    Regional public facilities (excluding transportation) are mapped, to
              the extent feasible, in the Land Use Element.
        6.    Community facilities are mapped in the Land Use Element.
        7.    The Circulation Element Master Plan of Arterial Highways is the
              City of Villa Park’s master plan for transportation providing general
              policy and program guidance for facility planning and citing.
ISSUES, OPPORTUNITIES AND OBJECTIVES
Issues
        •     With 99% of the City developed and no external Sphere-of-
              Influence for expansion of City boundaries, additional development
              potential is extremely limited.
        •     Development in the cities of Orange and Anaheim have, and will
              continue to, significantly affect established neighborhoods in Villa
              Park.
        •     The high cost of land in Villa Park restricts the range of potential
              development opportunities.
        •     Villa Park is adversely affected by pass-through traffic generated by
              sources outside of the City.
                                        VIII-2

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                    Growth Management Element
Opportunities
       •      Widening of select regional arterials highways can encourage traffic
              to avoid driving through residential neighborhoods.
       •      Synchronization of traffic signals will assist in minimizing vehicle
              congestion.
       •      The possible extension of Wanda Road south of Collins Avenue by
              the City of Orange would improve north-south traffic flow.
Objective
       •      Minimize the impacts of growth both within the City and within the
              region on the citizens and facilities of Villa Park.
                                       VIII-3

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                 Growth Management Element
GOALS, POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
Growth Management Goal #1: To work and cooperate with neighboring entities
                                  and regional bodies to alleviate impacts of
                                  surrounding area growth on Villa Park.
       Growth Management Policies:
       GM #1:      Continue       working     cooperatively      with  surrounding
                   jurisdictions.
       GM #2:      The City of Villa Park has and will continue to participate in
                   Inter-Jurisdictional Planning Forums at the Growth
                   Management Area (GMA) level to discuss developments
                   with multi-jurisdictional impacts and appropriate mitigation
                   measures.
       Actions Program
             1.    Continue implementing the current Development Mitigation
                   Program and ensure that standards meet acceptable impact
                   fees for applications within the GMAs.
Growth Management Goal #2: To manage any growth within the City of Villa
                                  Park in such a manner so as not to adversely
                                  affect transportation facilities and other public
                                  facilities within the City or surrounding
                                  communities.
       Growth Management Policies:
       GM #3:      Level of Service (LOS) “D” is the target standard for
                   intersections under sole control of the City of Villa Park. To
                   achieve this, it is the policy of the City of Villa Park that
                   within 3 years of the issuance of the first building permit for a
                   development project, or within 5 years of the first grading
                   permit for said development project, whichever occurs first,
                   any necessary improvements to transportation facilities, as
                   defined by the intersection of 2 arterial highways on the
                   County of Orange Master Plan of Arterial Highways (MPAH),
                   to which the project contributes measurable traffic, are to be
                   constructed and completed to attain level of service “D” at
                   the intersections.
                                       VIII-4

City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                   Growth Management Element
                   Intersections exempt from the above paragraph include
                   facilities under the jurisdiction of another City/County or the
                   State. However, it is the policy of the City of Villa Park that
                   all development contributing measurable impacts to
                   intersections and all projects contributing cumulatively, or
                   individually, 10% or more of the traffic using an intersection
                   will be assessed a mitigation fee determined by the involved
                   jurisdictions and locally administered as a part of the Capital
                   Improvement Program.
                   Achievement of the adopted level of service standard and
                   implementation of transportation improvements shall take
                   into       consideration        extraordinary     transportation
                   circumstances which may impact identified intersections
                   and/or timing of the required improvements. An example of
                   extraordinary circumstances would be when arterial
                   roadways serve as a substitute freeway access (thus
                   impacting LOS performance) while planning and
                   construction of additional freeway improvements are
                   underway.
       GM #4:      All development projects shall participate in comprehensive
                   public facilities financing plans as established by the City
                   Council as a condition of development approval except
                   where an increased level of participation exceeding those
                   requirements is established through negotiated legal
                   mechanisms.
       GM #5:      It is the policy of the City of Villa Park that all new
                   development pays its share of the costs associated with that
                   development, including regional traffic mitigation.
       GM #6:      It is the policy of the City of Villa Park to impose a traffic
                   impact mitigation fee for improvements within its boundaries
                   and to work with other jurisdictions to determine minimally
                   acceptable impact-free levels for applications within the
                   Growth Management Area which includes Villa Park.
       GM #7:      All development shall be phased in accordance with any
                   applicable Comprehensive Phasing Program adopted by the
                   City of Villa Park. Comprehensive Phasing Programs shall
                   include development phasing plans which establish both a
                   phasing allocation of development commensurate with
                   roadway and public facilities capabilities and an overall build-
                   out development plan which can be supported by
                   implementation of the planned infrastructure system.
                                       VIII-5
City of Villa Park
2010 General Plan                                   Growth Management Element
       GM #8:      It is the policy of the City of Villa Park to continue to balance
                   land use, whereby residential, non-residential and public
                   land uses are proportionally balanced.
       GM #9:      It is the policy of the City of Villa Park that new revenues
                   generated from any potential locally approved increased
                   sales tax measure shall not be used to replace private
                   developer funding which has been committed for any project.
       Action Programs
             2.    Continue implementing the current Comprehensive Phasing
                   Program to ensure that infrastructure is added as
                   development proceeds so that the provision of road
                   improvements and public facilities is in balance with
                   demand.
             3.    Continue implementing the current Performance Monitoring
                   Program established to provide an annual evaluation of
                   compliance       with      development     phasing     allocations
                   established pursuant to policies detailed previously.
             4.    The Performance Monitoring Program will provide periodic
                   evaluations of the maintenance of transportation and public-
                   facilities service levels. The evaluation will be related to
                   various public improvement projects with significant impacts
                   on public facilities. As part of the evaluation available traffic
                   reports will be utilized. In the event the evaluation identifies
                   one or more service level deficiencies measures to correct
                   the deficiency(s) will be identified.
             5.    Traffic     Improvement/Public         Facilities   Development
                   Agreements: In the event the financing and implementation
                   provisions of this Element are implemented through
                   subsequent, legally valid Traffic Improvement/Public
                   Facilities Development Agreements, said agreements shall
                   be consistent with this Element and its implementing
                   ordinances, plans and programs.
                                        VIII-6
