                          Exeter General Plan
                                   2000 to 2020
                                Circulation Element
Introduction
The Circulation Element is second only to the Land Use Element in terms of importance
to the community. It has a significant impact on the residents of Exeter because it
delineates the routes by which people will travel within and through Exeter. Further,
the Element identifies the different types of circulation routes in the community, such as
roadways, bikepaths and railroads.
Section 65302 (b) of the State Government Code indicates that the Circulation Element
must disclose the general location, dimensions and physical characteristics of existing
and proposed major thoroughfares, transportation routes and transportation-related
facilities.
The Court has indicated that in addition to the finding that a roadway improvement
must be consistent with the General Plan (Friends of “B” Street.et.al. v. City of
Hayward, et. al., 106 Cal. App. 3d 988 {1980}, it has also indicated that there must be a
correlation between the circulation and land use elements. Generally, correlation is
achieved by using the same population and land use projections for each element.
The Exeter Circulation Element is composed of seven sections. They are:
1)       existing conditions;
2)       an evaluation of the existing circulation system;
3)       traffic projections and evaluations;
4)       circulation goals;
5)       policies and action programs;
6)       roadway cross-section designs; and
7)       circulation map.
Existing Conditions
                                       Circulation Element
                                                 86

                         Exeter General Plan
                                 2000 to 2020
Early Circulation System
Exeter’s road system was based on a grid pattern that was formed by the Southern
Pacific Railroad through its subsidiary, Pacific Improvement Company. The original
townsite and road system was designed by the Company in the late 1880s. The original
240-acre townsite contained roads that ran perpendicular and parallel to the Southern
Pacific tracks. The early streets had rights-of-way of 80 feet and alleys that were 20 feet
wide. Each block generally measured 320 feet by 400 feet.
In the early 1900s, the early street system was reoriented so that streets ran north and
south and east and west. Where the two street systems met, odd shaped parcels were
formed, usually triangular-shaped lots.
Present Circulation System
Since the early 1900s, a system of roadways has been constructed in the Exeter area that
falls into one of the following categories - freeways, arterials, collectors, local streets and
alleys. A definition of each roadway type is provided below.
Freeways/Expressways
This type of roadway does not exist in the city of Exeter. The nearest freeway is State
Highway 198, about two miles north of Exeter. Caltrans is studying the feasibility of
elevating Spruce Road, located one mile east of Exeter, to expressway status.
Currently, it is a county-maintained arterial roadway.
Arterials
This type of roadway provides for through traffic movement on continuous routes
through the city. It generally is linked to other arterials and freeways. Often times it
will connect one city to another (e.g. Exeter and Farmersville). Arterials are generally 4-
lane roadways, divided and undivided. Exeter has three roadways that are classified as
an arterial - Visalia Road, State Highway 65 (Kaweah Avenue), and Spruce Road.
Visalia Road links Exeter with two cities to the west, Farmersville and Visalia; State
Highway 65 connects Exeter to State Highway 198, two miles to the north, and State
Highway 137, six miles to the south, and Spruce Road, which is located on the eastern
fringe of the community and is slated to be the “future” State Highway 65, links Exeter
with Lindsay and Porterville to the south and Woodlake to the north.
Major Collectors
                                     Circulation Element
                                               87

                        Exeter General Plan
                                 2000 to 2020
Major collectors provide traffic movement around and through a city. They generally
are connected to other collector or arterial roadways. Major collectors are generally
two lanes, divided, or four lanes, undivided. Major collectors are sometimes dedicated
to carrying truck traffic in addition to large volumes of automobile traffic.
Palm Street is an example of a major collector roadway. It has a right-of-way width of
80 feet. The roadway contains two travel lanes, two parking lanes, and a 15-foot
median with left-turn pockets.
Minor Collectors
Minor collectors provide traffic movement through neighborhoods. They generally
connect a local roadway to another collector or arterial roadway. Minor collectors
generally contain two travel lanes and two parking lanes. They often provide access to
two or more neighborhoods.
Vine Street is an example of a minor collector roadway. It has two travel lanes and two
parking lanes and it has a right-of-way width of 60 feet.
Local Roadways
Local roadways provide internal traffic movement within residential neighborhoods.
Adjacent property has direct access to these types of roadways. Local roadways
contain two travel lanes and two parking lanes. They have rights-of-way widths that
range from 52 to 60 feet.
Railroad Roadways
When the A.T. & S.F. Railroad was extended through Exeter, three roadways, First
Street, Second Street and Third Street, were constructed along with this railway
improvement. These roadways were intended to serve industrial development that
was developed adjacent to the railroad tracks most of which involved agriculturally-
related uses like packing houses and cold storage facilities. These roadways are narrow
with rights-of-way widths ranging from 30 to 50 feet.
Alleys
Alleys provide rear access to residential dwellings in older neighborhoods and to
commercial buildings in the downtown area. Typically, many alleys contain above-
(electricity and CATV) and below-ground utilities (sewer and water lines). They also
serve as a route for trash pickup.
                                      Circulation Element
                                                88
                         Exeter General Plan
                                  2000 to 2020
Exeter has an extensive alley system. Most of the alleys are 20 feet wide and are
unpaved.
Railroads
Exeter is crisscrossed with railroads. The Southern Pacific (SP) Railroad, constructed in
the 1880s, was installed prior to the establishment of the original Exeter townsite. This
railroad linked Exeter to numerous cities up and down the San Joaquin Valley.
In 1905, the Visalia Electric Railroad was constructed. It connected Exeter to Visalia to
the west and Lemon Cove and Woodlake to the northeast. The line was abandoned in
the 1990s and the track and ties have been removed. In fact, some of the right-of-way
has been planted with citrus and olives.
In 1914, the Atchinson Topeka and Sante Fe (A.T.&S.F.) Railroad was constructed on the
east side of the San Joaquin Valley. It formed the eastern boundary of the city
eventually spawning numerous agriculturally-related industrial uses.
In the 1990s, the San Joaquin Valley Railroad, a private railroad company, began to
operate their own trains on the SP and A.T.&S.F. lines, under lease agreements. This
company is involved in the transporting of goods and materials over the rail lines.
Public Transportation
Two public transportation systems are available to residents of Exeter. The City’s Dial-
A-Ride system provides a 17-passenger bus that transports people to destinations
within the city limits, including doctor’s offices, school and shopping centers. The
system operates between the hours of 8:30 am and 4:30 pm, Monday through Friday.
The Tulare County Transit System operates Monday through Friday and provides bus
service to surrounding cities, including Lindsay, Woodlake, Porterville, Tulare and
Visalia. The present schedule provides two locations in Exeter where persons can
connect with the county bus system. Pick-up and drop-off are available five times daily.
Air Service
Exeter is served by the Visalia Airport, 15 miles to the west. It provides regularly
                                      Circulation Element
                                                89

                      Exeter General Plan
                              2000 to 2020
scheduled freight and passenger service and it furnishes private and company aircraft
hangers and tie-downs
                                  Circulation Element
                                            90
                       Exeter General Plan
                                2000 to 2020
Evaluation of Existing Circulation System
Capacity Evaluation
The ability of a roadway to carry traffic is a function of many factors, including street
width, the number of travel lanes, the number of intersecting streets, the presence of
signals, and the existence of medians. A roadway's traffic volume increases during
"peak-hour" times - 7:00 to 8:30 a.m., 12:00 to 1:00 p.m., and 4:30 to 6:00 p.m.. To
measure the traffic capacity of a roadway, a Level of Service (LOS) rating system is
used. An LOS of "A" signifies a roadway that has traffic that is free flowing while a
roadway with a LOS of "F" is very congested. Table No. 4 provides an interpretation of
the various LOS ratings and Table No. 5 provides traffic counts for various types of
roadways that are operating at a LOS of "E" - a roadway that is experiencing extreme
congestion (grid-lock). Typically, an LOS of "C" is considered acceptable by the driving
public, however, in smaller cities, it may be too congested for the typical driver.
Table No. 6 shows average daily traffic volumes for selected roadways in Exeter and a
calculated Level of Service (LOS) rating for these roadways. Only Visalia Road from
Orange to Filbert Street is operating at at an LOS that approaches a congested
condition.
Intersections
Intersection analysis have been conducted at the intersections of Belmont Road and
Visalia Road, and Kaweah Street and Pine Street. The Belmont/Visalia Road intersection
is currently signalized while the Kaweah/Pine Street is not signalized.
The analysis of the Belmont/Visalia Road intersection, conducted by by the County of
Tulare in 1995, indicated that the intersection was operating at a LOS of B during peak
AM and PM hours. The analysis of the Kaweah/Pine Street intersection, conducted by
TPG Consulting, Inc. in 1998, indicated that the intersection was operating at a LOS of A
during peak AM and PM hours. This analysis included to-be-constructed projects on
surrounding properties.
                                        Table No. 4
                          Level of Service Interpretation
                                      Circulation Element
                                                91
                    Exeter General Plan
                             2000 to 2020
LOS         DESCRIPTION                                      VOLUME/CAPACITY
A             Free flow, low volume, high operating               0.00-0.59
              speed, high maneuverability.
B             Stable flow, moderate volume, speed                 0.60-0.69
              somewhat restricted by traffic conditions,
              high maneuverability.
C             Stable flow, high volume, speed and                 0.70-0.79
              maneuverability determined by traffic
              conditions.
D             Unstable flow, high volumes, tolerable              0.80-0.89
              but fluctuating operating speed and
              maneuverability.
E             Unstable flow, high volumes approaching             0.90-0.99
              roadway capacity, limited speed,
              intermittent vehicle queuing.
F             Forced flow, volumes lower than capacity            above 1.0
              due to very low speeds; heavy queuing of
              vehicles, frequent stoppage.
                                   Table No. 5
           Daily Capacities for Roadways Operating at LOS E
           ROADWAY                             LEVEL "E" CAPACITIES
           4 Lane Freeway                             80,000 vehicles per day
           4 Lane Divided Arterial                    27,000
           2 Lane Divided Arterial                    15,000
           4 Lane Undivided Arterial           24,000
           2 Lane Undivided Arterial           12,000
           4 Lane Divided Collector                   20,000
           2 Lane Divided Collector                   10,000
           4 Lane Undivided Collector                 18,000
           2 Lane Undivided Collector                  9,000
                                       Table No. 6
                           Existing Traffic Volumes
Roadway Segment                            Existing Traffic Volumes        LOS
                                 Circulation Element
                                           92
                         Exeter General Plan
                                  2000 to 2020
East/West
Visalia Road, Elberta to Belmont                 9,000 ADT                    A (.37)
Visalia Road, Belmont to Orange                 10,000                        A (.41)
Visalia Road, Orange to Filbert                 10,000                        D (.83)
Palm Avenue, Kaweah to F Street                    800                        A (.08)
Firebaugh Avenue, Third to Kaweah                2,000                        A (.22)
Firebaugh Avenue, Kaweah to Belmont              3,000                        A (.33)
Pine Street, Kaweah to F Street                  4,200                        A (.46)
Glaze Avenue, Kaweah to Filbert                   300                         A (.03)
Glaze Avenue, Filbert to Belmont                  400                         A (.04)
North/South
Belmont Avenue, Vine to Glaze                    5,000                        A (.55)
Kaweah Avenue, Sequoia to Palm                  10,000                        B (.66)
Kaweah Avenue, Palm to Pine                     11,000                        C (.73)
Spruce Road, Ave. 280 to Firebaugh               9,900                        C (.82)
Spruce Road, Firebaugh to Rocky Hill             5,700                        A (.47)
Source: TPG Consulting, 2000.
 Connectivity
There are various neighborhoods in Exeter that would benefit from the extension of a
roadway to another part of the community. Persons living in these neighborhoods
would be able to travel to other parts of Exeter using a direct roadway route.
Furthermore, by enhancing connectivity through Exeter, emergency vehicles are better
able to access neighborhoods thereby insuring better public safety protection for
residents. Also, direct routes to various points in the community facilitates less auto-
related air pollution.
Traffic Safety
A roadway system that is safe and efficient - free of congestion - is a primary circulation
goal of all cities. This goal also promotes a roadway system that is safe for pedestrians
and bicyclists, especially younger children.
The most potentially hazardous roadways in terms of traffic safety in Exeter are
Kaweah Avenue, Visalia Road, Palm Street and Rocky Hill Drive, from Kaweah Avenue
to Third Street. Driving, riding or walking along these roadways is hazardous because
                                      Circulation Element
                                                93
                       Exeter General Plan
                                 2000 to 2020
of one or more of the following characteristics - volume and speed of traffic, the width
of the roadway, the number of trucks or the number of pedestrians/bicyclists traveling
along the roadway.
Traffic Projections and Evaluations
The Consultant has projected traffic volumes for both roadway segments and certain
intersections in the Exeter area. These projections are based on the following
assumptions:
1. Traffic volumes on local and State roadway systems will generally increase at a rate
similar to population growth rates within the planning area.
                                    Circulation Element
                                              94
                        Exeter General Plan
                                2000 to 2020
2. Persons in Exeter will continue to use cars as their primary mode of transportation.
3. Uses that generate abnormally high volumes of traffic will not locate in the planning
area during the planning period.
4. Current traffic flow patterns in the planning area will not change significantly,
except when State Highway 65 is shifted from Kaweah Avenue to Spruce Road.
5. Spruce Road will become State Highway 65 within the planning period - 20 years.
Roadway Segment Projections
Increases in traffic volumes over the planning period for local and State roadways is
going to be generated by the development of the land uses in the Exeter area and by
increases in population and development in surrounding communities.
Traffic volume projections for 2020 for selected roadways in Exeter are delineated in
Table No. 7. These projections are based on data from the Tulare County Association
of Government’s traffic model for Tulare County and for the Exeter area. Projections
for State Highway 65 (Kaweah Avenue) and State Highway 198 are not provided
because the city does not have jurisdiction over these roadways nor does it finance
improvements along these highways.
Those roadway segments are are projected for LOS levels of D, E or F during the
planning period will be listed in Exeter’s Capital Improvement Program (CIP).
Improvements on these roadways, which will facilitate a more acceptable LOS rating -
C or better - will be financed by gas tax and transportation funds, redevelopment funds
and development impact fees.
                                           Table No. 7
                           Projected Traffic Volumes, 2020
Roadway Segment                                Projected Traffic Volumes     LOS
East/West
Visalia Road, Elberta to Belmont               11,000 ADT                     A (..45)
Visalia Road, Belmont to Orange                11,000                         A (.45)
Visalia Road, Orange to Filbert                11,000                         E (.91)
Palm Avenue, Kaweah to F Street                 7,500                         C (.75)
Firebaugh Avenue, Third to Kaweah               2,000                         A (.22)
                                     Circulation Element
                                               95

                        Exeter General Plan
                                2000 to 2020
Firebaugh Avenue, Kaweah to Filbert             9,000                          F (1.0)
Firebaugh Avenue, Filbert to Belmont            3,800                          A (.42)
Pine Street, Kaweah to F Street                 6,000                           B (.66)
Glaze Avenue, Kaweah to Filbert                 2,000                          A (.22)
Glaze Avenue, Filbert to Belmont                1,600                          A (.17)
North/South
Belmont Avenue, Vine to Visalia Rd.             8,000                         D (.88)
Belmont Avenue, Visalia Rd. to Glaze            9,000                         F (1.0)
Kaweah Avenue, Sequoia to Firebaugh            18,000                         C (.75)*
Spruce Road, Ave. 268 to Firebaugh             15,700                         C (.65)*
Spruce Road, Firebaugh to Rocky Hill           16,300                         C (.68)*
Source: TPG Consulting, 2000.
Intersection Segment Projections
TPG Consulting, using projected traffic counts from the TCAG traffic model and
roadway geometric and land use information, identified which intersections would
require some type of signalization and/or modification to an existing signal system
during the planning period. The intersections are: Visalia Road and Elberta Avenue,
Belmont Road and Visalia Road, Kaweah Avenue and Firebaugh Avenue, and Kaweah
Avenue and Rocky Hill Drive. Improvements at these intersections, which will facilitate
a more acceptable LOS rating, will be financed by gas tax and transportation funds,
redevelopment funds and development impact fees.
Circulation Issues and Goals
Circulation goals express general community values as they relate to travel, traffic
safety, mobility and funding for maintenance, construction and reconstruction. Some
of the goals listed below are the product of previously approved general plan elements
or specific plans. Other goals were fashioned by Exeter’s general plan committee,
planning commission and city council.
Traffic
Even if a roadway is operating at a Level of Service (LOS) A, which means that traffic
flows freely along the street with little or no congestion, people still complain that there
is too much traffic on the street especially if its their neighborhood street. While it is
difficult to improve on a roadway that has a LOS of A, cities can embrace goals that will
                                     Circulation Element
                                               96

                         Exeter General Plan
                                  2000 to 2020
minimize traffic impacts on the community.
•       Insure that streets and intersections in Exeter are not congested.
•       Insure that traffic on Exeter’s streets operates in an efficient and safe manner.
•       Provide for long-term financing for street construction and maintenance.
Expressways
A freeway does not presently exist within Exeter’s planning area; however, Caltrans is
planning to designate and upgrade Spruce Road to expressway status - State Route 65.
This route, which forms the eastern boundary of Exeter’s planning area, will carry
traffic along the east side of the San Joaquin Valley from Bakersfield to State Highway
198. It is important that the segment of Spruce Road adjacent to the Exeter planning
area be provided with proper interchanges and signage so that persons can effectively
access Exeter proper.
•       Insure that there is an interchanges at Spruce Road and Firebaugh Avenue.
•       Provide signage advertising Exeter along Spruce Road (State Route 65).
Arterials
Arterial roadways carry the greatest volumes of traffic in Exeter. Traffic on these
roadways travels at a high rate of speed and carry a significant number of trucks,
making these roadways noisy. Because of these characteristics, the design, location
and types of land uses developed adjacent to these roadways must be carefully
planned.
Most persons in Exeter will travel on an arterial at least once a day. Travel efficiency on
these roadways is important for two reasons: (1) congested traffic conditions cause the
traveler to be late to their destination and (2) congestion creates greater amounts of air
pollution, already a significant environmental problem in the Valley. Traffic that moves
smoothly and efficiently along an arterial minimizes these two problems.
•       Provide an arterial road system that conveys traffic in an efficient and safe
        manner.
•       Arterials should be visually pleasing.
                                       Circulation Element
                                                 97

                         Exeter General Plan
                                  2000 to 2020
•      The following roadways shall be designated as arterials by the Circulation
       Element.
                                           Arterials
East/West Arterials          ROW width              Paved width     Planned Features
Visalia Road, Elberta to
Orange Street                84 feet                64 feet         10 to 12-foot
                                                                    median and
                                                                    bikepath; truck
                                                                    route
Visalia Road, Orange
to Palm Street               60 feet                40 feet         bikepath; truck
                                                                    route
Palm Street, G Street
to Kaweah Avenue             80 feet                60 feet         10 to 12-foot
                                                                    median and
                                                                    bikepath; truck
                                                                    route
North/South Arterial         ROW width              Paved width     Planned Features
Kaweah Avenue                80 feet                60 feet         10 to 12-foot
                                                                    median; truck
                                                                    route
Collectors
Aside from arterials, collectors carry the greatest amount of traffic in a city. Unlike
arterials, collectors traverse residential neighborhoods and connect one neighborhood
to another. It is this type of roadway that drains traffic from a neighborhood and
conveys it towards other collector or arterial roadways. Because collectors pass
through neighborhoods, their effectiveness to channel traffic can be diminished by the
                                      Circulation Element
                                                98

                        Exeter General Plan
                                 2000 to 2020
design of land uses adjacent to the roadway. If these uses are designed so that they
haphazardly funnel traffic onto the collector, the efficiency of the collector is reduced.
Collectors that conduct truck traffic must be located where they will not have an
adverse impact on existing neighborhoods and yet be able to conduct truck traffic
effectively.
Due to their proximity to residential neighborhoods, collector roadways can have an
impact neighborhoods if not properly located or designed. The volume of traffic, the
level of noise and a collector’s appearance can affect an adjacent neighborhood. It is
important to properly plan and design these roadways so that they are an asset to the
community and the neighborhood and not a detraction.
•       Provide efficient and safe circulation access to all parts of Exeter.
•       A collector system that provides for truck traffic but not at the expense of the
        community or adjacent residential neighborhoods.
•       The following roadways shall be designated as major collectors by the
        Circulation Element.
                                      Major Collectors
East/West Collectors        ROW width               Paved width          Planned Features
Firebaugh, G Street to
Kaweah Avenue               60 feet                 40 feet              Truck Route
Firebaugh, First Street
to Spruce Road (SR 65)      60 (40) feet            40 (22) feet         Truck Route
Glaze Avenue, Belmont       60 feet                 40 feet              Truck Route
to Kaweah Avenue
Rocky Hill Drive, First
Street to Spruce Road       60 (50) feet            40 (22) feet         Truck Route and
                                                                         bikepath
North/South Collectors ROW width                    Paved width          Planned Features
                                      Circulation Element
                                                99

                        Exeter General Plan
                               2000 to 2020
Belmont Road              60 feet                 40 feet       Bikepath
G Street                  80 feet                 60 feet       Truck Route
F Street                  80 feet                 60 feet       Truck Route
Third Street              60 (50) feet            40 (22) feet  Truck Route
Industrial Drive          60 feet                 40 feet       Truck Route
                                   Minor Collectors
East/West Collectors      ROW width               Paved width   Planned Features
Vine Avenue               60 feet                 40 feet       NA
Chestnut Street           60 feet                 40 feet       School Route
Sequoia Drive             60 feet                 40 feet       School Route
Firebaugh, 1st to Kaweah 60 feet                  40 feet       NA
Firebaugh, G to Belmont 60 (40) feet)             40 (30) feet  School Route
Rocky Hill, Pine to 1st   60 (50) feet            40 feet       School Route
Pine Street, F to Kaweah 80 feet                  60 feet       Main Street
North/South Collectors ROW width                  Paved width   Planned Features
Elberta Avenue            60 feet                 40 feet       NA
Filbert Street            60 to 80 feet           40 to 60 feet NA
D Street                  60 feet                 40 feet       NA
                                    Circulation Element
                                             100
                        Exeter General Plan
                                 2000 to 2020
Parking
The success of commercial businesses is often dependent upon parking. The parking
must be in close proximity to the business, it must be safe, and if possible, it should well
designed - good lighting, wide stalls, shaded, and easy access.
For other uses, such as public facilities, churches, apartments and industries, adequate
off-site parking is important so as to insure that surrounding land uses are not
adversely impacted by persons parking their vehicles in front of other establishments
or residences.
•       Provide adequate public parking in the downtown.
•       Insure that adequate off-street parking is provided by new development.
•       Encourage the joint use of parking lots.
•       Design parking lots that are safe, visually pleasing and convenient.
School Routes
School-aged children walking or riding to school should be provided with a safe routes-
to- school. There are a number of roadways in Exeter that are used extensively by
children traveling to and from school. Sidewalks should be constructed along both
sides of roadways leading to schools in Exeter.
•       Provide safe route-to-school improvements for school-aged children.
•       Provide direct routes to school from adjoining neighborhoods.
Street Design
                                     Circulation Element
                                              101

                        Exeter General Plan
                                 2000 to 2020
The primary purpose of a street is to carry traffic from one point to another. Streets,
however, do not have to be a sterile public improvement that negatively impacts
adjacent land uses. In fact, streets can be designed so that they can enrich the adjacent
land use, using features like trees, decorative lighting, public art, and well designed
signage. For example, the Circulation Element has identified certain streets in Exeter
that are proposed for landscaped medians, including Kaweah Street, Palm Avenue, and
Visalia Road.
•       Develop streets that are well designed and visually attractive.
•       Provide an adequate source of funding for the construction of streets and
        their related improvements.
•       Apply for state and federal grants to upgrade streets in Exeter.
Intersections
Busy roadway intersections are signalized in order to insure that traffic can safely and
effectively maneuver through the intersection.             At busy intersections where
signalization is lacking, accidents can occur, some of them serious. For existing and
future intersections in Exeter, signalization or an upgrade to an existing signal system
may be necessary. Signalization can be very expensive. It is important that a city have
a means of financing this improvement prior to the improvement being required.
Signalization is not the only means of controlling traffic at intersections. For hundreds
of years Europe and Mexico have used roundabouts to control traffic at intersecting
streets. In addition, the interior portion of the roundabout often contains a visual
feature, like a fountain, statue, or landscaping. The Circulation Element has designated
two intersections for roundabouts. They are Pine and C Street and Pine and Filbert
Street.
•       Insure that busy intersections are properly signalized thereby insuring safe
        and effective traffic maneuvers.
•       Seek innovative methods of controlling traffic at busy intersections within
        the Exeter planning area.
Alternative Modes of Transportation
                                       Circulation Element
                                                102

                         Exeter General Plan
                                  2000 to 2020
Alternative modes of transportation are important to different groups of people for
different reasons. For low-income, handicapped or non-driving age persons, public
transit may be the only means of travel. For a person who is concerned about polluting
the air, riding a bus or bike may be their way of minimizing an impact on the
environment.
For recreational and health reasons, people may wish to walk or bike around town.
Pedestrian and bikepaths are necessary for this type of travel. They should be designed
and located so that conflicts with car and truck traffic is minimized.
•       Promote alternative modes of transportation, including bicycles, buses, trains
        and walking.
•       Insure that bike and pedestrian pathways are properly located, safe and well-
        designed.
Truck Traffic
Truck traffic can adversely affect a community and specifically residential
neighborhoods because of the noise and vibrations they generate. Further, heavy
trucks can damage local roadways because of their weight. However, trucks are an
essential ingredient for the local economy in terms of employment and movement of
goods and products. In Exeter, the local economy would collapse if packing houses,
cold storage plants and other non-agricultural industries could not receive trucks at
their locations.
•       Establish truck routes through Exeter that are safe and not disruptive to
residential neighborhoods, schools and businesses.
Railroads
Exeter is either blessed or cursed with an inordinate number of rail lines traversing the
city. On the positive side, the rail lines provide an alternative to trucks for the shipping
and receiving of goods and products. As a matter of fact, Exeter’s prominence in the
citrus and deciduous fruit industry is closely tied to these rail lines. On the other hand,
the trains cause traffic delays, create noise and vibrations as the pass through town and
railroads rights-of-way are often unsightly and poorly maintained.
The railroad companies have extensive landholdings in Exeter, much of which, is zoned
industrial. There are economic development opportunities along the railroads if some
of this excess land is sold.
                                       Circulation Element
                                                103

                        Exeter General Plan
                                  2000 to 2020
•       The city shall coordinate with the railroad companies to insure that crossings
        are safe and that trains travel through the community in a safe and effective
        manner.
•       The City shall work with railroad companies in the marketing of their excess
        landholdings.
Bikepaths and Pedestrian Pathways
Due to Exeter’s close proximity to Rock Hill and Yokohl Valley, both of which are
popular areas for competitive bikers, the city receives a considerable amount of
through bike traffic. When added to the local bike traffic generated by school-aged
children, it is important to properly locate and design Exeter’s bikepath system.
By encourages persons to walk in Exeter, personal contact is promoted. This interaction
makes for a more close-knit community in addition to promoting a more healthy
lifestyle.
•       Encourage persons to ride bikes for health reasons as well as for
        environmental reasons.
•       Design a bikepath system that encourages persons from other communities to
bike to Exeter.
•       Insure that Exeter’s bikepath system is consistent with the Tulare County
Bicycle Transportation Plan.
•       Encourage persons to walk in Exeter by promoting pedestrian-friendly design.
Landscaped Medians and Street Trees
Some of the great streets in the world contain landscaped medians or a boulevard of
street trees. These features “soften” the appearance of the street, provide shade for the
pedestrians and provide a positive image.
•       Overly wide streets in Exeter should be considered for a tree-lined median,
•       The downtown area should be planted with street trees that provide shade,
        color and interest.
                                      Circulation Element
                                               104

                         Exeter General Plan
                                  2000 to 2020
Circulation Policies and Actions (Implementation Measures)
Policies and actions serve as the instructions for the circulation element blueprint.
Without these instructions, implementation of the element could not occur. For each
circulation-related topic, this section of the element will provide a list of policies and
actions that will facilitate implementation of the goals.
Traffic
•      Insure that streets and intersections in Exeter are not congested.
•      Insure that traffic on Exeter’s streets operates in an efficient and safe manner.
•      Provide for long-term financing for street construction and maintenance.
1. A level of service (LOS) C will be the desirable minimum service level in Exeter at
which highway, arterial and collector segments will operate. A level of service of B will
be the desirable minimum service level in Exeter at which intersections will operate.
       a. The City will program into its 5-year capital budget, street improvements
       that will insure the specified level of service (LOS) is not exceeded in the city
       limits. Funds for these street improvement projects will come from gas tax
       and transportation funds.
       b. The City shall develop a traffic impact fee for new development in Exeter.
       Said fee shall be consistent with the requirements of AB 1600.
       c. The City, working with Caltrans, will periodically check traffic warrants at
       intersections along State Highway 65 (Kaweah Street) in order to plan for
       proper signalization and turn lanes at these intersections.
2. Land use projects which generate large amounts of traffic shall be precluded from
channeling traffic onto local roadways.
       a. The Planning Department shall recommend denial of discretionary land
       use projects to the Planning Commission and City Council that are
       inconsistent with this policy.
Expressways
                                      Circulation Element
                                               105

                        Exeter General Plan
                                  2000 to 2020
•      Insure that there is an interchange at Spruce Road and Firebaugh Avenue.
•      Provide signage advertising Exeter along Spruce Road (State Route 65).
1. Study the future design of Rocky Hill Drive and Firebaugh Avenue west from
Spruce Road for truck access and automobile access into Exeter proper.
       a. The City should contract with a traffic consultant to prepare a preliminary
       road design for these two roadways.
       b. The City should work with CALTRANS to insure that the design of the
       intersections at Spruce Road provide for adequate access into Exeter from this
       roadway.
       c. Design of these intersections should also include proper signage for Exeter.
Arterials
• Provide an arterial road system that conveys traffic in an efficient and safe manner.
• Arterials should be visually pleasing.
1. Study reconfiguring Visalia Road, Palm Avenue, and Kaweah Avenue to provide a
landscaped median, left-turn lanes and bike lanes.
       a. The City should contract with a traffic consultant to prepare a preliminary
       road design for these three roadways.
       b. The City should seek state and federal funds to construct improvements
       along these roadways, including medians, signals and left-turn pockets.
       c. The City shall develop a landscaped median development impact fee on
       new development. Said fee shall be consistent with the requirements of AB
       1600.
       d. Arterial roadways will be constructed consistent, where possible, with
       street cross-section illustrations contained in the Circulation Element.
2. Driveways that intersect with arterials should be kept to a minimum and, if possible,
                                       Circulation Element
                                                106

                         Exeter General Plan
                                   2000 to 2020
should be reduced when redevelopment occurs along an arterial roadway.
        a. Through the site plan review process, the Planning and Engineering
Departments will discourage development designs that create this condition.
3. Left turn lanes shall be constructed on arterials where they intersect with other
arterials or collectors.
        a. The Public Works Department will coordinate with Caltrans to insure that
        left turn lanes are constructed along Kaweah Avenue.
4. New driveways constructed onto Kaweah Avenue shall meet Caltran’s construction
specifications.
        a. Through Exeter’s site plan review process, Caltrans will review all new
        construction projects along Kaweah Avenue.
5. Curbing at the intersections of arterial and collector streets should be painted red at
least 50 feet in all directions from the corner curb radius in order to provide sufficient
sight-line for traffic entering the intersection.
        a. The Public Works Department will coordinate with Caltrans to identify
        which curbs at the aforementioned intersections should be red-curbed.
6. The City shall analyze the couplet where Visalia Road links with Palm Avenue in
regards to traffic flow, right-of-way, and roadway construction.
        a. This study shall determine if reconstruction of this couplet is necessary
based on traffic safety and future traffic volumes.
Collectors
•       Provide efficient and safe circulation access to all parts of Exeter.
•       Provide a collector system that encourages truck traffic but not at the expense
        of the community or adjacent neighborhoods.
1. Driveways that intersect with collectors should be kept to a minimum and, if
possible, should be reduced when redevelopment occurs along this type of roadway.
        a. Through the site plan review process, the Planning and Engineering
                                       Circulation Element
                                                107

                         Exeter General Plan
                                   2000 to 2020
Departments will discourage development designs that create this condition.
2. Left turn lanes shall be constructed on collectors where they intersect with other
arterials or collectors.
        a. Through the site plan review process, the Planning and Engineering
Departments will require this design feature.
3. Curbing at the intersections of arterial and collector streets should be painted red at
least 50 feet in all directions from the corner curb radius in order to provide sufficient
sight-line for traffic pulling into the intersection.
        a. The Public Works Department will identify which curbs at the
aforementioned intersections should be red-curbed.
4. If possible, major collector roadways should contain sufficient right-of-way for two
travel lanes, two bike lanes, two parking lanes and a median/turn lane; and minor
collectors should have sufficient right-of-way for two travel lanes, two parking lanes,
two 6-foot parkways, and two 4 1/2-foot sidewalks.
         a. Major and minor collector roadways will be constructed consistent with
        street cross-section illustrations contained in Appendix A of the Circulation
        Element.
5. All street improvement projects, including widening, closing, or constructing new
roadways, will be reviewed by the Planning and Engineering Departments to confirm
that the project is consistent with the Circulation Element.
        a. The Planning and Engineering Departments will review development
projects to determine consistency with the Circulation Element during site
plan or subdivision review.
Parking
•       Provide adequate public parking in the downtown.
•       Insure that adequate off-street parking is provided by new development.
•       Encourage the joint use of parking lots.
                                        Circulation Element
                                                 108

                        Exeter General Plan
                                 2000 to 2020
•       Design parking lots that are safe, visually pleasing and convenient.
1.      Off-street parking in the downtown shall be located on the side or at the rear of
building(s).
2. Parking lots for new uses shall contain landscaping, proper lighting and shall be
properly designed to insure maneuverability of vehicles and pedestrians.
        a. Through the site plan review process, the Planning and Engineering
Departments will insure that the design of new parking lots contain these
features.
        b. The Zoning Ordinance shall be amended to include parking lot design
standards, including a requirement for fifty (50) percent shading within a 10-
year time period. Rows of parking stalls shall be interrupted with a tree-
containing planters.
        c.     Pedestrian pathways through parking lots shall be clearly delineated
        using improvements such as landscaping, lighting and pavement material.
3. Parking lots located adjacent to residentially designated land shall be separated by a
6-foot block wall, which is landscaped with vines, shrubs or trees. Parking lots adjacent
to streets shall be separated by a low wall, which is landscaped on both sides.
4. New parking lots along Kaweah Avenue and Visalia Road should be designed so
that the parking lot does not occupy the entire frontage of the site.
        a. Through the site plan review process, the Planning Department will
insure that the design of new parking lots will be consistent with this policy.
5. The City and/or the Exeter Redevelopment Agency may consider the purchase of
land in the downtown for use as a public parking lot.
Street Design
•       Develop streets that are well designed and visually attractive.
•       Provide an adequate source of funding for the construction of streets and their
related improvements.
•       Apply for state and federal grants to upgrade streets in Exeter.
                                     Circulation Element
                                              109

                         Exeter General Plan
                                 2000 to 2020
 1. The City should prepare a streetscape design plan that will establish a 20-year
improvement program for the construction of landscaped medians for specific
roadways in Exeter. This Plan should include details for lighting, landscaping and
signing.
        a. The Engineering and Planning Departments will prepare the streetscape
        design plan. Funds will come from tax increment, gas tax, transportation
funds and state grant programs.
        b. The City shall apply for urban forestry grants to assist in the funding of
        constructing landscaped medians.
2. Single family residential subdivisions may have local streets that have a minimum
right-of-way width of 56 feet, 32 feet paved width. Tree-line parkways shall be
installed in this right-of-way. The parkway shall have a width of 7 feet; the sidewalk 5
feet.
3. Single family residential subdivisions may have cul-de-sac streets that have a
minimum right-of-way width of 52 feet, 28 feet paved width. Tree-line parkways shall
be installed in this right-of-way. The parkway shall have a width of 7 feet; the sidewalk
5 feet. All cul-de-sac streets shall provide for a pedestrian opening at the end of the
street.
4. Alleys are permitted within residential subdivisions. Alleys shall have a rights-of-
way of 24 feet and a paved width of 20 feet. A concrete vee gutter is required in the
middle of the alley. The non-paved portion of the right-of-way shall be landscaped and
provided with irrigation. Garbage pickup shall not be permitted in the alleys.
Intersections
•       Insure that busy intersections are properly signalized thereby insuring safe and
effective traffic maneuvers.
•       Seek innovative methods of controlling traffic at busy intersections within
        the Exeter planning area.
1. The City shall adopt a development impact fee that finances the signalization of
intersections.
        a. The City will periodically review the levels of service ratings at major
                                     Circulation Element
                                              110

                         Exeter General Plan
                                   2000 to 2020
intersections in Exeter to determine if signals should be installed.
        b. The City will calculate and implement development impact fees for
        signalization that are consistent with the Circulation Element map and
Assembly Bill 1600 (legislation that requires a nexus, or connection, between
the fee being required and the improvement to be installed).
2. The City shall construct roundabouts at the intersection of Pine Street and Rocky Hill
Drive and at the intersection of Pine Street and Filbert Street.
        a. The Engineering and Planning Departments will prepare the design plan
        for these roundabouts.
        b. The City shall seek public input in regards to the interior treatment of the
        roundabouts.
Transit
•       Promote alternative modes of transportation, including bicycles, buses, trains
        and walking.
•       Reduce automobile use by improving transit service and encouraging transit
        use.
1. Facilitate the provision of convenient, frequent, dependable and efficient scheduled
transit for Exeter residents.
        a. New developments adjacent to arterial or collector streets shall include bus
loading zones.
        b. All arterial streets shall be designed to accommodate buses and bus loading
zones.
        c. Improve transit line coverage and frequency throughout Exeter and to
        adjacent cities, with particular emphasis on service to the downtown,
        employment centers, and social services.
Truck Traffic
•       Establish truck routes through Exeter that are safe and not disruptive to
residential neighborhoods, schools and businesses.
                                        Circulation Element
                                                 111

                        Exeter General Plan
                                  2000 to 2020
1. Identify truck routes on the Exeter Circulation Element map.
2. Prohibit through truck traffic on streets that are not identified as truck routes.
       a. Direct truck traffic away from residential areas and other sensitive land
           uses.
       b. The Public Works Department shall install truck route signage.
       c. Consider using county roads to divert truck traffic through or around
Exeter to avoid sensitive land uses.
 Railroads
•      The city shall coordinate with the railroad companies to insure that crossings
       are safe and that trains travel through the community in a safe and effective
       manner.
•      The City shall work with railroad companies in the marketing of their excess
       landholdings.
1. In order to insure circulation connectivity in Exeter, railroad crossings will be
constructed.
       a. Adoption of the Circulation Map will implement this policy.
       b. The City will calculate and implement development impact fees for
       railroad crossings consistent with the Circulation Element map.
2. Two railroad crossing sites should be explored by the City for the potential construction of a
crossing roadway, Elberta Road and the Southern Pacific Railroad and Vine Street and the
Southern Pacific Railroad.
Bikepaths and Pedestrian Pathways
•      Encourage persons to ride bikes for health reasons as well as for
       environmental reasons.
•      Design a bikepath system that encourages persons from other communities to
                                       Circulation Element
                                                112

                        Exeter General Plan
                                 2000 to 2020
bike to Exeter.
•      Insure that Exeter’s bikepath system is consistent with the Tulare County
Bicycle Transportation Plan.
•      Encourage persons to walk in Exeter by promoting pedestrian-friendly design.
1. Develop a bike path plan for the City of Exeter.
       a. Design the Plan so that some of the bike path segments are not along
surface streets but along railroad rights-of-way, parks and ditch easements.
       b. Apply for state and federal funds to finance the construction of the
       bikepath system.
       c. Insure that subdivisions are designed so that persons riding bikes can access
adjacent properties from the neighborhood.
       d. Work with the county of Tulare to insure that Exeter’s Plan is linked to
       any bike plan that the county might prepare.
       e. Consider implementing traffic calming designs where bike paths cross
       surface streets.
       f. Bikepaths will be constructed consistent with the bikepath cross-section
       illustrated in Appendix A of the Circulation Element.
2. Attempt to provide safe and convenient pedestrian access to all areas of the city,
including between neighborhoods.
       a. Maintain and repair sidewalks to make them safe for pedestrians.
       b. Plant existing parkways that are devoid of trees to make the walking
experience more enjoyable.
       c. Provide signage for walking paths.
       d. Investigate the use of ditch easements and railroad rights-of-way for
       walking paths.
Landscaped Medians and Street Trees
                                     Circulation Element
                                              113

                         Exeter General Plan
                                 2000 to 2020
•       Overly wide streets in Exeter should be considered for a tree-lined median or
tree-lined parkway.
•       The downtown area should be planted with street trees that provide shade,
        color and interest.
1. Existing parkways that do not contain trees should be planted with trees.
        a. The City should apply for an urban forestry grant to pay for the cost of
        installing street trees.
2. Parkways that contain trees that have broken or lifted adjacent sidewalk shall be
removed and replaced with more appropriate street trees.
3. Parkways that have been filled with pavement shall be opened up and planted with
appropriate street trees.
                                     Circulation Element
                                              114

                Exeter General Plan
                       2000 to 2020
Roadway Cross-Section Designs
                          Circulation Element
                                   115
                       Exeter General Plan
                                2000 to 2020
Circulation Map
Exhibit No. 6 delineates the different types of roadway types and routes of other types
of transportation in the Exeter planning area.
                                    Circulation Element
                                             116
                        Exeter General Plan
                                 2000 to 2020
                                Land Use Element
Introduction
The Land Use Element is the most prominent of the seven mandatory elements of the
General Plan. It, more so than the other elements, has the most significant impact on
existing and future Exeter residents. It is the element that determines the general
location of residential, commercial, industrial, public and open space uses and it
discloses building intensities and population densities for the planning area. In planning
circles, the land use and circulation elements of the General Plan have been termed the
“blueprints” for the development of a city. The goals, policies, and implementation
measures of the elements are considered to be the “instructions” for the blueprints.
The Exeter Land Use Element contains seven sections:
1)      land use and population;
2)      population and land use projections;
3)      land use designations and population densities;
4)      planning issues and land use goals;
5)      land use policies and actions (implementation measures);
6)      land use designation/ zoning district matrix; and a
7)      land use map.
Land Use and Population
Early Land Use Patterns
                                       Land Use Element
                                              6

                        Exeter General Plan
                                 2000 to 2020
The original Exeter township was formed by the Southern Pacific (SP) Railroad through
its subsidiary, Pacific Improvement Company (see Exhibit 3 ). The townsite was
established after the Pacific Improvement Company bought land from John Firebaugh
in 1888, a local landowner. Exeter received its name from an early promoter of the
improvement company, D.W. Parkhurst. He named the city Exeter after his home city
of Exeter, England.
The original townsite encompassed 240 acres. The SP Railroad traversed the townsite in
a northwest to southeast direction. The railroad and adjoining right-of-way occupied
approximately 40 acres. The railroad depot was situated between Pine and Maple
Streets on the east side of the railroad tracks.
As was the case in many early railroad-sponsored towns, Exeter’s first streets were laid
out parallel with and perpendicular to the railroad tracks. The streets had right-of-way
widths of 80 feet and each block formed by these streets had a 20-foot wide alley that
bisected the block. The early blocks were rectangular in shape, 320 by 400 feet. They
were composed of lots that measured 25 feet by 150 feet. (see Exhibit 3).
In 1911, when Exeter incorporated, the city had already shifted the orientation of its
newer streets to north/south and east/west alignments. This reorientation created
numerous triangular-shaped blocks where the two street patterns joined. Today, many
of these blocks are used either as park or church sites.
An early land use survey, November 4, 1904, indicated the following uses were
operating in town - three hotels, two livery stables, two churches, two restaurants, four
blacksmith shops, two saloons, two railroads, two packing houses, six retail stores, a
harness shop, a bank, an elegant barber shop and one “wide-awake” newspaper.
Crops being grown around Exeter included Emperor grapes, citrus and dry-land wheat
and barley.
Exeter’s land use patterns and appearance were forged by three seemingly unrelated
forces - railroads, agriculture and building materials. Exeter’s past, present and future
land use patterns will be dictated by railroads. Exeter’s first railroad, Southern Pacific,
traversed the city in a northwest/southeast alignment. This manmade feature
essentially divided the city in half. In 1905, the Visalia Electric Railroad began operation.
This railroad connected Exeter to Visalia to the west and Lemon Cove to the northeast.
This railroad, which runs from the SP Railroad to the east towards the foothills, has
limited development in the northeast quadrant of town. The Sante Fe Railroad was
constructed in 1914. The Sante Fe line formed the eastern border of urbanized Exeter.
Except for the development of agriculturally-related industries (packing houses, cold
                                        Land Use Element
                                                7

                       Exeter General Plan
                                 2000 to 2020
storage) along the track, development has not occurred east of this railroad.
Oranges drive the economy in Exeter. First planted in 1896 by George Frost, the citrus
industry today (oranges, lemons, grapefruit, tangerines) dominates the visual and
economic landscape. Citrus is the dominate crop around Exeter and in fact lines both
sides of State Route 65 from State Highway 198 to the city limits. In terms of the
economy, as goes the citrus industry so goes the Exeter economy. Sectors of the
economy that are strongly dependent on the citrus industry include, trucking, packing,
cold storage, spraying, irrigating, processing, and marketing.
Bricks and granite were building materials that were mined in the Exeter area. The
Exeter brick yard produced brick that was used widely on buildings throughout Exeter
and the Rocky Point Granite Quarry provided material for most of the curbs in
downtown Exeter and many of its buildings. Today, the brick yard, which is located
north of Exeter, is used as a storm drainage retention basin.
Existing Land Use Patterns
Exeter is a compact community occupying approximately two square miles of land and
containing a population of 9,168 (Jan. 1, 2000). The urban growth has extended in all
directions from the original 1888 townsite. Exeter’s downtown and its older residential
neighborhoods are contained within a triangular area that is formed by the SP Railroad
on the west, the Visalia Electric Railroad on the north and State Route 65 (Kaweah
Avenue) on the east.         The city’s industrial districts, which are dominated by
agriculturally-related uses such as packing houses and cold-storage facilities, are located
along the Southern Pacific Railroad, the A.T. & S.F. Railroad, and Industrial Drive,
located immediately south of the original townsite.
Single family residential development has occurred in all quadrants of the city, with
most of this type of development occurring on the west side of town since 1990.
Development of multiple family residential development has been limited. Scattered
corner lots in the original townsite have been developed with duplexes and triplexes
and a cul-de-sac street in the southeast quadrant of town was developed with 11 duplex
units. The most recent multiple family developments included a 45-unit complex at the
northeast corner of Visalia Road and Jacobs Place and an 18-unit complex at the
northeast corner of F Street and Palm Avenue. These units provided housing
opportunities for low- to moderate-income families in the community.
Commercial development is centered in the downtown and to a lesser extent, along
Visalia Road and Kaweah Avenue (State Route 65). Recent developments include fast-
food franchises on Visalia Road, an office complex on north Kaweah Avenue, a Best
                                      Land Use Element
                                             8

                        Exeter General Plan
                                  2000 to 2020
Western Hotel on south Kaweah Avenue, and numerous remodels of retail space in the
downtown.
Schools and parks are scattered throughout the community, locating in neighborhoods
that are experiencing a demand for these types of public facilities. An elementary
school was constructed on Sequoia Drive in the northeast quadrant of the city and the
school district recently purchased a future elementary school site in the southwest
quadrant.
Table 1 provides a breakdown by acreage of the land uses within the city limits as of
January 1, 2000. Exhibit No. 4 illustrates the arrangement of land uses within the city as
of this date.
                                        Table No. 1
                                      Existing Land Use
              Land Use Category                               City Limits
              Residential
              single family residential                       460.68 ac.
              two-family residential                            5.11
              multi-family residential                         12.67
              mobile home/trailer parks                        23.50
              Commercial
              central commercial                               17.21
              general commercial                               23.19
              office commercial                                 4.80
                                        Land Use Element
                                               9
                         Exeter General Plan
                                   2000 to 2020
              service commercial                              14.80
              Industrial                                      63.53
              Public
              Exeter City Hall/Fire Department                  .87
              Exeter Police building                            .31
              Exeter Recreation building                        .50
              Exeter Memorial District                         5.41
              Exeter Memorial Hospital                         4.34
              Exeter Waste Water Treatment Plant              30.00
              Churches                                         8.50
              Open Space
              parks                                           37.00
              golf course                                     20.66
              brick yard                                       7.15
              Schools                                         43.08
              Vacant and Agriculture Land                    215.90
              Rights-of-way (streets and railroads)          321.00
              TOTAL                                          1320 acres
Residential Development Trends
In 1990, the Exeter City Council approved Annexation Policy 90-01. This action
established an acreage threshold upon which future annexations would be reviewed.
The policy stated:
       “The City of Exeter will not initiate, entertain, encourage or support the
       annexation of land to the City until such time the amount of undeveloped land,
       zoned for single-family residential uses, falls below 23 acres, 92 single family
       lots.”
On February 14, 1995, the Exeter City Council strengthened the city’s annexation policy
by amending its Urban Area Boundary Element with the addition of a 10-year
annexation line. The amount of land contained within the 10-year annexation line was
based on an annual population growth rate of 3.5 percent, a residential density of 5
                                         Land Use Element
                                                10

                        Exeter General Plan
                                 2000 to 2020
units per acre, and a dwelling unit population of 2.87 persons per unit. The total
amount of land inside the 10-year annexation line was 303 acres.                This line
accommodates residential development in all four quadrants of the city - 139 acres in
the northwest, 66 acres in the southwest, 39 acres in the southeast and 59 acres in the
northeast.
The 10-year annexation line and Annexation Policy 90-01 have placed restrictive
controls on residential growth in Exeter. The objective of these two growth control
measures is to promote residential infill development. Since 1995, these growth control
measures have encouraged residential infill and a development pattern that is
generally contiguous to existing development and concentric to Exeter’s downtown.
Residential infill has been the most obvious result of these two growth measures.
Figure No. 1 details the trends in lot development since the adoption of these two
growth control measures. Obviously, the number of lots that has been developed (in-
filled) has increased from 21 in 1991 to 434 in 2000. The number of vacant lots (available
for a residential dwelling units) have increased and decreased depending upon market
activity. The number of lots available at any one time for home construction has been
sufficient enough to insure that the cost of lots remain affordable.
                                      Figure No. 1
                                  Lot Trends in Exeter
                                      Land Use Element
                                              11

                        Exeter General Plan
                                  2000 to 2020
                                       Residential Lot Trends
       500                                                                      Dev. Lots
     N
                                                                                Vacant Lots
     u
     m 400                                                                      Tent. Map Lots
     b
     e
     r 300
     o
     f 200
     L
     o 100
     t
     s
          0
              1991 1992   1993  1994  1995 1996 1997       1998 1999 2000
                                        Years
This “infill” process has been beneficial for the city in that it better utilizes existing city
infrastructure; it maintains a tight service area for police, fire and solid waste services;
and it encourages residential development near existing parks and schools.
Table No. 2 shows the status of residential subdivisions that have been processed since
1990. Some, like Awbrey Estates, have been built-out while others, such as the Bitterlan
Subdivision, are still in the tentative map stage.
                                         Table No. 2
                                     Subdivision Status
Subdivision Tract         Developed Lots           Vacant lots       Tent. Map Lots
                                        Land Use Element
                                                  12

                          Exeter General Plan
                                     2000 to 2020
Country View                23                   19
Camden Place                39                   0
Pheasant Run                54                   0
Quince Park Estates         64                   0
Woodland Estates            59                   32               13
Cosart IV                   21                   3                31
Johnson Land Manor          20                   0
Awbrey Estates              10                   0
Bitterlan Subdivision        0                   0                105
Atkinson Subd               23                   27               0
Wild Rose Estates           79                   0
Hamar Subd.                 42                   30               75
TOTAL                       434 lots             111 lots         224 lots
Collins & Schoettler, January 1, 2001
Since 1990, Exeter has been averaging 45 new single family and 7 multiple family
residential units per year. This residential development activity has fostered a
population growth rate that has been slow - averaging about 1.9 percent annually. At
this pace, Exeter’s pool of single family residential lots will last about 9.5 years.
Population
Except for the “dust bowl” decades, from 1920 to 1940, where the average annual
growth rate was about 4.5 percent, Exeter’s population growth from decade to decade
has been slow. In fact, from 1940 to 1970, the community grew by only 592 persons,
about 20 persons per year. It wasn’t until the 1970s that Exeter began to grow at any
appreciable rate, exceeding 2 percent per year. During the 1990s, Exeter has grown at
an average annual rate of 1.88 percent per year. A graphic look at Exeter’s population
changes since 1920 is provided in Figure No. 2.
                                         Figure No. 2
                                      Population Growth
                                         Land Use Element
                                                13

                      Exeter General Plan
                               2000 to 2020
             10000                                               population
              9000
          p   8000
          o
          p   7000
          u   6000
           l  5000
          a
          t   4000
           i  3000
          o   2000
          n
              1000
                 0
                    1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
                                       years
Population and Land Use Projections
Population Projections
In order to determine the amount of land needed for urban development in Exeter
                                     Land Use Element
                                            14
                        Exeter General Plan
                                   2000 to 2020
over the next 20 years, 2000 to 2020, population projections are required. Two
population projection scenarios (low and high) are provided in the Plan. These
population figures are projections from the base year of 2000, provided by the U.S.
Census Bureau. The Plan’s "low" population projection is based on Exeter’s average
annual growth rate from 1990 to 2000 (1.88 percent) based on State Department of
Finance; its "high" population projection is based on Exeter’s average annual growth
rate from 1980 to 1990 (2.88 percent) based on the U.S. Census Bureau.
                                         Table No. 2
                                  Population Projections
                                                     2000             2010          2020
Low Population Projection (1.88 %)                   9,168            11,044        13,306
High Population Projection (2.88 %)                  9,168            12,178        16,177
Source: U.S. Census Bureau; State Department of Finance; Collins & Schoettler, 2000
Land Use Projections
Projections for different types of urban development for the years 2010 and 2020 are
based on the population projections above and other types of demographic data,
including persons per dwelling unit, acres of parkland per 1000 persons, residential
densities, size of school sites, etc. Land demand projections are furnished in 10-year
increments in order to be consistent with the city’s current planning boundary lines -
10-year annexation line and urban development boundary line (20-year growth line).
Residential Land Demand
Residential land demand projections (low and high) for the years 2010 and 2020 are
calculated below. Residential uses include single and multi-family dwellings and mobile
homes, including trailers. Criteria for the location and demand for this type of land use
are as follows:
       • The number of persons per residential dwelling unit will be 2.89 persons (State
       Department of Finance, 1998).
                                         Land Use Element
                                                 15

                        Exeter General Plan
                                 2000 to 2020
       • Seventy-five percent of the new residential dwelling units will be single family
       units, 18 percent multi-family units, and 6.75 percent mobile home units (State
       Department of Finance, 1998).
       • Single family developments will have a gross density of 4.5 units per acre;
       multi-family development, 15 units per acre; and mobile homes, 9 units per acre.
       (Collins & Schoettler, 1998 Land Use Survey).
       • The residential land demand projections for 2010 and 2020 will be increased by
       25 percent (flex-factor) so as to insure that the local residential real estate market
       does not become overly restricted thereby artificially forcing up residential land
       prices.
Residential Land Demand, Low Population Estimate, 2010
11,044 (2010 estimated population) - 9,168 (2000 population) = 1,876 persons
1,876 persons / 2.89 persons per residential unit = 649 residential units
649 residential units x 75 percent single family units =         487 units
649 residential units x 18 percent multi- family units =         117 units
649 residential units x 6.75 percent mobile home units =          44 units
487 single family residential units /4.5 units per acre =          108 acres
117 multi-family residential units / 15 units per acre =              8 acres
 44 mobile home units / 8 units per acre =                          5.5 acres
subtotal                                                         121.5 acres
121.5 acres x 1.25 (flex-factor)                                 152 acres
Residential Land Demand, Low Population Estimate, 2020
13,306 (2020 estimated population) - 9,168 (2000 population) = 4,138 persons
4,138 persons / 2.89 persons per residential unit = 1,432 units
1,432 residential units x 75 percent single family units =       1,074 units
1,432 residential units x 18 percent multi- family units =         258 units
1,432 residential units x 6.75 percent mobile home units =       97 units
1,074 single family residential units / 4.5 units per acre =      239 acres
  258 multi-family residential units / 15 units per acre =          17 acres
   97 mobile home units / 8 units per acre =                       12 acres
                                       Land Use Element
                                              16

                        Exeter General Plan
                                 2000 to 2020
subtotal                                                        268 acres
268 acres x 1.25 (flex-factor)                                  335 acres
Residential Land Demand, High Population Estimate, 2010
12,178 (2010 estimated population) - 9,168 (2000 population) = 3,010 persons
3,010 persons / 2.89 persons per residential unit = 1042 residential units
1042 residential units x 75 percent single family units =      781 units
1042 residential units x 18 percent multi- family units =      188 units
1042 residential units x 6.75 percent mobile home units = 70 units
781 single family residential units / 4.5 units per acre =     174 acres
188 multi-family residential units / 15 units per acre =         13 acres
 70 mobile home units / 8 units per acre =                        9 acres
subtotal                                                       196 acres
196 acres x 1.25 (flex-factor)                                 245 acres
Residential Land Demand, High Population Estimate, 2020
16,177 (2020 estimated population) - 9,168 (2000 population) = 7,009 persons
7,009 persons / 2.89 persons per residential unit = 2,425 residential units
2,425 residential units x 75 percent single family units =     1,819 units
2,425 residential units x 18 percent multi- family units =       437 units
2,425 residential units x 6.75 percent mobile home units = 164 units
1,819 single family residential units / 4.5 units per acre =   404 acres
  437 multi-family residential units / 15 units per acre =       29 acres
  164 mobile home units / 8 units per acre =                     21 acres
subtotal                                                       454 acres
454 acres x 1.25 (flex-factor)                                 568 acres
                                       Land Use Element
                                              17
                        Exeter General Plan
                                2000 to 2020
These residential land demand projections indicate that Exeter will need between 152
and 245 acres of land for residential development by 2010 and between 335 and 568
acres by 2020. As previously mentioned, these acreage projections are based on
specific variables, including population growth rates, residential density, persons per
dwelling unit, land demand flex-factor, and residential composition. A modification of
any one variable can cause the above land projections to decrease or increase. For
example, if Exeter were to require single family residential development to meet a
density of five units per acre rather than the proposed 4.5 units per acre, the demand
for residential land for the year 2020 would be lower, ranging from 305 to 517 acres
rather than the proposed 335 to 568 acres.
                                     Land Use Element
                                            18
                        Exeter General Plan
                                 2000 to 2020
Office/Retail Commercial Land Demand
Projections (low and high) for office/retail commercial land for the years 2010 and 2020
are calculated below. Office/retail commercial uses will generally include professional
and administrative uses and businesses that retail goods. Criteria for the location and
demand for these types of land uses are as follows:
       • Retail commercial/office uses will generally be restricted to lands along Visalia
       Road and Kaweah Avenue and in the downtown.
       • Retail commercial /office uses will continue to be intermixed.
       • A significant portion of the office demand in Exeter will be met by conversions
       of residential structures into offices.
       • Retail commercial/office uses will replace service commercial and residential
       uses in Exeter’s Downtown as land values increase.
       • Existing retail commercial/office buildings are not operating at capacity. They
       have the ability to serve a significant number of additional clients and/or
       shoppers.
       • New retail commercial/office uses will generally be housed in one-story
       buildings although multi-story buildings no higher than three stories would be
       encouraged in the downtown.
       • There were 45 acres of retail commercial/office uses in Exeter as of 1-1- 2000.
Retail/Office Land Demand, Low Population Estimate, 2010
9,168 (2000 population)/45 acres of retail/office (2000) = 1 acre retail/office per 204
persons
11,044 (2010 estimated population)/1 acre of retail/office per 204 persons = 54 acres
retail/office needed
54 acres retail/office needed - 45 acres of existing retail/office = 9 acres retail/office
needed by 2010
Retail/Office Land Demand, High Population Estimate, 2010
                                       Land Use Element
                                               19

                       Exeter General Plan
                               2000 to 2020
9,168 (2000 population)/45 acres of retail/office (2000) = 1 acre retail/office per 204
persons
12,178 (2010 estimated population)/1 acre of retail/office per 204 persons = 60 acres
retail/office needed
60 acres retail/office needed - 45 acres of existing retail/office = 15 acres retail/office
needed by 2010
Retail/Office Land Demand, Low Population Estimate, 2020
9,168 (2000 population)/45 acres of retail/office (2000) = 1 acre retail/office per 204
persons
13,306 (2020 estimated population)/1 acre of retail/office per 204 persons = 65 acres
retail/office needed
65 acres retail/office needed - 45 acres of existing retail/office = 20 acres retail/office
needed by 2020
Retail/Office Land Demand, High Population Estimate, 2020
9,168 (2000 population)/45 acres of retail/office (2000) = 1 acre retail/office per 204
persons
16,177 (2020 estimated population)/1 acre of retail/office per 204 persons = 79 acres
retail/office needed
79 acres retail/office needed - 45 acres of existing retail/office = 34 acres retail/office
needed by 2020
Service Commercial Land Demand
Projections (low and high) for service commercial land for the years 2010 and 2020 are
calculated below. Service commercial uses generally involve repair, maintenance and
overhaul of equipment and vehicles, light manufacturing operations, storage and
                                     Land Use Element
                                            20
                        Exeter General Plan
                                 2000 to 2020
warehousing, and service uses, like rug cleaning, auto painting, tire and muffler shops,
etc. Criteria for the location and demand for these types of land uses are as follows:
       • The service commercial sector (commercial services like automobile repair,
       warehousing, and light manufacturing) of the economy will grow faster than the
       retail/office and industrial sectors.
       • Service commercial uses do not require the high visibility that office/retail
       commercial uses require.
       • Existing service commercial uses are not operating at capacity and can serve
       additional clients.
       • Service commercial uses will generally be restricted to lands along Industrial
       Drive, First Street, Second Street, Third Street, and on selected parcels west of the
       Southern Pacific Railroad south of Pine Street.
       • There were 15 acres of service commercial uses in Exeter as of 1-1- 2000.
Service Commercial Land Demand, Low Population Estimate, 2010
9,168 (2000 population)/15 acres of service commercial (2000) = 1 acre service
commercial per 611 persons
11,044 (2010 estimated population)/1 acre of service commercial per 611 persons = 18
acres service commercial needed
18 acres service commercial needed - 15 acres of existing service commercial = 3 acres
service commercial needed by 2010
Service Commercial Land Demand, High Population Estimate, 2010
9,168 (2000 population)/15 acres of service commercial (2000) = 1 acre service
commercial per 611 persons
12,178 (2010 estimated population)/1 acre of service commercial per 611 persons = 20
acres service commercial needed
20 acres service commercial needed - 15 acres of existing service commercial = 5 acres
                                       Land Use Element
                                              21

                      Exeter General Plan
                              2000 to 2020
service commercial needed by 2010
Service Commercial Land Demand, Low Population Estimate, 2020
9,168 (2000 population)/15 acres of service commercial (2000) = 1 acre service
commercial per 611 persons
13,306 (2020 estimated population)/1 acre of service commercial per 611 persons = 22
acres service commercial needed
22 acres service commercial needed - 15 acres of existing service commercial = 7 acres
service commercial needed by 2020
Service Commercial Land Demand, High Population Estimate, 2020
9,168 (2000 population)/15 acres of service commercial (2000) = 1 acre service
commercial per 611 persons
16,177 (2020 estimated population)/1 acre of service commercial per 611 persons = 26
acres service commercial needed
26 acres service commercial needed - 15 acres of existing retail/office = 11 acres service
commercial needed by 2020
General Industrial Land Demand
Projections (low and high) for general industrial land for the years 2010 and 2020 are
calculated below. Industrial uses generally involves manufacturing, food processing
and storage, transportation operations, and warehousing. Criteria for the location and
demand for these types of land uses are as follows:
       • Industrial uses will generally be restricted to lands on both sides of the
       Southern Pacific and Sante Fe Railroads, along Industrial Drive, and along the
       west side of Kaweah Avenue south of Firebaugh Avenue.
       • The general industrial sector will include the following typical industrial uses:
                                    Land Use Element
                                            22

                       Exeter General Plan
                                2000 to 2020
       packing houses, manufacturing plants, cold storage facilities, food processing
       plants, and metal fabrication operations.
       • General industrial uses do not require high visibility, however, they do require
       effective roadway and railroad access.
       • Existing general industrial uses are not operating at capacity. They have the
       ability to expand production internally
       • A significant amount of vacant, industrially zoned land, can be accommodated
       along the Southern Pacific Railroad.
       • There were 64 acres of general industrial uses in Exeter as of 1-1- 2000.
General industrial land demand, low population estimate, 2010
9,168 (2000 population)/64 acres of general industrial (2000) = 1 acre general industrial
per 143 persons
11,044 (2010 estimated population)/1 acre of general industrial per 143 persons = 77
acres general industrial needed
77 acres general commercial needed - 64 acres of existing general industrial = 13 acres
general industrial needed by 2010
General industrial land demand, high population estimate, 2010
9,168 (2000 population)/64 acres of general industrial (2000) = 1 acre general industrial
per 143 persons
12,178 (2010 estimated population)/1 acre of general industrial per 143 persons = 85
acres general industrial needed
85 acres general commercial needed - 64 acres of existing general industrial = 21 acres
general industrial needed by 2010
General industrial land demand, low population estimate, 2020
9,168 (2000 population)/64 acres of general industrial (2000) = 1 acre general industrial
per 143 persons
                                     Land Use Element
                                            23

                       Exeter General Plan
                                2000 to 2020
13,306 (2020 estimated population)/1 acre of general industrial per 143 persons = 93
acres general industrial needed
93 acres general commercial needed - 64 acres of existing general industrial = 29 acres
general industrial needed by 2020
General industrial land demand, high population estimate, 2020
9,168 (2000 population)/64 acres of general industrial (2000) = 1 acre general industrial
per 135 persons
16,177 (2020 estimated population)/1 acre of general industrial per 143 persons = 113
acres general industrial needed
113 acres general commercial needed - 64 acres of existing general industrial = 49 acres
general industrial needed by 2020
Park Land Demand
Park land demand projections (low and high) for the years 2010 and 2020 are calculated
below. Parks uses include open space, sport and recreation facilities, and water
features. Criteria for the location and demand for this type of land use are as follows:
       • The City of Exeter has set a standard through its Conservation, Open Space,
       Parks and Recreation Element of 5 acres of parkland for every 1000 persons in
       Exeter.
       • The open space associated with school grounds and golf courses, and single
       use storm drainage ponds will not be counted as park land.
       • The City of Exeter currently has 37 acres of passive and active parkland. This
       figure does not include “future” designated park sites.
       • The City of Exeter’s current parkland ratio is 4.04 acres of parkland for every
       1000 persons
                                     Land Use Element
                                            24

                      Exeter General Plan
                               2000 to 2020
Park land demand, low population projection, 2010
Five acres of parkland per 1000 persons or 1 acre of parkland per 200 persons
10,376 (2010 estimated population)/1 acre of parkland per 200 persons = 52 acres of
parkland
52 acres of parkland needed - 37 acres of existing parkland = 15 acres of parkland
needed by 2010
Park land demand, high population projection, 2010
Five acres of parkland per 1000 persons or 1 acre of parkland per 200 persons
12,178 (2010 estimated population)/1 acre of parkland per 200 persons = 61 acres of
parkland
61 acres of parkland needed - 37 acres of existing parkland = 24 acres of parkland
needed by 2010
Park land demand, low population projection, 2020
Five acres of parkland per 1000 persons or 1 acre of parkland per 200 persons
13,306 (2020 estimated population)/1 acre of parkland per 200 persons = 67 acres of
parkland
67 acres of parkland needed - 37 acres of existing parkland = 30 acres of parkland
needed by 2020
Park land demand, high population projection, 2020
Five acres of parkland per 1000 persons or 1 acre of parkland per 200 persons
16,177 (2020 estimated population)/1 acre of parkland per 200 persons = 81 acres of
parkland
81 acres of parkland needed - 37 acres of existing parkland = 44 acres of parkland
                                    Land Use Element
                                           25
                       Exeter General Plan
                                2000 to 2020
needed by 2020
School Land Demand
School land demand projections for the years 2010 and 2020 are calculated below. The
high population projection for 2010 and 2020 was used because it is in the best interest
of the school districts and the students they serve to identify, purchase and construct
schools before the existing schools are impacted with too many students. Using the
higher population projection will achieve this objective. Criteria for the location and
demand for this type of land use are as follows:
       • The Exeter Union School and Exeter High School Districts have set acreage
       figures for the following types of schools: elementary school, 10 to 20 acres;
       middle school, 15 to 25 acres; and high school, 40 acres or more.
       • The Exeter Union School and Exeter High School Districts have set enrollment
       figures for the following types of schools: elementary school, 600 to 700
       students; middle school, 750 to 900 students; and high school, 1000 to 2000
       students.
       • Elementary school sites should be located within walking distance of the
       neighborhoods they are to serve; all sections of Exeter should be effectively
       served by elementary schools.
       • Middle school sites should be located within walking distance of the
       neighborhoods they are to serve; all sections of Exeter should be effectively
       served.
                                      Land Use Element
                                             26

                          Exeter General Plan
                                   2000 to 2020
        • For the 2000/01 school year, Exeter’s school districts documented the
        following enrollments: Lincoln Elementary (K-2), 579 students; Rocky Hill
        Elementary (3-5), 652 students; Wilson Middle School (6-8), 669 students; Exeter
        High School (9-12), 974 students; Kaweah High School, 61 students; and Exeter
        High School independent study, 26 students.
        • The Exeter Union School District purchased in 1997 a 22.5 acre parcel of land
        for a future elementary or middle school site. The property is located on the
        west side of Belmont Road and south of Visalia Road.
        • For the 2000/01 school year, Exeter Schools had the following student
        enrollments. Elementary enrollment (K-6), 1454 students; middle school
        enrollment (7-8), 446 students; and high school enrollment (9-12), 974 students.
        • The percentage of school enrollment to the Exeter 2000 population is
        expressed as follows: K-6 grades - 1454 students/9,168 population or 15.9
        percent; 7-8 grades - 446 students/9,168 population or 4.9 percent; and 9-12
        grades - 974 students/9,168 population or 10.6 percent.
School land demand, high population projection, 2010
K-6
12,178 (2010 population, high estimate) x .159 = 1936 students/ 650 students per school
site = 3 elementary school sites needed by 2010
3 sites - 2 current sites (Lincoln and Rocky Hill) = 1 site needed by 2010
7-8
12,178 (2010 population, high estimate) x .049 = 597 students/ 825 students per school
site = .72 middle school sites needed by 2010
.72 sites - 1 current site (Wilson) = 0 sites needed by 2010
9-12
12,178 (2010 population, high estimate) x .106 = 1291 students/ 1500 students per school
site = 1.03 high school sites needed by 2010
                                         Land Use Element
                                                27

                          Exeter General Plan
                                   2000 to 2020
.86 sites - 1 current site (Exeter H.S.) = 0 sites needed by 2010
School land demand, high population projection, 2020
K-6
16,177 (2020 population, high estimate) x .159 = 2572 students/ 650 students per school
site = 4 elementary school sites needed by 2020
4 sites - 2 current sites (Lincoln and Rocky Hill) = 2 elementary sites needed by 2020
7-8
16,177 (2020 population, high estimate) x .049 = 793 students/ 825 students per school
site = .92 middle school sites needed by 2020
.96 sites - 1 current site (Wilson) = 0 sites needed by 2020
9-12
16,177 (2020 population, high estimate) x .106 = 1714 students/ 1500 students per school
site = 1.18 high school sites needed by 2020
1.14 sites - 1 current site (Exeter H.S.) =1 high school site needed by 2020 (or expand
existing high school campus to accommodate 1714 students)
                                         Land Use Element
                                                 28
                       Exeter General Plan
                                2000 to 2020
Total Land Demand Projections
Table No. 3 provides the land demand projections for the Land Use Element for the
years 2010 and 2020. The actual acreage figures for each land use category depicted on
the land use map generally fall within the ranges detailed below. Other planning
considerations, such as access, land use compatibility, infrastructure availability and
aesthetics, also influence the amount of acreage depicted on the land use map for each
land use category.
                                      Table No. 3
                             Land Demand Projections
Land Use Category                        2010                        2020
                                  Low            High        Low            High
Residential                       152 acres      245 acres   335 acres      568 acres
                                    9             15          20             34
Service Commercial                  3              5            7            11
General Industrial                 13             21          29             49
Park Land                          15             24          30             44
School Land
   K-6                                           10-20 acres                10-20 acres
   7-8
   9-12                                                                        40 acres
Total                             192 acres      320-330 ac. 421 acres      716-726 ac.
Total without flex-factor*        162 acres      271-281 ac. 354 acres      632-642 ac.
* Note: These land demand acreage figures are potentially the actual amount of land
that will be urbanized over the 20-year planning period. It will be these acreage figures
that are discussed and analyzed in the general plan environmental impact report.
                                     Land Use Element
                                            29
