LAND USE ELEMENT
ELEMENT DESCRIPTION FOR HOMEPAGE:
The Land Use Element regulates the growth of the community in order to achieve a balanced and orderly
pattern of development. It promotes a stable and livable environment by preserving existing residential
neighborhoods, while ensuring compatibility in the development of new residential and non-residential land-
uses for citizens to live and work locally and access commercial and recreational opportunities. Through a
mix of well-designed and complementary land uses centered around public transit, the land use element
promotes the viability of modes of travel other than the car, which is necessary for Upland to meet specific
greenhouse gas emissions targets, and for ensuring a high quality of life for our existing and future citizens.
Land Use Designations
This section describes the General Plan land use designations for the City of Upland, as shown in Figure LU-
1. The boundaries of the land use designations are delineated as specifically as possible, in most cases
following parcel lines. The land use designations are intended to help implement the future vision of Upland,
as reflected in the goals and policies of this General Plan, while also providing flexibility for landowners.
The land use designations establish the types and intensity or density of uses allowed on each parcel; these
densities and intensities are summarized in Table LU-1. The land use designations establish minimum and
maximum allowable gross densities. New development must fall within the density range established by the
land use designation for a given area or parcel. However, the land use designations contained in the General
Plan are more general in nature than the Zoning Code. The Zoning Code may contain several zones that are
consistent with one land use designation. For example, the SFR-L (0-4 du/ac) designation will encompass
the more specific residential zones that permit 0-2 and 2-4 du/ac.
Figure LU-1 Land Use Plan
Table LU-1 General Plan Land Use Designations
                                               Density             Floor Area Ratio
          Land Use Designation                 (du/ac)                  (FAR)
          Residential
          Single-Family Low                        0-4                    --
          Single-Family Medium                    4-10                    --
          Mobile Home                            8-14                     --
          Multi-Family Low                       10-20                    --
          Multi-Family Medium                    20-30                    --
          Commercial
City of Upland General Plan                                                                             Page LU-1
         Neighborhood Commercial                 --                     0.5
         Highway Commercial                      --                     0.5
         Regional Commercial                     --                     0.5
         Office/Professional                     --                     0.5
         Industrial
         Light Industrial/Business Park          --                     0.5
         Industrial                              --                     0.5
         Gravel Mine                             --                      --
         Mixed-Use
         Business/Residential Mixed-Use         20                      0.5
         Commercial/Residential Mixed-Use       20                      1.0
         Commercial/Industrial Mixed-Use         --                     1.0
         Commercial/Office Mixed-Use                                    1.5
         Special/Institutional
         Institutional                           --                     -0.5
         Civic/Schools                           --                     -0.5
         Park/Open Space                         --                      --
         Public Utilities                        --                     -0.5
         Cable Airport                           --                      --
         Specific Plan
         Specific Plan                           --                      --
Residential Land Use Designations
The residential designations include six distinct designations of varying density. They permit certain non-
residential uses including places of worship, day care centers, schools, libraries, and recreational facilities.
Single-Family Low (SFR-L)
Intensity: 0-4 dwelling units per acre
The Single Family Low designation provides for the development of detached single-family units and
contributes to the preservation of existing single-family suburban residential neighborhoods. The permitted
density range is from zero up to 4 dwelling units per acre.
Page LU-2                                                                             City of Upland General Plan
Single-Family Medium (SFR-M)
Intensity: 4-10 dwelling units per acre
The Single-Family Medium designation is intended for new and existing single-family neighborhoods with
slightly higher densities than areas designated as Single-Family Low. This designation is implemented
primarily in older existing neighborhoods and in transition zones between lower-density residential uses and
higher-density commercial, industrial, and multi-family residential land uses. The permitted density range is
from 4 to 10 dwelling units per acre.
Mobile H ome (MH )
Intensity: 8-14 dwelling units per acre
The Mobile Home land use designation provides for the development of mobile home parks. The permitted
density range is from 8 to 14 dwelling units per acre.
Multi-Family Low (MFR-L)
Intensity: 10-20 dwelling units per acre
The Multi-Family Low designation supports vertical attached multi-family development (i.e., townhomes.)
The purpose of this land use designation is to support slightly more dense multi-family development. The
permitted density range is from 10 to 20 dwelling units per acre.
Multi-Family Medium (MFR-M)
Intensity: 20-30 dwelling units per acre
The Multi-Family Medium designation supports a variety of residential development types including vertical
and horizontal attached units (i.e., stacked flats, etc.) as well as detached products. This designation is typically
located on major corridors, near major commercial areas, and near transit stations and opportunities (i.e., bus
lines). The purpose of this land use designation is to provide for a relatively high density residential
environment. The permitted density range is from 20 to 30 dwelling units per acre.
Commercial Land Use Designations
There are four solely commercial land use designations in the Land Use Plan. The commercial designations
provide locations for a diverse array of local- and regional-serving commercial establishments in Upland.
Neighborhood Commercial (NC)
Intensity: 0.5 FAR
The Neighborhood Commercial designation is intended to provide appropriately located shopping centers
for daily shopping needs with a service radius of approximately 1 mile. These centers should be provided
throughout the City, generally on lots no greater than 5 acres. Typical uses within the Neighborhood
Commercial designation include supermarkets, drug stores and a variety of smaller shops.
Highway Commercial (H -C)
Intensity: 0.5 FAR
The Highway Commercial designation is intended to provide commercial uses for Upland residents’ daily and
occasional needs. It is applied only in existing major commercial areas. General commercial areas include a
wide variety of commercial, office, and restaurant uses oriented to retail trade and services.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                             Page LU-3

Regional Commercial (RC )
Intensity: 0.5 FAR
The Regional Commercial designation is intended for the development of regional shopping centers and
accompanying uses that are visible from a regional standpoint, such as near freeways and major arterials.
Typical uses include department stores, home furnishings and appliance stores, apparel stores, specialty retail
stores, and restaurants.
Office/Professional (OP )
Intensity: 0.5 FAR
While office uses are supported in all commercial designations, the Office/Professional designation provides
areas to be used predominantly for professional and administrative offices, supporting retail, and related uses.
Mixed office and commercial uses are supported as well.
Industrial Land Use Designations
Upland has three categories of industrial land uses to plan for the industrial economy in the City.
Light Industrial/Business Park (LI-BP)
Intensity: 0.5 FAR
The Light Industrial/Business Park designation is intended to accommodate office and industrial uses that
produce minimal traffic, noise, odors, or pollutants and generate employment opportunities in the City.
Supported land uses include light manufacturing, assembly, processing and office. The implementation of
design guidelines provided in this General Plan will ensure high-quality industrial and business park
developments.
Industrial (IN)
Intensity: 0.5 FAR
Areas designated as Industrial are designed for industrial or manufacturing uses located in College Heights.
Typical uses include light manufacturing and assembly, small scale warehousing and distribution, and research
and development. In addition, administrative offices supporting the primary industrial use of the property
may be permitted.
Gravel Mine (GM)
The Gravel Mine designation is intended for the lands used for gravel mining in the northern part of Upland.
Mixed-Use Designations
There are four mixed-use designations within the Land Use Plan. These designations are intended to foster
developments that provide a mix of related land uses within close proximity and walking distance in order to
encourage more walking and to reduce traffic and greenhouse gas emissions associated with driving. The
implementation of mixed-use development standards and design guidelines will ensure quality design and
compatibility of adjacent uses.
Commercial/Residential Mixed-Use (C/R-MU)
Intensity: 1.0 FAR/ Maximum 20 dwelling units per acre
Page LU-4                                                                           City of Upland General Plan
The Commercial/Residential land use designation supports a combination of retail, service commercial and
medium-density multi-family residential. The preference for land uses within this designation is to provide
integrated (i.e., horizontal) mixed-uses. The Commercial/Residential Mixed-Use designation is intended to
support the development of compact, walkable and pedestrian-oriented districts.
Business/Residential Mixed-Use (B/R-MU)
Intensity: 0.5 FAR/ Maximum 20 dwelling units per acre
The Business/Residential designation is intended for areas in which business and/or light industrial uses are
compatible with multi-family or single-family residential. Supported uses include light manufacturing,
assembly, processing, office, and multi-family and single-family residential.
Commercial/Office Mixed-Use (C/O-MU)
Intensity: FAR 1.5
The Commercial/Office Mixed-Use designation is intended to accommodate multi-story office buildings
along Foothill Boulevard near San Antonio Hospital, and along Mountain Avenue near the I-10 Freeway, to
support regional employment opportunities. Commercial uses are also supported within this designation, and
are expected to be integrated into the office complex.
Commercial/Industrial Mixed-Use (C/I-MU )
Intensity: 1.0 FAR
The Commercial/Industrial Mixed-Use designation is designed to accommodate a variety of industrial and
regional retail uses and to support commercial activities to satisfy a range of shopping needs for residents of
the community. It is also intended to encourage development of business in the City and to maximize the
potential for job generation. Uses supported under this category include commercial and industrial. Typical
industrial uses could include limited general industrial, manufacturing, assembly, warehousing, multi-tenant
industrial, research and development, and airport–related uses. Typical commercial uses include retail
commercial and durable sales goods, tourist-related commercial, entertainment, recreational uses,
administrative and professional offices, commercial activities, business support services, food and institutional
uses, as well as residential, subject to a reasonable minimum increment of land area as well as a special use
permit process.
Special/Institutional Designations
Institutional (I )
Intensity: 0.5 FAR
The Institutional designation is for large private institutions, including the hospital and churches.
Civic/Schools (C-S)
Intensity: 0.5 FAR
The Civic/Schools designation is for major public uses or institutions, including the Civic Center, schools,
and fire stations.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                           Page LU-5

Park/Open Space (P-OS)
Areas designated as Parks/Open Space are designed for green space. This designation encompasses active
and passive public parks of all sizes and other forms of open space, such as natural hillside areas and
retention basins. Residential, commercial, and industrial activities are not supported within the Park/Open
Space designation.
Public Utilities (PU )
Intensity: 0.5 FAR
The Public Utilities designation provides areas for landfills, flood control/recharge facilities and public
utilities including gas, electricity, and water.
Cable Airport (CA)
The Cable Airport designation is for the Cable Airport land.
Specific Plan (SP)
The Specific Plan designation is for the multiple special plan areas of the City, which have specific land use
designations and development standards. These specific plans include Historic Downtown Upland, the
Colonies, College Park, Foothill Walk, Foothill Benson Terrace, Wyeth Cove, Upland Crossing, College
Commerce Center, and Park View.
OVERARCHING GOAL:
Upland aspires to protect our residential neighborhoods and existing business community and encourage
new, balanced growth with a range of housing choices, diversified industry with high-quality employment
opportunities, a variety of retail and commercial businesses, and access to recreational and cultural
opportunities.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS SECTIONS:
•     A Viable Community
•     Stable and Livable Neighborhoods
•     High-Quality Non-Residential Uses
•     Feasible and Rational Land Use Patterns
•     Multi-Modal Mobility
•     Complementary Development
GENERAL PLAN FIGURES:
•     Land Use Plan (Figure LU-1)
Page LU-6                                                                         City of Upland General Plan

BACKGROUND DOCUMENTS:
•   Upland General Plan Existing Conditions Report: Land Use White Paper
Goal LU-1          A viable community with a mix of land uses and building types that offer a wide
                   range of choices to live, work, shop and participate in civic, cultural, open space,
                   and recreational opportunities.
Policies
Policy LU-1.1      Land Use Plan. Utilize and maintain the Land Use Plan (see Figure LU-1) to designate
                   the location and extent of each land use designation within the Planning Area.
Policy LU-1.2      Permitted Densities and Intensities. Ensure existing and future zoning designations
                   correspond to the permitted density and intensity ranges as listed in Table LU-1 of the
                   Land Use Element.
Policy LU-1.3      Strategic Growth. Concentrate growth in strategic locations that strengthens the City’s
                   economic base, offers new housing opportunities, maximizes available and planned
                   infrastructure, and fosters the development and use of transit and multi-modal
                   transportation. These areas include Historic Downtown Upland, Foothill Boulevard, the
                   Southeast Quadrant, College Heights, Mountain Avenue, along the Interstate 10
                   corridor, and in the 9th Street Industrial area.
Policy LU-1.4      Complete and Balanced Community. Foster new land uses and building types that
                   contribute to City revenues and increase employment while also ensuring the provision
                   of sufficient housing, shopping, civic, cultural,          open space, and recreational
                   opportunities.
Policy LU-1.5      Range of Housing Types and Densities. Provide high-quality housing in a range of
                   types, densities, and unit sizes that meets the housing needs of residents of all income
                   levels.
Policy LU-1.6      Jobs-Housing Match. Encourage new employment opportunities that match the range
                   of housing types to make it possible for people to live and work in Upland.
Goal LU-2          A community with stable and livable residential neighborhoods.
Policies
Policy LU-2.1      Low-Density Residential. Maintain low-density residential designations in existing
                   low-density residential areas, unless conversion to another use is provided for by the
                   land use plan and policies of this General Plan.
Policy LU-2.2      Historic Residential Districts. Ensure the protection of Upland’s nine designated
                   historic residential districts through active maintenance and upkeep of historic homes, as
                   well as adequate buffers and transitions to adjacent neighborhoods.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                        Page LU-7

Policy LU-2.3  Living Environment. Provide healthy, affordable and desirable living environments
               consistent with adopted code requirements that set forth the acceptable health and
               safety standards for the occupancy of housing.
Goal LU-3      A community with high-quality non-residential uses sufficient to serve the
               shopping, employment, and cultural needs of Upland residents and the region.
Policies
Policy LU-3.1  Economic Development. Retain and attract land uses that generate revenue to the
               City, provide employment for residents while balancing other community needs such as
               housing, parks and open space, and public facilities.
Policy LU-3.2  Economic Revitalization. Promote the development of vacant and underutilized
               parcels with higher intensity commercial and industrial land uses.
Policy LU-3.3  Commercial Attractions. Support the redevelopment and revitalization of certain
               commercial uses along Interstate 10 to create an attractive freeway frontage that draws
               people into Upland.
Policy LU-3.4  Design of Commercial Centers. Discourage new “strip” commercial development and
               encourage site design for new commercial projects that enhances the pedestrian
               environment through proper building design, orientation and scale.
Policy LU-3.5  Commercial Revitalization. Encourage the revitalization of aging commercial centers
               to improve the tax base and provide improved commercial services for the community.
Policy LU-3.6  Adaptive Reuse. Encourage the adaptive reuse of historic buildings in non-residential
               land use designations and zones as an alternative to demolition.
Policy LU-3.7  Industrial Uses. Maintain sufficient amounts of industrial land and uses in appropriate
               parts of the City to encourage the retention and expansion of the City’s employment
               base.
Policy LU-3.8  9th Street Industrial. Support the continuation of mixed residential and industrial uses
               located along 9th Street between Central and San Antonio Avenues.
Policy LU-3.9  Cable Airport. Ensure land uses surrounding Cable Airport comply with the policies
               and restrictions of the Cable Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan.
Policy LU-3.10 Ontario International Airport. Ensure land uses in Upland affected by Ontario
               International Airport comply with the policies and restrictions of the Ontario
               International Airport Land Use Compatibility Plan.
Policy LU-3.11 Gravel Mining. Ensure that gravel mining operations do not impact new development
               by ensuring their compliance with regulatory documents and adequate buffering
               between dissimilar uses.
Policy LU-3.12 Inter-Jurisdictional Coordination. Maintain an ongoing liaison with Caltrans, Public
               Utilities Commission, the railroads and other agencies to help minimize impacts and
               improve the operations and aesthetics of their facilities.
Page LU-8                                                                   City of Upland General Plan

Goal LU-4          A community whose land use patterns focus growth in ways that are supportable
                   and environmentally responsible, including the implementation of smart growth
                   practices and the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions consistent with
                   Assembly Bill (AB) 32, Senate Bill (SB) 375, the Regional Transportation Plan
                   and Sustainable Community Strategy.
Policies
Policy LU-4.1      Infill Development. Encourage mixed-use, infill development on brownfields or
                   underutilized parcels, particularly near public transit and within the historic downtown.
Policy LU-4.2      Balance Commercial and Residential Development. Strive to balance commercial
                   and residential development within the City to provide services for residents and a
                   supportive local clientele for businesses.
Policy LU-4.3      Jobs Housing Balance. Encourage a balance between jobs, workforce skills, and
                   housing supply.
Policy LU-4.4      Incentives. Work to identify and support financial and administrative incentives (i.e.,
                   fee reductions) to encourage desired land uses, development patterns, and alternative
                   modes of transportation that reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Policy LU-4.5      Infrastructure Improvements. Preserve and maintain the City’s infrastructure and give
                   preference to infrastructure improvements that support or enhance desired land uses
                   and projects.
Goal LU-5          A community that facilitates options for the use of cars, walking, biking, and the
                   use of public transportation.
Policies
Policy LU-5.1      Complementary Uses. Encourage the development of complementary land uses such
                   as grocery stores, basic commercial services, parks and recreational fields, and schools in
                   close proximity to residential uses.
Policy LU-5.2      Mixed-Use Development. Along major arterials such as Foothill Boulevard, provide
                   opportunities for residential, commercial and employment uses to occupy the same site
                   in mixed-use configurations, and regulate mixed-use development to ensure high-quality
                   development and protection of the occupants.
Policy LU-5.3      Transit Zones. Support transit zones around existing and planned transit stations
                   where transit-oriented development should be facilitated.
Policy LU-5.4      Transit-Oriented Development. Support the development of multi-family residential
                   and mixed-use projects around transit stations by allowing a reduction in the parking
                   requirements or other development standards.
Policy LU-5.5      Pedestrian Safety. Encourage the creation of safe, walkable environments that include
                   elements such as wide, smooth sidewalks, good lighting, safe crosswalks, clear signage,
                   curb bulb-outs, curb cuts, street furniture, trees and traffic-calming measures which
City of Upland General Plan                                                                          Page LU-9

              allow people of all ages and abilities to exercise and safely access public transportation,
              community centers, schools and goods and services.
Goal LU-6     A community that encourages complementary development and maintenance of
              existing development.
Policies
Policy LU-6.1 Quality Development. Ensure that development is attractive and promotes harmony
              in the visual relationships and transitions between newer and older buildings.
Policy LU-6.2 Compatibility of Uses. Control the location, concentration and operations of land uses
              that have potential impacts on surrounding development through effective design
              principles, adequate buffering, and enforcement of regulatory documents.
Policy LU-6.3 Regulation of Nuisances and Code Violations. Prevent and address nuisances and
              code violations through educational efforts and enforcement of regulatory documents.
Policy LU-6.4 Hazardous Uses. Carefully review the development of industrial and similar uses that
              use, store, produce or transport toxic substances, air emissions, other pollutants or
              hazardous materials to ensure they are appropriately located and operated to minimize
              impacts to adjacent development.
Page LU-10                                                                  City of Upland General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CITY OF UPLAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GENERAL PLAN                          UPDATE
Map Date: 9/14/15
                                                                                                                                                                    26th Street
                                                                                                                                             Mountain Ave
                                                                                                                                                                     25th Street
                                                                                                     Burt Street
                                                                                                                   25th Street
                                                                                                                                                                     24th Street
                                                                                                                                                    R                                                                                        EE
                                                                                                                                                                     23rd Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Campus Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                   22nd Street
                                                                                                            A           ve
                                                                                                       Mildura                                                         21st Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EE
                                                                                                                                                                       20th Street
                                                Los
                                              San
                                                    A ng
                                                  Bern
                                                        eles
                                                             C
                                                                                                                                                            §
                                                                                                                                                            ¦
                                                                                                                                                            ¨210
                                                                                                                                                                      19th Street                                          EE
                                                       ardin ounty
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                            o Co
                                                                 unty
                                                                                                                                                                                 18th Street                                                                                                             Ea st
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            kw                      ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Colonies Par
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ga
                                                                                                               Wilson Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ve
                                                                             R                                                                                                   17th Street                                                                                                                 te A
                                           10                                                    R
                                                                                                                                                                                 16th Street                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                            San Antonio Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Euclid Avenue
                                                                                 Benson Avenue                                                                                                                                         Campus Avenue
                                                                                                                                 Mountain Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FC
                                                                                                                                                                                 15th Street                               R
                                                                                                        9
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Grove Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                  14th Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5th Avenue                                        Alta Avenue
                                                                             R
                                                                                                                                                                                 13th Street
                                                                                           7                          8
                                                                                                                                                              Foothill Boulevard
           Monte Vista Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     66
                           6            11
                                        11
                                                     Central Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                  11th Street
                                FC/R   5
                                                                                                                                                                      Arrow Highway
                                                                                                           Pacific Electric Bike Trail
       4                         FC/R
                                                                                                                                                                                 9th Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3
                                       ¤
                                       n                                                                                                                                               R                             ¤
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n
                                                                                                                                                                                  8th Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           11th Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     FC/R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Olive Street
                                                                                                                                                                                  7th Street
                                                                                                                                                         §
                                                                                                                                                         ¦
                                                                                                                                                         ¨  10
      0                                 0.5                                1 Miles
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Source: City of Upland
SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL                                             COMMERCIAL                                                                        INDUSTRIAL                                                                           SPECIFIC PLAN
       LOW (0-4 du/ac; SFR-L)                                               Neighborhood Commercial (NC)                                                                         Light Industrial/Business Park (LI-BP)                                    Specific Plan (SP)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          1. The Colonies                                      7. Foothill Benson Terrace
       MEDIUM (4-10 du/ac; SFR-M)                                           Highway Commercial (HC)                                                                              Industrial (IN)                                          2. Upland Hills Country Club                         8. Foothill Walk
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          3. Historic Downtown Upland                          9. Wyeth Cove
       Mobile Home (8-14 du/ac; MH)                                         Regional Commercial (RC)                                                                             Gravel Mine (GM)                                         4. College Park                                      10. Park View
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5. College Commerce Center                           11. The Enclave
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          6. Harvest at Upland
                                                                            Office/Professional (OP)                                                    SPECIAL/INSTITUTIONAL
MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Metrolink
       LOW (10-20 du/ac; MFR-L)
                                                                      MIXED-USE
                                                                                                                                                                             Cable Airport (CA)                                                    ¤
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n
       MEDIUM (20-30 du/ac; MFR-M)                                                                                                                                           Institutional (I)                                                               Rail Line
                                                                            Commercial/Residential Mixed-Use (C/R-MU)
       HIGH (30-40 du/ac; MFR-H)                                                                                                                                             Civic/School (C-P)                                                              Pacific Electric Trail
                                                                            Commercial/Office
                                                                                                                                                                             Park/Open Space (P-OS)                                                          City Limits
                                                                            Business/Residential Mixed-Use (B/R-MU)
                                                                                                                                                                             Public Utilities (PU)                                                           Sphere of Influence
                                                                            Commercial/Industrial Mixed-Use (C/IN-MU)
                                                                                                                                                                                 R- Reservoir
                                                                                                                                                                                 L- Landfill                                                                 County Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                 EE- Edison Easement
                                                                                                                                                                                 FC/R- Flood Control/Recharge
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FIGURE LU-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GENERAL PLAN LAND USE


FOCUS AREAS
ELEMENT DESCRIPTION FOR HOMEPAGE
The City of Upland has defined several areas for special focus in the City. These areas include Foothill Boule-
vard, the Southeast Quadrant, College Heights, Euclid Avenue and Historic Downtown Upland; their bound-
aries are shown in Figure FA-1. Focus Areas are locations in the City that are given more focused policy di-
rection to guide future growth and/or preservation in a manner consistent with the community’s vision for
each area. The policy direction below is based on conditions or issues unique to each Focus Area, and sup-
plements the citywide goals and policies contained in the other elements. The policies work to enhance the
functionality and visual quality of land uses, circulation, streetscape and character, and strengthen the com-
mercial economy and sustainability of each Focus Area.
OVERARCHING GOAL:
Upland aspires to encourage vibrant and attractive concentrations of residential, non-residential or mixed uses
in College Heights, the Southeast Quadrant, along Foothill Boulevard, in Downtown and along Euclid Ave-
nue that support the broad General Plan goal of strengthening the economic and environmental future of the
City.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS SECTIONS:
•    Foothill Boulevard
•    Southeast Quadrant
•    College Heights
•    Euclid Avenue
•    Historic Downtown Upland
GENERAL PLAN FIGURES:
Figure FA-1 (Focus Areas)
FOOTHILL BOULEVARD
Foothill Boulevard, part of Historic Route 66, has always been the most important east-west corridor in Up-
land. It plays a key role in establishing the identity and the economic vitality of Upland. It features a vibrant
mix of uses, providing amenities for the citizens of Upland, as well as being a location for an increase of mul-
ti-family residential uses. As such, it should provide the best example of the automobile, pedestrian and bicy-
cle-friendly environment that Upland is fostering through the General Plan, as well as maintaining and en-
couraging new housing, retail and commercial development. The design of the streetscape will foster a cohe-
sive and unified visual character along the length of Foothill Boulevard, providing visual interest and contrib-
uting to defining the character and identity of Foothill Boulevard.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                           Page FA-1

PART 3: FOCUS AREAS
GOAL FA-1:    Foothill Boulevard’s long term economic vitality is ensured through a mix of high-
              quality land uses that serve the commercial needs of the community.
Policies
Policy FA-1.1 Economic Development. Focus economic development efforts on attracting and retaining
              desirable commercial uses along Foothill Boulevard.
Policy FA-1.2 Transit-Oriented Development. Encourage the intensification of development in areas
              that are served by transit and multi-modal opportunities.
Policy FA-1.3 Commercial Uses. Encourage a combination of retail, office, entertainment, and other
              commercial uses that will strengthen the City’s revenues and serve daily and occasional needs
              of residents of Upland.
Policy FA-1.4 Commercial Design. Require new commercial development to be designed to avoid the
              appearance of strip development and enhance the pedestrian environment by bringing build-
              ings to the street edge with parking provided behind.
Policy FA-1.5 Mixed-Use Centers. Allow for the intensification of commercial and introduction of resi-
              dential uses at the intersections of Mountain Avenue, San Antonio Avenue and Euclid Ave-
              nue to create vibrant, mixed-use centers. Encourage housing to be set back from the street at
              the primary intersections of Mountain, San Antonio and Euclid Avenues to allow commer-
              cial uses to activate the street front.
Policy FA-1.6 Housing. Allow for and encourage the development of multi-family residential projects at
              mid-blocks along Foothill Boulevard.
Policy FA-1.7 Residential Design. Require new residential uses to use state-of-the-art design, technolo-
              gies and siting techniques to mitigate the effects of living near a high-traffic road on resi-
              dents of the new housing units.
GOAL FA-2:    Vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian traffic on Foothill Boulevard is accommodated in a
              safe and efficient manner.
Policies
Policy FA-2.1 Service Roads. Coordinate the removal of service roads over time to allow for a wider,
              more pedestrian-oriented public realm consisting of landscaped parkways and a multi-use
              path.
Policy FA-2.2 Continuous Multi-Use Path. Provide for a continuous multi-use path along Foothill that is
              separated from the vehicular travel way by a landscaped parkway.
Policy FA-2.3 Pedestrian Connections. Ensure that pedestrian connections to open space, parks and
              commercial uses are developed as part of new developments throughout this area.
Policy FA-2.4 Public Plazas. Work with developers to create special pedestrian gathering places along the
              corridor and at key intersections as part of developments or within the public realm.
Page FA-2                                                                      City of Upland General Plan

GOAL FA-3:            Foothill Boulevard has a visually unified, landscaped streetscape that makes the
                      most of its identity as historic Route 66.
Policies
Policy FA-3.1    Unified Design Theme. Coordinate the design of street furnishings, lighting, trees, and
                 paving materials to be consistent and continuous along the length of Foothill.
Policy FA-3.2    Consistent Streetscape. Adopt consistent streetscape standards for the entire length of
                 Foothill Boulevard to ensure continuity along the corridor.
Policy FA-3.3    Landscaped Center Parkways and Median. Maintain and expand landscaped parkways
                 and center median wherever practical to create visual interest along the length of the corri-
                 dor, being sensitive to the needs of businesses for access.
Policy FA-3.4    Historic Route 66 Character. Encourage new commercial development along Foothill
                 Boulevard to incorporate historic Route 66 characteristics in the design of buildings and/or
                 signage.
SOUTHEAST QUADRANT
The Southeast Quadrant is the eastern gateway into Upland, and home to the City’s largest nongovernmental
employer, San Antonio Community Hospital, and Upland’s largest public park, Memorial Park. Although
predominately residential, the hospital, commercial uses and small industrial parks make the Southeast Quad-
rant a major employment base. The medical industry has great potential to expand and continue to provide
high quality jobs and services to Upland’s residents and the region. The policies below focus on expanding
the employment base, creating a “front door” for the hospital and Memorial Park, protecting existing residen-
tial neighborhoods, creating opportunities for new residential development, and improving connectivity and
the public realm to achieve a safe and comfortable walking environment.
GOAL FA-4:            The Southeast Quadrant is a stable neighborhood with a balanced mix of jobs
                      and housing.
Policies
Policy FA-4.1    Medical Industry. Accommodate and encourage the growth of the medical industry in the
                 Southeast Quadrant as an important economic provider of jobs and revenue to the City and
                 region.
Policy FA-4.2    San Antonio Community Hospital. Support the retention and expansion of the San An-
                 tonio Community Hospital and related medical uses.
Policy FA-4.3    Partnership with Hospital. Foster a public-private partnership with the San Antonio
                 Community Hospital to support expansion efforts, including developing shared parking op-
                 portunities with Memorial Park.
Policy FA-4.4    Office/Professional Uses. Accommodate primarily office/professional and supporting
                 uses, including medical offices, on Foothill Boulevard near the San Antonio Community
                 Hospital.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                         Page FA-3

PART 3: FOCUS AREAS
Policy FA-4.5    Gateway Development. Require new development in the gateway area between Grove Av-
                 enue and Hospital Parkway to be designed to be welcoming, attractive and contribute to a
                 unique sense of place through the use of landscaping, art and signage.
Policy FA-4.6    Building Design. Ensure that building placement, frontage treatments and landscaping
                 enhance the pedestrian experience and increase accessibility within the Southeast Quadrant.
Policy FA-4.7    Housing. Provide a diverse range of housing types in the Southeast Quadrant that meet the
                 needs of residents at all income levels.
Policy FA-4.8    Historic Neighborhoods. Protect the historic homes and neighborhoods in the Southeast
                 Quadrant through the Historic Preservation Ordinance.
Policy FA-4.9    Support Facilities. Encourage the location of support facilities such as schools, parks and
                 churches within or near to neighborhoods.
Policy FA-4.10 Neighborhood Character. Ensure that new development is sensitive to the character of
                 adjacent structures and the immediate neighborhood.
Policy FA-4.11 Land Use Compatibility. Require appropriate transitions and buffers between multi-
                 family, office and mixed-use projects and adjacent single-family homes.
Policy FA-4.12 Transformation of Industrial Sites. Encourage the transition of industrial sites to residen-
                 tial uses, as appropriate, on sites that are underutilized or incompatible with neighboring us-
                 es.
Policy FA-4.13 Multi-modal Access. Improve automotive, pedestrian, and bicycle access throughout the
                 Southeast Quadrant.
Policy FA-4.14 Pedestrian and Street Connections. Require new development to incorporate pedestrian
                 and street connections to adjacent uses, parks and open space.
Policy FA-4.15 Neighborhood Connectivity. Facilitate the development of safe and convenient bicycle
                 and pedestrian routes throughout the Southeast Quadrant that connect the various neigh-
                 borhoods, employers and recreation facilities.
COLLEGE HEIGHTS
As a location of Upland’s major industrial employers and its proximity to the Montclair Transportation Cen-
ter and the Claremont Colleges, College Heights is an important employment center in the City and a prime
location for new transit-oriented development. Because of the already broad range of uses in College Heights,
an important focus of the General Plan is to enhance compatibility and multi-modal accessibility throughout
the area. New multi-family residential developments will join the existing developments of College Park and
Broadstone, creating a solid base of housing, and the potential for a cohesive residential community. New
development in College Heights will focus on the pedestrian realm, improve connectivity and create inviting
frontages along major streets. College Heights will continue to evolve as an economically and environmentally
sustainable community of Upland.
GOAL FA-5:            College Heights is an employment center offering a range of sustainable busi-
                      ness and employment opportunities.
Page FA-4                                                                           City of Upland General Plan

Policies
Policy FA-5.1   Business and Employment Expansion. Focus economic development efforts on the
                retention, attraction and expansion of firms that provide an array of high quality businesses
                and job opportunities in College Heights, including high-skilled manufacturing jobs and high
                technology jobs, through the application of the goals and policies of the Economic Sustaina-
                bility Element and the Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy.
Policy FA-5.2   Outreach. Encourage academic sector participation in an advisory capacity to facilitate
                workforce development and emerging technologies to locate in the City.
Policy FA-5.3   Industrial Preservation. Preserve industrial uses in the central and eastern portion of Col-
                lege Heights and along the 9th street industrial corridor, and maintain commercial-industrial
                mixed use along the portions of Central and Benson Avenues.
Policy FA-5.4   Training and Advancement Opportunities. Pursue employment uses that offer oppor-
                tunity for training and advancement of Upland residents and workers in industries with
                growth potential.
Policy FA-5.5   Commercial-Industrial Mixed-Use. Allow commercial-industrial mixed use along Central
                and Benson Avenues to maintain flexibility in the types of uses that can locate in these areas.
Policy FA-5.6   Commercial Nodes. Encourage new, local-serving commercial development in College
                Heights that focuses on providing everyday services to local businesses and residents at key
                commercial nodes.
Policy FA-5.7   Residential as a Limited Use. With the exception of high-density residential uses near the
                Montclair Transit Station and other major transit corridors, allow residential uses only as
                supportive uses and where there is limited potential for incompatibility with commercial us-
                es.
Policy FA-5.8   Compatibility between Dissimilar Uses. Provide transitional uses and landscape buffers
                between dissimilar uses, such as between industrial and residential properties, to minimize
                impacts and compatibility conflicts.
Policy FA-5.9   Gateways and Streetscapes. Ensure major intersections and streets are designed to be wel-
                coming, attractive and contribute to a unique sense of place through the use of landscaping,
                art and signage.
GOAL FA-6:           College Heights is transit-oriented and environmentally and economically sus-
                     tainable.
Policies
Policy FA-6.1   Reduce Commute Times. Reduce commute times for Upland residents and employees by
                providing more local employment near transit.
Policy FA-6.2   Transit-Oriented Employment Development. Retain and attract land uses with higher
                employment intensities that support transit and strengthen linkages between land uses and
                transit.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                         Page FA-5
PART 3: FOCUS AREAS
Policy FA-6.3      Residential Development. Focus residential development in College Heights in the south-
                   western corner of the area near Claremont Colleges and the Metrolink and future Gold Line
                   stations.
Policy FA-6.4      Access Improvements to Montclair Station. Coordinate with the City of Montclair to
                   implement streetscape and connectivity improvements to support access to the station.
Policy FA-6.5      High-Density Housing. Encourage higher-density multi-family housing and mixed-use
                   developments near the Montclair Transportation Center as designated on the Land Use Plan
                   in the southwestern portion of College Heights.
Policy FA-6.6      Multi-Modal Transportation Connectivity. Create new roadways and improve pedestrian
                   and bicycle facilities and linkages to regional facilities, such as the Pacific Electric Trail,
                   throughout College Heights.
Policy FA-6.7      Montclair Transportation Center. Strengthen multi-modal transportation linkages to the
                   Montclair Transportation Center from the College Heights area.
Policy FA-6.8      Existing Single-Family Housing. Encourage the preservation and improvement to exist-
                   ing single-family homes along Hervey and Drake Avenues.
Policy FA-6.9      Business/Residential Mixed-Use. Allow parcels south of the Pacific Electric Trail in Col-
                   lege Heights to contain both light industrial and residential uses to support opportunities for
                   live/work arrangements in the City.
Policy FA-6.10 Connectivity. Incorporate pedestrian design elements including pedestrian-oriented street
                   and sidewalk improvements to improve connectivity throughout College Heights.
Policy FA-6.11 Design and Compatibility. Utilize the College Heights Design Standards and Guidelines
                   to achieve high quality design and compatibility between disparate land uses.
EUCLID AVENUE
Euclid Avenue is a 200 foot-wide corridor that is listed on both the National Register of Historic Properties
and the State List of Historic Sites. The corridor is significant as an early example of a planned center park-
way and is part of an innovative planned community designed by George Chaffey as a model colony in a rural
community. The large stately buildings, beautiful trees, landscaped median and bridle path each contribute to
making this corridor one of the most scenic in Southern California. Euclid Avenue serves as a primary gate-
way into Upland and Downtown and serves as the entrance to Mount Baldy. An important focus of the Gen-
eral Plan is to ensure Euclid Avenue remains as a beautiful and historic highway through the preservation of
existing historic resources and the thoughtful design of new development.
GOAL FA-7:              The historic and scenic character of Euclid Avenue is protected, preserved and
                        enhanced as a valuable resource of the community.
Page FA-6                                                                             City of Upland General Plan
Policies
Policy FA-7.1     Scenic Corridor. Continue to provide for and promote the orderly growth of Euclid Ave-
                  nue through implementation of the Scenic Corridor Overlay Zone and Historic Downtown
                  Upland Specific Plan.
Policy FA-7.2     Deep Landscaped Setback. Require new developments to maintain the deep landscaped
                  front yard setback that is prominent along Euclid Avenue.
Policy FA-7.3     New Development. Require new development along Euclid Avenue to be compatible with
                  and reinforce the scale, site design and overall stylistic characteristics of buildings within 200
                  feet of the subject site along the Euclid corridor.
Policy FA-7.4     Historic Character of the Foothill/Euclid Intersection. Preserve the historic character
                  of Euclid Avenue at Foothill Boulevard by protecting and preserving the historic homes on
                  the northeast corner of the intersection of Euclid Avenue and Foothill Boulevard.
Policy FA-7.5     Historic Properties. Relocating historic buildings, or adapting historic buildings to ac-
                  commodate new uses, in which minimal changes are made to the structure and the historic
                  integrity of the structure is maintained, is preferred over the significant alteration or demoli-
                  tion of that resource.
HISTORIC DOWNTOWN UPLAND
Downtown Upland is recognized as the historic heart of the community. With the arrival of the railroad and
regional growth in the citrus industry in the late 1800s, Downtown is where growth began in Upland. Rem-
nants of early community life still remain in Downtown, which encompasses many of the City’s historic dis-
tricts and structures. Upland residents cherish their agricultural small town roots and recognize the value of
having a unique, historic downtown. A Specific Plan was recently completed in 2011 to build upon Down-
town’s rich history and establish a vision, goals and policies, standards and guidelines, infrastructure im-
provements, and implementation strategies to facilitate the rejuvenation of existing businesses, the attraction
of new uses, streetscape enhancements, and the preservation of Downtown’s historic and cultural character.
This General Plan reinforces the policies of the Specific Plan to prioritize the attraction of new multi-family
housing and desirable commercial uses in order to spur economic revitalization and ensure the continual im-
provement to Upland’s hometown downtown.
GOAL FA-8:             GOAL FA-8:             The historic character and economic vitality of Historic
                       Downtown Upland is protected, preserved and enhanced as a valuable resource
                       of the community.
Policies
Policy FA-8.1     Historic Downtown Upland Specific Plan. Implement the Historic Downtown Upland
                  Specific Plan to revitalize and retain the downtown area as the “heart of the City.”
Policy FA-8.2     Economic Development. Focus economic development efforts on the retention and at-
                  traction of viable and desirable commercial uses in Downtown.
Policy FA-8.3     Housing Expansion. Encourage and help facilitate the development of new high-density
                  multi-family housing developments in downtown, particularly near the Metrolink station, to
City of Upland General Plan                                                                               Page FA-7

PART 3: FOCUS AREAS
          support downtown commercial uses and provide pedestrian access to public transit and
          nearby services.
Page FA-8                                                         City of Upland General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CITY OF UPLAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GENERAL PLAN UPDATE
Map Date: 02/20/14
                                                                                                                                                      EU
                                                                                                                                                       C
                                                                                                                          E.                                LI D
                                                                                                                         AV                                        A
                                                                                                           MOUNT A I N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        City of
                                                                                                                                                                    VE      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Rancho Cucamonga
                                                                                                                                                 23RD ST.
                                                                 el
                                                                ha nn                                                                                                                                             Cu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  co m
                                                  A nt o
                                                        nio C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ong
                    City of                                                                                                                      21ST ST.                                                           aC
                   Claremont                     San
                                                                                                VE
                                                                                                     .                                                                                                                 ha n
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            n
                                                                                          O   NA                                                                                                                           el
                                                                                       NS
                                                                                     BE                                                                                             210
                                                                                                                                                 19TH ST.
                                                                                                                 30
                                                         BASELINE ST.                                                                            16TH ST.                           Euclid
                              A ng
                                                                                                                                                                                   Corridor
                                                                                                                              SAN ANTONIO AVE.
                                  eles
                                       Cou
                                                                                                         MOUNTAIN AVE.
                      San                  nty
                                                                                                                                                                                             CAMPUS AVE.
                          Bern
                                                                                                                                                                   EUCLID AVE.
                               ardin              Cable                                                                                          14TH ST.
                     Los            o Co          Airport
                                        unty                                                                                                        Text
                                                                                                                                                                                 FOOTHILL BLVD.
                                                                                                Foothill Boulevard                                                                                           66
                                                 CENTRAL AVE.                 BENSON AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                            83
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Southeast
                                                                                            ARROW HWY.                                            10TH ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Quadrant
                      College Heights                                                                                                                                            Downtown
                                                                                                                                                                                   Upland
                                                                                                                                                  8TH ST.
                    City of                                                                                                                       7TH ST.                                                                             City of
                   Montclair                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ontario
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GROVE AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
           0                       0.5                                  1 Miles
                                                   Focus Areas
       County Boundary
                                                                    College Heights
       Sphere of Influence
                                                                    Foothill Boulevard
       City Limits
                                                                    Southeast Quadrant
       Southern Pacific Trail
                                                                    Downtown Upland
       Rail Line
                                                                    Euclid Corridor                                                                                                                                                    FIGURE FA-1
       Metrolink Station
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FOCUS AREAS

COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND URBAN DESIGN ELEMENT
ELEMENT DESCRIPTION FOR HOMEPAGE
The Community Character and Urban Design Element of the General Plan is best defined as the element that
preserves and builds upon Upland’s “sense of place” and unique identity. This element will influence the
future physical form of the community by guiding the desired quality and character of future development,
and by protecting important aspects of the natural and built environment that define the image and spirit of
Upland. This element gets to the heart of Upland’s vision statement, which is to preserve and enhance
Upland’s small town community character and the attributes that evoke a unique sense of place--beautiful and
safe neighborhoods, vibrant centers and districts, thriving and diverse corridors, quality parks and open
spaces, a scenic and natural environment, and rich historic and cultural resources. While many of these topics
are also addressed elsewhere in the General Plan, the Community Character and Urban Design Element takes
a somewhat different approach by looking at each topic through a place-based framework that focuses on the
building blocks of the community: neighborhoods, districts, corridors and gateways. In this way, this element
is able to address a wide range of aspects contributing to community character and urban design in a more
broad, unified and coherent manner than would be possible if these topics were scattered throughout the
General Plan.
This element addresses four major topics: community character and sense of place, connectivity and
walkability, historic and agricultural heritage, and arts and culture.
OVERARCHING GOAL
The preservation and enhancement of Upland's small town character, connectivity and walkability, historic
and cultural heritage, and arts and culture in order to provide the highest quality of life and distinct sense of
place for its citizens.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS SECTIONS
•    Community Character and Sense of Place
•    Connectivity and Walkability
•    Historic Preservation
•    Agricultural Heritage
•    Arts and Culture
GENERAL PLAN FIGURES
•    Figure CC-1 (Historic Districts)
City of Upland General Plan                                                                           Page CC-1

BACKGROUND DOCUMENTS
•   Upland General Plan Update Existing Conditions Report: Community Character White Paper
COMMUNITY CHARACTER AND SENSE OF PLACE
Upland’s quality neighborhoods, tree-lined corridors, mountain views, and gracious architectural heritage lend
a sense of place and organization to the community. They are the primary contributors to the “small town”
character of the community and offer a setting in which to integrate new development. Preserving and
enhancing the attributes that define Upland’s unique character and sense of place are key themes of this
General Plan.
Goal CC-1            A community with a small town character and distinct sense of place that
                     embraces complementary growth.
Policies
Policy CC-1.1     Small Town Scale. Support the maintenance and expansion of Upland’s existing character
                  by requiring preservation of historic features, buildings, and landscaping while encouraging
                  new development to complement the character, scale, and heritage of development in the
                  community.
Policy CC-1.2     Community Identity. Cultivate a greater sense of community identity and recognizable
                  community focal points, centers, districts, and gateways.
Policy CC-1.3     Place Making. Ensure that existing and proposed buildings, structures, infrastructure,
                  landscaping, lighting, and signage contribute to the image of the City as a place of high
                  quality and positive value.
Policy CC-1.4     Contextual Design Themes. Encourage new development to incorporate similar design
                  themes to those existing within the project area to ensure buildings, when seen together,
                  create recognizable districts and corridors.
Policy CC-1.5     Human Scale Roadways. Maintain narrow streets that provide multi-modal circulation
                  mobility without dominating the streetscape.
Policy CC-1.6     View Protection. Direct private development to enhance public view corridors of the San
                  Gabriel Mountains, where feasible. These views are an integral part of the City’s geographic
                  space and provide a unique sense of place for Upland as a foothill community.
Goal CC-2            Diverse, distinct, and well-structured neighborhoods that meet the community’s
                     needs for complete, sustainable and high-quality living environments.
Policies
Policy CC-2.1     Protect Established Neighborhoods. Preserve, protect and enhance established
                  neighborhoods by providing sensitive transitions between these neighborhoods and
                  adjoining areas, supporting the maintenance and improvement of properties and buildings
                  and infrastructure, and requiring new development, both private and public, to respect and
Page CC-2                                                                          City of Upland General Plan

                respond to those existing physical characteristics—buildings, streetscapes, open spaces and
                urban form—that contribute to the overall character and livability of each neighborhood.
Policy CC-2.2   Complete Neighborhoods. Promote the design and development of neighborhoods
                whose physical layout and land use mix promote walking, biking and transit use; provide
                housing and access to nearby employment, retail and service uses; foster community pride;
                provide access to recreational amenities; enhance neighborhood identity; and are safe,
                family friendly and address the needs of all ages and abilities.
Policy CC-2.3   Mixed-Use Neighborhood Centers. Promote the design and development of mixed-use
                developments that accommodate local-serving retail and service uses, employment
                opportunities, and entertainment; provide diverse housing opportunities; and are efficiently
                served by transit.
Policy CC-2.4   Balanced Neighborhoods. Encourage new major residential development to provide a
                balanced housing mix that includes a range of housing types, densities and floor plans.
Policy CC-2.5   Neighborhood Amenities. Encourage appropriately scaled community-supportive
                facilities and services within all neighborhoods to enhance neighborhood identity and
                provide convenient access within walking and biking distance of residents.
Policy CC-2.6   Neighborhood Enhancement.                  Promote infill development, redevelopment,
                rehabilitation, and reuse efforts that contribute positively (e.g., site layout and architectural
                design) to existing neighborhoods and surrounding uses.
Policy CC-2.7   Neighborhood Branding. Support the development of neighborhood “branding” or
                identification so that particular neighborhoods can be recognized through naming, signage,
                gateways, etc.
Policy CC-2.8   Conservation/Maintenance/Improvement Programs. Encourage the on-going
                conservation, maintenance, and upgrading of existing neighborhoods through enforcement
                of property maintenance codes, rapid abatement of graffiti, programs for the rehabilitation
                of housing, and replacement of deteriorated infrastructure.
Policy CC-2.9   Infill Development. Require infill development to be compatible with surrounding uses
                and to equal or exceed the quality of adjacent development.
Goal CC-3          Districts that achieve cohesive design to reinforce a unique and vibrant sense of
                   place in the community.
Policies
Policy CC-3.1   Diverse Districts. Encourage development of citywide districts that address different
                community needs and market sectors, and complement and are well integrated with the
                surrounding neighborhoods.
Policy CC-3.2   Districts as Destinations. Provide incentives (e.g., density bonuses, reduced parking
                requirements, etc.) to transform existing auto-dominated districts into destinations by
                integrating residential, employment, retail, and community supportive facilities and services;
                and by adding public plazas, pedestrian amenities, and streetscape improvements that will
                create people-oriented centers for living, working, shopping and gathering.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                           Page CC-3

Policy CC-3.3 Districts Served by Transit. Promote the development of districts that are located on
              existing or planned transit stops in order to facilitate and take advantage of transit service,
              reduce vehicle trips, and enhance community access.
Policy CC-3.4 Enhanced Design Character. Encourage renovation, infill, and redevelopment of existing
              districts that reduces the visual prominence of parking lots, makes districts more pedestrian
              friendly, reduces visual clutter associated with signage, and enhances the definition and
              character of the street frontage and associated streetscape.
Policy CC-3.5 Cohesive Design. Encourage individual development projects to be designed as part of a
              larger district, in which they enhance multi-modal and visual connectivity and compatibility
              with the surrounding area.
Goal CC-4         Attractive and functional gateways that clearly signal arrival into the City and
                  enhance the identity of distinct neighborhoods.
Policies
Policy CC-4.1 Gateway Design Features. Maintain and enhance major gateways over time using such
              features as street trees, decorative landscaping, architectural and design features, welcome
              signs, decorative lighting, archways, and other streetscape design techniques to announce
              the gateway.
Goal CC-5         Sites and buildings of a high standard of design quality, visual interest, livability
                  and sustainability.
Policies
Policy CC-5.1 Site Design Principles. Require new development projects to adhere to the basic
              principles of high-quality site design as set forth below, elsewhere in the General Plan,
              zoning and development standards, and any additional design guidelines adopted by the
              City. Basic principles include:
                  a.   Buffers. Encourage buffers between uses that are incompatible in design and/or
                       operations, including, but not limited to, areas in the southwest and southeast
                       portions of the City where industrial and residential land uses intermix.
                  b. Edges. Ensure that buildings, trees or other architectural features provide edges and
                       definition to the street to enhance the vitality and improve the feeling of safety and
                       security in urbanized areas, especially in areas with high pedestrian traffic.
                  c.   Building Siting. Encourage new developments to bring buildings closer to the street as
                       appropriate to create a more intimate and comfortable pedestrian environment.
                  d. Varied Setbacks. Encourage varying setbacks, according to the existing character or
                       context of the neighborhood, to provide visual interest, opportunities for
                       transitional landscaping, and varying shadow patterns.
                  e.   Green Space. Provide adequate green space by ensuring new development and
                       redevelopment includes appropriate green spaces, such as parkways, community
Page CC-4                                                                         City of Upland General Plan
                        squares, parks, rooftop gardens, and plazas that complement the architecture of the
                        development.
                   f.   Landscaping. Promote high-quality landscape design and maintenance to soften
                        buildings, parking lots, and hardscape with specific emphasis on a “California-
                        friendly” plant palette.
                   g. Pedestrian Elements. Promote the use of elements such as special paving materials,
                        landscaping, pedestrian-scaled lighting and seating along pedestrian paths and
                        walkways to encourage pedestrian use.
                   h. Walls and Fencing. Walls and fencing should be limited to providing privacy in side
                        and rear yards and providing screening of non-residential utility areas to preserve the
                        sense of a safe and inviting community. Where they are allowed, walls and fencing
                        should be built of high quality materials that match and complement the
                        architectural style of buildings on the property and provide visual relief through the
                        use of a mixture of materials, landscaping, walkways and greenbelts. Additional
                        landscape areas between sound walls, garden walls, and fencing and rights-of-way
                        should be provided to mitigate the height and visual barrier of walls per the Zoning
                        Code.
Policy CC-5.2   Building Design Principles. Require new development projects to adhere to the basic
                principles of high-quality building design as set forth below, elsewhere in the General Plan,
                and in any additional design guidelines adopted by the City. Basic principles include:
                   a.   High-Quality Development. Require new buildings to be of high architectural design
                        and construction quality, including a high degree of articulation for visual interest,
                        and attention to detail in both design and construction within the context of a
                        building’s location.
                   b. Sustainable Development. Require building owners and developers to integrate green
                        initiatives into their buildings, such as recycled materials, California friendly
                        landscaping, energy efficient devices and water conservation technologies.
                   c.   Architectural Style for Non-Historic Areas. Require new developments to adhere to the
                        predominant architectural style of buildings in the vicinity, where one is apparent,
                        while encouraging variation in design elements; where there is not a strong
                        architectural style, new styles may be appropriate.
                   d. New Buildings Adjacent to Historic Buildings. Require the design of new buildings
                        adjacent to historic buildings to be compatible with the form and massing of the
                        historic structure, including height, setback, massing, roof form, and architectural
                        style.
                   e.   Multi-Family and Mixed-Use Residential Compatibility. Require multi-family housing and
                        mixed-use development to be in scale with or transition in scale from adjoining or
                        adjacent single-family areas through the use of similar setbacks, complementary
                        building arrangements and architecture, gradual changes to building heights, buffer
                        yards and the avoidance of overwhelming building scale and visual obstructions.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                         Page CC-5

                 f.   Single-Family Residential Compatibility. Require that new single-family housing in
                      established neighborhoods be designed to be compatible in scale with other homes
                      in the immediate neighborhood.
                 g. Single-Family Residential Additions. Require that additions to existing single-family
                      housing be developed in the same style.
                 h. Building Articulation. Ensure that the exterior on all sides of a building are varied and
                      articulated to provide visual interest to its surroundings.
                 i.   Variety of Size and Scale. Encourage new developments to contain a variety of lot and
                      dwelling sizes and scales. Some lots may be designed to accommodate one-story
                      houses, which generally require greater lot width to avoid front elevations of houses
                      that are dominated by garages.
                 j.   Upper Story Setbacks. Encourage multiple-story buildings to step the building back
                      from the street edge at upper levels to allow sunlight into the street and create visual
                      interest.
                 k. Building Entrances. Encourage building entrances to be oriented toward a public
                      street, serve as primary pedestrian entrances to a business, and include architectural
                      features that give them prominence.
                 l.   Garage Design. Ensure garages for new single-family houses, duplexes, and
                      townhouses are visually subordinate in importance to the house itself, especially the
                      entry. This can be achieved by locating garages toward the back of properties,
                      limiting the width of the garage to two car spaces, building garages as separate
                      structures from the house, requiring garages to be set back from the front facade of
                      the house, and encouraging the orientation of garage doors at 90 degrees to the
                      street.
                 m. Secondary Units. Require secondary units to be visually subordinate to the primary
                      residence and located behind single-family homes and above garages pursuant to the
                      standards of the Zoning Code.
Goal CC-6        Public buildings with a high standard of design quality, visual interest, and
                 functionality.
Policy CC-6.1 New Public Buildings. Require new public buildings to be designed to be architecturally
              distinctive and constructed to high standards of quality and connect visually and in style and
              character with setting and context. Where the City is not the direct developer of the new
              building, work with the property owner to set the same high standard of quality.
Policy CC-6.2 Public Building Focal Points. Use new public buildings as additional focal points (i.e.,
              community gathering places) for the neighborhood in which it is located and ensure they
              are designed to accommodate a variety of community uses, where appropriate.
Page CC-6                                                                         City of Upland General Plan
CONNECTIVITY AND WALKABILITY
The well-being of residents and visitors, and the experience of being in the community, is enhanced by the
ability of residents to walk within their community and take other modes of transportation to their
destinations. Upland supports resident’s ability to walk by promoting pedestrian safety, maintaining the
pattern of small block sizes, providing attractive streetscapes and mitigating visual and physical barriers for
pedestrians.
Goal CC-7             A City with excellent connectivity and walkability throughout.
Policies
Policy CC-7.1     Safety. Encourage the creation of safe, walkable environments that include elements such
                  as wide, smooth sidewalks, good lighting, safe crosswalks, clear signage, curb bulb-outs,
                  curb cuts, street furniture, trees and traffic-calming measures, which allow people of all ages
                  and abilities to exercise and safely access public transportation, community centers, schools,
                  and services.
Policy CC-7.2     Connectivity. Require new development to incorporate sufficient, attractive and well-
                  marked pedestrian and vehicle connections that link to the adjacent streets and pedestrian
                  network.
Policy CC-7.3     Upland Grid Pattern. Reinforce and extend the traditional grid pattern in new
                  developments that create new roadways. Promote short residential block lengths, typically
                  no more than 400 feet, to create a street pattern that allows for multiple routes through a
                  neighborhood and greater opportunities for pedestrian activity.
Policy CC-7.4     Gated Communities. Discourage the construction of new gated communities or walls
                  surrounding individual projects (i.e. a single developer or builder) for infill development.
Policy CC-7.5     Lack of Barriers. Work to eliminate or soften visual barriers, such as an arterial street, a
                  railroad track or a major drainage way.
Policy CC-7.6     Street Trees. Encourage street trees to be planted in linear planting beds rather than tree
                  wells, in order to support long-living healthy trees, except within Downtown Upland where
                  tree wells are more conducive to urban environments.
Policy CC-7.7     Medians. Facilitate additional landscaping through the construction of medians where
                  feasible.
Goal CC-8             A City with vibrant, aesthetically pleasing, and functional corridors.
Policies
Policy CC-8.1     Streetscape Features. Enhance the streetscapes along corridors with shade trees, street
                  furniture, pedestrian lighting and other features that improve the pedestrian realm.
Policy CC-8.2     Streetscape Consistency. Ensure consistent streetscapes in specific areas of the City to
                  create a sense of place within neighborhoods and districts.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                             Page CC-7

Policy CC-8.3     Street Tree Canopy. Maintain street trees in the public right-of-way as an essential
                  aesthetic and functional (i.e., shade) component of the community in accordance with the
                  Conservation and Open Space Element.
HISTORIC PRESERVATION
Upland’s historic districts, buildings, landscape features and physical layout are one of its greatest assets and
contribute to the City’s identity. With some of the most authentic historically distinct residential
neighborhoods in Southern California, Upland continues to preserve its neighborhoods, buildings, streets and
landscapes through its own programs and by leveraging the policies and programs of State and Federal
agencies. Figure CC-1 identifies the location and names of the City’s historic districts.
Goal CC-9             A community connected to its past through historically significant sites,
                      structures and districts.
Policies
Policy CC-9.1     Identification. Continue to identify historic and cultural resources including individual
                  properties, districts, and sites to provide adequate protection of these resources.
Policy CC-9.2     National, California, and Upland Registers. Pursue eligibility and listing of qualified
                  resources, including historic districts and individual resources, under the appropriate
                  register(s).
Policy CC-9.3     Applicable Laws and Regulations. Ensure that City, State, and federal historic
                  preservation laws, regulations, and codes related to historical resources are implemented,
                  including the California Historical Building Code and State laws related to archaeological
                  and paleontological resources, to ensure the adequate protection of these resources.
Policy CC-9.4     Early Consultation. Minimize the potential impacts to historic and cultural resources by
                  consulting with property owners and land developers early in the development review
                  process.
Policy CC-9.5     Consultation with Individuals and Organizations. Consult with the appropriate
                  organizations and individuals (e.g. Information Centers of the California Historic Resources
                  Information System (CHRIS), the Native American Heritage Commission (NAHC), and
                  Native American groups and individuals) to minimize potential impacts to historic and
                  cultural resources.
Policy CC-9.6     Compatibility with Historic Context. Review proposed new development, alterations,
                  and rehabilitation/remodels for compatibility with the surrounding context. Pay special
                  attention to the scale, massing, and relationship of proposed new development to
                  surrounding historic resources.
Policy CC-9.7     Historic Resource Property Maintenance. Actively pursue maintenance and upkeep of
                  historic resources to avoid the need for major rehabilitation and to reduce the risks of
                  demolition, loss through fire or neglect, or impacts from natural disasters.
Policy CC-9.8     Contextual Elements. Promote the preservation, rehabilitation, restoration, and/or
                  reconstruction, as appropriate, of contextual elements (e.g., structures, landscapes, street
                  lamps, signs) related to the historic resource.
Page CC-8                                                                           City of Upland General Plan

Policy CC-9.9      City-Owned Resources. Maintain all City-owned historic and cultural resources in a
                   manner that is consistent with the U.S. Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the
                   Treatment of Historic Properties.
Policy CC-9.10     Rock Curb Retention. Preserve rock curbs in areas that have been identified as historically
                   significant areas (i.e., Euclid Avenue) or historic districts, or immediately adjacent to these
                   districts to create a cohesive streetscape. In addition to City efforts, work with
                   homeowners who wish to repair the rock curbing adjacent to their residences.
Policy CC-9.11     Historic Resources. Ensure that identified cultural and historic landmarks and buildings
                   are preserved, unless the City finds that such preservation is economically infeasible.
Policy CC-9.12     Certified Local Government. Become and remain a Certified Local Government per
                   State Office of Historic Preservation requirements.
Policy CC-9.13     Adaptive Reuse. Encourage continued use and adaptive reuse of designated historic
                   resources through application of the U.S. Secretary of the Interior's Standards and
                   Guidelines for rehabilitation, reconstruction, and restoration.
Policy CC-9.14     Modifications to Historic Resources. Ensure that modifications to identified historic
                   resources are consistent with the U.S. Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for the
                   Treatment of Historic Properties. The City’s first preference is the repair of existing
                   materials, second preference is replace with the same materials, and third preference, when
                   there is no other economically feasible solution, is to use simulated materials that offer the
                   same appearance of historically used materials.
Policy CC-9.15     Renovation and Remodels. Require the architectural details and design elements of
                   historic structures be preserved during renovations and remodels pursuant to the Zoning
                   Code.
Policy CC-9.16     Demolition. Consider demolition of historic resources as a last resort, to be permitted only
                   if the rehabilitation of the resource is not feasible, demolition is necessary to protect the
                   health, safety, and welfare of its residents, or the public benefits outweigh the loss of the
                   historic resource.
Policy CC-9.17     Incentives. Use incentives such as City, State, Federal, and private grants, loans, easements,
                   and tax credits to promote the preservation, maintenance, rehabilitation and interpretation
                   of the City’s historic and cultural resources.
Policy CC-9.18     Landmark Trees. Promote the preservation of Upland’s landmark trees that occupy both
                   public and private property through the preparation of a Tree Preservation Ordinance. A
                   landmark tree is defined as a tree of historic or cultural significance based on the following
                   criteria: 1) It is one of the oldest or largest trees of the species in the City; 2) It has historical
                   significance due to an association with a historic event, person, site, street, or structure; or
                   3) It is a defining landmark or significant outstanding feature of a neighborhood.
AGRICULTURAL HERITAGE
The history of Upland’s use of land includes citrus agriculture, a tradition that the City strives to continually
preserve and celebrate through public art, the Lemon Festival, historic packing houses and ongoing support
for locally-grown food. This agricultural heritage is a defining characteristic of Upland and one that will be
carried into the future as a reminder of Upland’s citrus origins.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                                  Page CC-9

Goal CC-10              A community that is connected to its historic agricultural uses.
Policies
Policy CC-10.1      Citrus Heritage. Continue to integrate the citrus heritage theme into community festivals,
                    public art, and landscaping.
Policy CC-10.2      Memorabilia. Support Upland Heritage and similar groups’ efforts to acquire and store
                    photographs and other memorabilia relating to historical agricultural operations in Upland.
Policy CC-10.3      Local Support. Support collaborations with local agricultural operations in surrounding
                    jurisdictions with various Farmer’s Market and school programs.
Policy CC-10.4      Locally Grown and Organic Foods. Encourage, maintain, and enhance a local farmer’s
                    market and encourage serving locally grown and organic foods at City public facilities.
Policy CC-10.5      Community and Rooftop Gardens. Support urban agriculture by supporting community
                    and rooftop gardens and recognizing their value in providing fresh food in urban areas in
                    addition to their recreational, community building, landscaping, and educational value.
Policy CC-10.6      San Antonio Community Hospital. Collaborate with San Antonio Community Hospital
                    for healthy community initiatives.
ARTS AND CULTURE
The availability and accessibility of a wide range of cultural opportunities for all ages and abilities improves
the quality of life for Upland residents. These resources promote opportunities for community engagement,
personal inspiration, learning and enjoyment, and the appreciation of and understanding of Upland’s heritage.
It is these resources that attract and retain residents and help spur new investment in the community.
Goal CC-11              A community with opportunities to experience a diversity of arts, culture, and
                        local heritage.
Policies
Policy CC-11.1      Community Programs. Continue to provide programs such as the music venue at
                    Magnolia Park, Parks and Recreation sponsors programs, Scary-A-Fair, Christmas Parade,
                    Lemon Festival, and the Tour d’ Foothill.
Policy CC-11.2      Citywide Expansion of Resources. Work with community organizations to expand art
                    and cultural events, festivals, activities, and performances throughout the City, with a
                    special focus on Downtown as the historic and cultural heart of Upland.
Policy CC-11.3      Partnerships to Increase Programs. Encourage partnerships among arts and cultural
                    groups, community organizations, and the business community to develop arts and cultural
                    educational activities and programming for all ages.
Policy CC-11.4      Assistance for Non City-Owned Facilities. Support arts stabilization for private and
                    nonprofit arts and cultural organizations to maintain and expand their facilities, programs,
                    and events.
Page CC-10                                                                          City of Upland General Plan

Policy CC-11.5  Coordination with Other Entities. Coordinate and support public, quasi-public, and
                private entities in their preservation programs and efforts and serve as a liaison for such
                groups.
Policy CC-11.6  Grants and Donations. Support the efforts of nonprofit, private and community-based
                organizations to apply for public and private grants and encourage donations for arts and
                cultural activities.
Policy CC-11.7  Cultural Institutions. Coordinate with cultural institutions to integrate marketing
                opportunities and partnerships that promote arts and culture in Upland.
Policy CC-11.8  Accessible Facilities and Programs. Encourage the development of arts and cultural
                facilities and programs that are accessible to all residents (e.g., affordable and accessible by
                various travel modes).
Policy CC-11.9  Programs for Children. Support programs and events that introduce children to the arts
                and provide positive outlets to explore their own talents and creativity for self-expression.
Policy CC-11.10 Child Education. Work with the Upland Heritage, Upland Unified School District, and
                similar groups to find opportunities through community events to educate children about
                the City’s history.
Policy CC-11.11 Heritage Tourism. Work with agencies, organizations, property owners, and business
                interests to develop and promote heritage tourism opportunities.
Policy CC-11.12 Religious Expression. Support religious expression in Upland through encouraging a
                variety of faith-based institutions and activities in the City.
Policy CC-11.13 Support for Artists. Provide opportunities and incentives for affordable living, studio or
                live-work spaces for artists in appropriate areas in the City, including Downtown, College
                Heights and the 9th Street Industrial Area.
Policy CC-11.14 Thematic Art. Encourage thematic art in existing and new development that expresses
                Upland’s unique heritage and fits within the surrounding context, including the citrus and
                agriculture theme, the mountains, the Madonna of the Trail statue, Route 66, Downtown
                murals, and other character-defining features.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                         Page CC-11


                                                                                                                              CITY OF UPLAND
                                                                                                                       GENERAL PLAN UPDATE
Map Date: 07/31/12
                                                                  FOOTHILL BLVD.
                                   EUCLID AVE.                                                  CAMPUS AVE.
   ARROW HWY
                                                                      !
                                                                      (
                     8TH ST.
                                                                                                              Euclid Avenue
                                                                                                                Corridor
                     7TH ST.
                      §
                      ¨
                      ¦
                      10
           0            0.5                      1 Miles
                                           Historic Districts
          City Limits                                  Euclid Avenue Corridor   Euclid
          Downtown Specific Plan                       Arrow Laurel             Old Town
          Upland Parcel
                                                       Citrus Transportation    Pleasant View
                                                       Civic Center East        Stowell
          Southern Pacific Trail
                                                       Magnolia                 Victorian Row                           FIGURE CC-1
                                                                                                                 HISTORIC RESOURCES
          Rail Line
   !
   (      Metrolink Station


ECONOMIC SUSTAINABILITY ELEMENT
ELEMENT DESCRIPTION FOR HOMEPAGE
The Economic Sustainability Element envisions a sustainable local economy, which provides an array of
quality job and business opportunities for residents, entrepreneurs and investors across multiple local and
regional-serving industries. It also includes a diversity of retail and other commercial services that meet the
consumer needs and preferences of residents. Finally, it is supported by local government policies and
services that prioritize quality job retention, expansion and attraction, as well as public decision-making that
considers the long-term economic and fiscal health of the community and City.
To maintain and grow Upland’s economy over the long-term requires judicious preservation of employment
lands, on-going support and communication with the existing business community, and outreach and
attraction of firms in growth industries that provide quality jobs, as well as retailers that provide new goods
and services for Upland residents. City resources should be dedicated to programs that accomplish these, and
other, General Plan goals in such a way that ensures long-term success in the most efficient and effective way
possible.
OVERARCHING GOAL
A strong and flexible local economy that provides high quality jobs for residents, opportunity for existing
businesses to expand and new businesses to form or locate in Upland, and an array of commercial services to
meet resident needs.
GOAL, POLICIES AND ACTIONS SECTIONS
•    Job Opportunity & Access
•    Business Climate
•    Retail Diversity
•    Fiscal Sustainability
BACKGROUND DOCUMENTS
•    Upland General Plan Existing Economic Conditions Report
•    Memorandum regarding Potential for Mixed Use and Office Uses
•    College Heights Existing Economic Conditions and Opportunities Assessment
•    College Heights Economic Development Strategy
BUSINESS CLIMATE
Goal ES-1              A sustainable business environment that supports local entrepreneurial growth
                       and attracts commercial and industrial investment and revitalization.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                            Page ES-1

Policies
Policy ES-1.1 Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy. Implement and update a
              comprehensive Economic Development Strategy every three years to enhance the City’s
              long-term prosperity. Include such strategies as:
              A. Regularly evaluate economic conditions to determine the industries, sectors, and
                  locations that are most significant to regional and local economic growth and
                  creation of quality jobs.
              B. Regularly evaluate citywide economic conditions and economic indicators as new
                  data becomes available and provide regular economic reports to decision makers.
              C. Regularly identify the need for new economic development strategies and priorities
                  for public investment.
              C. Develop and maintain programs and services that address the changing needs of the
                  local business community.
              D. Develop and maintain business incentive programs for desirable industries that
                  contribute to revitalization and expansion.
              E. Facilitate the retention and attraction of existing and new businesses based upon
                  beneficial factors, such as the following:
                  a.  Target Industries: Attract industries and businesses that are appropriate for a
                      specific location.        For example, target high-skilled manufacturing,
                      biotech/medical device manufacturing and specialty food production for their
                      potential for long-term growth, job quality and high-density employment for
                      College Heights, and professional and medical support firms near San Antonio
                      Community Hospital. In commercial areas, target key anchor and niche
                      retailers/restaurants/entertainment venues appropriate for Upland’s
                      demographic character, which are currently missing from Downtown and
                      Upland as a whole, by both business type and market orientation.
                  b. Job Quality. Target industries that offer high quality jobs that offer long-term job
                      stability, good benefits and salaries which meet or exceed a living wage. In
                      addition to wages, consider targeting jobs that offer mid-or-long term on-the-
                      job training since they are generally of a higher quality, due to the investment
                      required in each employee.
                  c.  Growth Potential. Target businesses that demonstrate a potential for long-term
                      growth and the eventual provision of a significant number of jobs (i.e. 15 plus
                      jobs).
                  d. Job Density. Target businesses that provide a high job density in terms of the
                      number of jobs per square foot of built space to generate the maximum amount
                      of employment. For example, a research and development business which
                      employs 10 people over 10,000 square feet would be prioritized over a
                      warehouse, which might employ 3 people over 50,000 square feet.
                  e. Jobs at a Range of Skill Levels. Target industries that offer high-quality jobs for a
                      variety of educational and skill levels.
Page ES-2                                                                    City of Upland General Plan

Policy ES-1.2      Employment Districts. Encourage the expansion and intensification of existing
                   industrial and commercial developments to facilitate business and employment growth
                   that serves the daily and occasional needs of the community. Where appropriate,
                   encourage the consolidation of smaller parcels into large format business complexes and
                   commercial developments that are pedestrian-oriented in design and function.
Policy ES-1.3      Business Enhancement. Where feasible, prioritize public improvement projects that
                   assist in the revitalization of business districts.
Policy ES-1.4      Development Incentives. For the highest-priority businesses, offer tailored packages
                   of development incentives, which might include tax rebates, fee reductions or other
                   financial or regulatory incentives.
Policy ES-1.5      Business Regulatory Process. Align existing local government business license,
                   permitting and approvals policies and procedures to minimize the burden of regulatory
                   processes.
Policy ES-1.6      Local Assets for Business Development. Pursue business development opportunities
                   that capitalize on nearby institutions and other assets, including San Antonio
                   Community Hospital and Claremont Colleges, or significant transit amenities.
JOB OPPORTUNITY AND ACCESS
Goal ES-2          A diverse local economy that offers an array of accessible, high quality job
                   opportunities for Upland residents.
Policies
Policy ES-2.1      Job Expansion. Increase the number of quality jobs in Upland to improve the balance
                   of jobs and housing.
Policy ES-2.2      High Quality Jobs. Retain, expand and attract firms that provide a variety of high
                   quality job opportunities that meet the array of educational backgrounds and job-skills
                   sets of Upland residents.
Policy ES-2.3      Employment Support. Support existing and new employment uses that offer
                   opportunity for training and advancement of Upland residents and workers.
Policy ES-2.4      Access to Jobs. Improve local walking, biking and transit access to Upland employment
                   centers, as well as Metrorail commuter rail and Gold Line light rail stations, in order to
                   reduce commute burden and vehicle miles travelled and improve job access and
                   livability.
RETAIL DIVERSITY
Goal ES-3          A vital Downtown and corridor shopping districts that meet the consumer needs
                   and preferences of Upland residents and strengthen the City’s economic and
                   fiscal base.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                        Page ES-3

Policies
Policy ES-3.1  Business Attraction. As part of the Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy,
               identify and pursue new businesses offering contemporary eating, entertainment and
               shopping experiences that fit the demographic character of Upland’s households and
               complement existing businesses.
Policy ES-3.2  Distinctive Shopping Centers and Districts. Ensure regulations facilitate commercial
               centers that are designed to meet the growing need for convenience and good design to
               attract consumers, such as pedestrian-oriented “Main Street” or village type
               development.
Policy ES-3.3  Commercial Revitalization. Encourage the renovation or redevelopment of existing
               strip commercial development, through lot consolidation of smaller, single parcels into
               larger sites, to facilitate the creation of distinctive shopping centers and districts.
Policy ES-3.4  Night-time Uses. Increase and diversify night-time uses including entertainment
               venues, sit-down restaurants, and tasting rooms.
Policy ES-3.5  Anchor Businesses. Target and attract appropriate new anchor businesses to
               Downtown that will expand its offerings, attract new customers and drive additional
               foot traffic to existing stores.
Policy ES-3.6  Key Commercial Corridors. Support the compact redevelopment of key commercial
               corridors to better accommodate current trends in retail formats and mixed use
               development and improve the quality of place in select corridors.
Policy ES-3.7  Retail Development. Direct new retail development to Downtown or shopping nodes
               along commercial corridors targeted for intensification.
Policy ES-3.8  Ground-floor Retail. Attract retail uses to the ground floor level in Downtown in
               coordination with policies and standards in the Historic Downtown Upland Specific
               Plan.
Policy ES-3.9  Residential Density. Increase residential densities in appropriate locations to provide a
               customer base for new and existing commercial uses.
Policy ES-3.10 Gateway Areas. Better delineate gateway areas to Downtown and distinct retail areas
               along commercial arterials to identify and brand them as shopping districts.
FISCAL SUSTAINABILITY
Goal ES-4      Fiscally sustainable municipal finance system and decision-making that supports
               the long-term livability, economic stability, and prosperity of the community as a
               whole.
Page ES-4                                                                        City of Upland General Plan

Policies
Policy ES-4.1      Budget Process and General Plan Vision Alignment. Use the City’s municipal
                   finance system and annual budget process to implement long-term city-wide goals and
                   policies articulated in the General Plan and other strategic planning documents.
Policy ES-4.2      Capital Improvement Program. Ensure the capital improvement program supports
                   the goals and policies articulated in the General Plan.
Policy ES-4.3      Economic Impacts of Land Conversion. Consider long-term fiscal and economic
                   impacts of any conversion of employment lands to other uses when updating zoning.
Policy ES-4.4      New Development, Zoning, and Policy. Consider fiscal and economic sustainability
                   as one of a number of citywide goals when evaluating new development, zoning or
                   public policy.
Policy ES-4.5      Development Impact Fees. Evaluate Development Impact Fees on a regular basis to
                   ensure that increased demands on infrastructure and services as a result of new
                   development are adequately funded.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                       Page ES-5


CIRCULATION
The Circulation Element envisions a comprehensive transportation system that provides a full range of
mobility choices for all potential users. In many jurisdictions, vehicular travel has often been the focus of
planning efforts with limited attention devoted to pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit users. The widest range
of mobility choices is realized when all modes are treated equally, rather than prioritizing one mode of travel
at the expense of others. Achieving a balance between travel modes requires an efficient roadway network
complemented by an extensive system of facilities for alternative modes of travel.
Upland’s transportation network cannot be implemented in isolation. There are regulations, guidelines, and
design standards which can affect the design and construction of many transportation facilities. Additionally,
development in Upland can create impacts on transportation facilities in adjacent jurisdictions, and the
converse is often true. Successful implementation of a comprehensive transportation network requires
extensive coordination and outreach with neighboring agencies.
OVERARCHING GOAL
A comprehensive, multimodal transportation system that provides all users with safe connections to homes,
job centers, schools, community centers, open spaces, recreation areas and visitor destinations.
GOAL AND POLICY SECTIONS
•    Roadway System
•    Non-Motorized System
•    Transportation Safety
•    Parking
•    Freight Movement
GENERAL PLAN FIGURES
•    Figure CIR-1 (Roadway System)
•    Figure CIR-2 (Bicycle Routes)
•    Figure CIR-3 (Pedestrian Facilities)
•    Figure CIR-4 (Designated Truck Routes)
BACKGROUND DOCUMENTS
•    Upland General Plan Existing Conditions Report: Circulation White Paper
ADDITIONAL LINKS
•    San Bernardino County Non-Motorized Transportation Plan
City of Upland General Plan                                                                         Page CIR-1

•    San Bernardino Association of Governments
•    Omnitrans
•    Metrolink
•    Complete Streets Guidelines (California Office of Planning & Research)
•    California Bikeway Classifications
ROADWAY SYSTEM
Upland’s roadway system must meet multiple goals. It must be safe, provide convenient access, maintain free
flowing traffic, be visually appealing, accommodate multiple modes of travel, and be designed in context with
its surroundings. The roadway system should be designed to provide the necessary capacity to accommodate
the traffic generated from the future buildout of the Land Use Plan while maintaining Level of Service
standards. The street right-of-ways also need to accommodate pedestrians, bicyclists, landscaping, traffic
control devices, and infrastructure in a manner that is safe and aesthetically pleasing.
Goal CIR-1             A transportation network that provides mobility and access for all modes of travel
                       including automobiles, transit, bicyclists, pedestrians, and freight vehicles.
Policies
Policy CIR-1.1         Roadway system. Require the City’s roadways to:
                       a.   Provide accommodations for transit, bicyclists, and pedestrians within the public
                            right-of-way.
                       b. Comply with Federal, State, San Bernardino County, and local standards for
                            roadway design, maintenance and operation.
                       c.   Strive to maintain LOS D at all intersections outside of the Downtown Specific Plan
                            area and the Transit Priority Roadways except where such improvements are
                            physically infeasible or would negatively impact bicyclists, pedestrians, or transit
                            patrons.
                       d. Strive to maintain LOS E at all intersections within the Downtown Specific Plan
                            area and intersections along the Transit Priority Roadways.
                       e.   Provide future capacity as envisioned with the Future Roadway System map.
Policy CIR-1.2         Foothill Boulevard. As shown on the Roadway System Map, maintain Foothill
                       Boulevard as a four-lane roadway with necessary deceleration and acceleration lanes at
                       intersections to facilitate an acceptable level of service.
Policy CIR-1.3         Transit Priority Roadways. Designate certain roadways as Transit Priority Roadways,
                       which are intended to prioritize high efficiency transit services such as Bus Rapid Transit
                       (BRT). These transit priority roadways will be designated through cooperative activities
                       between the City, Omnitrans, and SANBAG.
Page CIR-2                                                                            City of Upland General Plan

Policy CIR-1.4         Bus Rapid Transit on Foothill Boulevard. Support Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) on
                       Foothill Boulevard in a manner that does not require a dedicated lane.
Policy CIR-1.5         Future Development Impacts. Require future development or redevelopment to
                       disclose intersection traffic impacts in the City or adjacent jurisdictions as identified
                       through the CEQA process and mitigate impacts where such mitigation measures are
                       physically feasible. These shall be required to contribute to the implementation of
                       mitigation measures, including but not limited to those identified in the General Plan
                       EIR, by the payment of fair share costs, constructing the required improvement,
                       providing right-of-way, or other actions as required by the City.
Policy CIR-1.6         Intersection Improvements. Evaluate impacts of intersection improvements on all
                       modes of travel including bicyclists, pedestrians, and transit.
Policy CIR-1.7         Driveway Access Points. Require that driveway access points onto arterial roadways be
                       minimized and located to ensure the smooth and safe flow of vehicles and bicycles.
Policy CIR-1.8         Regional Coordination. Participate in the planning of regional roadway and transit
                       improvements such as interchange improvements along I-10, other regional freeway and
                       arterial improvements, and transit planning efforts such as the development of a regional
                       Bus Rapid Transit (BRT).
NON-AUTOMOTIVE TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM
A transportation network that serves all users requires an extensive network of bicycle, pedestrian, and transit
facilities. In addition to providing more travel options for residents, workers and visitors, alternative
transportation modes carry significant co-benefits including reductions in fuel usage and emissions, increased
levels of physical activity, less automobile traffic and other quality of life improvements.
Additional use of alternative travel modes requires more effort than merely building new facilities or
expanding existing ones. Outreach and education is needed to further encourage these alternative modes and
ensure safe use of these facilities.
Goal CIR-2             An interconnected network of bicycle, pedestrian, and transit facilities that
                       accommodate and encourage travel through non-automotive modes.
Policies
Policy CIR-2.1         Transit Facilities. Incorporate transit facilities into the design of land use plans and
                       capital improvement projects where appropriate, including:
                       a.   Attractive and convenient bus stops (shade/weather protection, seats, transit
                            information); and,
                       b. Bus turnouts at transit stops.
Policy CIR-2.2         Coverage and Frequency of Transit Service. Coordinate with regional transit
                       operators to maintain and improve the coverage and frequency of transit service in the
                       City.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                         Page CIR-3
Policy CIR-2.3      Transit Access. Locate community-serving facilities in transit-ready areas that are
                    served by transit or can be made accessible to transit.
Policy CIR-2.4      Future Gold Line. Support the future alignment of the Ontario Airport Extension of
                    the Metro Gold Line to be located adjacent to the existing Metrolink rail line through
                    Upland.
Policy CIR-2.5      Future Gold Line Station. Support the location of the future station to be near the
                    existing Metrolink station in downtown Upland.
Policy CIR-2.6      Accessible Transit. Provide pedestrian access to all transit facilities and maintain
                    pedestrian facilities that are safe, attractive, and well lit.
Policy CIR-2.7      Regional Participation. Actively participate in regional planning efforts related to
                    transit service within Upland.
Policy CIR-2.8      Bicycle System. Implement and maintain a comprehensive bicycle system pursuant to
                    the City’s Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan, the San Bernardino County Non-
                    Motorized Transportation Plan and Caltrans standards to reduce slope, sharp curves,
                    and interference from vegetation, pedestrians, and motor vehicle traffic.
Policy CIR-2.9      Bicycle Facilities. Incorporate bicycle facilities into the design of land use plans and
                    capital improvement projects, including:
                    a.   End of trip facilities (bicycle lockers, showers, where feasible, and changing rooms)
                         within non-residential sites;
                    b. Bicycle parking within new multi-family and non-residential sites;
                    c.   Publicly accessible bicycle parking; and,
                    d. Signage for all bicycle routes.
Policy CIR-2.10     Pedestrian System. Maintain a network of sidewalks, crosswalks, and other pedestrian
                    facilities throughout the City as specified in the County’s Non-Motorized Transportation
                    Plan.
Policy CIR-2.11     Intersections and Crossing Locations. Utilize Federal and State guidelines and
                    standards for traffic operations, signal timing, geometric design, Universal Access
                    (ADA) and roadway maintenance that facilitate walking and bicycling at intersections
                    and other key crossing locations.
Policy CIR-2.12     Regional Bicycle and Pedestrian Connections. Participate in regional planning
                    activities related to development of regional bicycle and pedestrian facilities that connect
                    to Upland.
SAFETY
In order to encourage non-motorized travel and protect all travelers, the Upland transportation system should
provide the highest possible level of safety. Upland uses a combination of roadway improvements, urban
Page CIR-4                                                                         City of Upland General Plan

design strategies, quality bicycle and pedestrian facilities, and traffic enforcement to ensure a safe
transportation network for all users.
Goal CIR-3            A transportation system that ensures safety for all modes of travel.
Policies
Policy CIR-3.1        Connected Roadway Network. Require future development or redevelopment to
                      implement local street networks which allow travel by all modes and ensure connectivity
                      with the larger City-wide roadway network.
Policy CIR-3.2        Complete Streets Roadway Standards. Require that pedestrian, vehicular, and bicycle
                      circulation on both public and private property be coordinated and designed to
                      maximize safety, comfort and aesthetics while maintaining consistency with applicable
                      Federal, State, and San Bernardino legislation and requirements.
Policy CIR-3.3        Safe Routes to School. Collaborate with local school districts and private schools to
                      identify and implement safety measures to improve safe travel to and from schools for
                      students, parents, and school employees.
Policy CIR-3.4        Slow Traffic. Use a combination of traffic calming measures, signage, speed limits, and
                      traffic enforcement to slow traffic in areas where non-motorized travel is encouraged,
                      particularly near schools and parks.
Policy CIR-3.5        Bicycle Education and Enforcement. Maintain and promote a comprehensive safety
                      awareness program for cyclists and drivers.
PARKING
Parking facilities are essential facilities for most types of land uses and their supply can influence travel
choices. For example, reducing the level of available parking has been shown to reduce vehicle travel and
increase biking, walking, and transit use. To ensure a balance between the provision of adequate parking to
meet residential and business needs and the goal of improving non-motorized travel options, Upland strives
to provide an appropriate level of “right-sized” parking facilities.
For example, shared parking concepts allow parking spaces to be used by more than one type of user at
different times of the day. This can provide more efficient utilization of parking spaces over predictable cycles
of the day, week or year. Another strategy is to provide comprehensive and routine management of parking in
key destination areas of Upland, like the Historic Downtown.
Goal CIR-4            A parking system which provides an appropriate level of parking supply in public
                      and private parking areas.
Policies
Policy CIR-4.1        Shared Parking. Require mixed-use and multiple use developments to implement
                      shared parking techniques for complementary land uses.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                          Page CIR-5

Policy CIR-4.2        Parking Management. Manage and regularly monitor and evaluate public and private
                      parking resources in key destination areas within the City.
Policy CIR-4.3        Parking Demand. Reduce parking demand by improving transit, bicycle and pedestrian
                      mobility, particularly to and from key destination areas.
Policy CIR-4.4        Accessibility. Ensure parking is accessible to persons with a range of abilities.
FREIGHT MOVEMENT
Freight vehicles are an integral aspect of the transportation network and are crucial to the economic vitality of
any city. A key consideration for the City is the management of freight vehicles to limit any negative impacts
to City residents and employees. Established truck routes allow truck traffic to flow efficiently and minimize
the possible exposure of people in sensitive areas, such as residential neighborhoods and schools, to accidents
involving trucks, high noise levels, and diesel emissions. In addition, guiding truck traffic to designated routes
minimizes impacts and maintenance demands on our other non-designated roadways.
Goal CIR-5            A transportation system which accommodates the efficient movement of freight
                      vehicles on appropriate routes.
Policies
Policy CIR-5.1        Designated Truck Routes. Identify, implement, and maintain a system of truck routes
                      within the City that provide for the effective transport of goods while minimizing
                      negative impacts on local circulation and noise-sensitive land uses.
Policy CIR-5.2        Hazardous Materials Transport. Coordinate with the State of California and other
                      agencies to limit transportation of hazardous materials through the City.
Page CIR-6                                                                          City of Upland General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CITY OF UPLAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GENERAL PLAN                   UPDATE
Map Date: 07/31/12; Source: Fehr & Peers
                                                                                                                                                                               EU
                                                                                                                                                                                C
                                                                                                                                                  E.                                 LI D
                                                                                                                                                 AV                                         A
                                                                                                                                   MOUNT A I N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City of
                                                                                                                                                                                             VE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Rancho Cucamonga
                                                                                                                                                                          23RD ST.
                                                                                el
                                                                               ha n n                                                                                                                                                     Cu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               o ng
                                                                 A nt o                                                                                                                                                                    co m
                                                                       n io C
                    City of                                                                                                                                               21ST ST.                                                            aC
                   Claremont                                    San                                                      E   .                                                                                                                  han
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    n
                                                                                                                  N   AV                                                                                                                           el
                                                                                                               SO
                                                                                                        BE
                                                                                                          N
                                                                                                                                                                          19TH ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                            V
                                                                                                                                                                                                            U210
                                                                                                                                 V
                                                                                                                                 U      30
                                                                        BASELINE ST.                                                                                      16TH ST.
                                         eles            unty
                                                                                                                                                      SAN ANTONIO AVE.
                                              Cou       o Co
                                                                                                                                 MOUNTAIN AVE.
                                                  nty
                                                                                                                                                                                            EUCLID AVE.               CAMPUS AVE.
                              A ng                 ardin         Cable                                                                                                    14TH ST.
                      Los                       Bern             Airport
                                             S an
                                                                                                                                                                                                          FOOTHILL BLVD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    U66
                                                                CENTRAL AVE.                     BENSON AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                                            V
                                                                                                                                                                                            U
                      MONTE VISTA AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                     83
                                                                                                                                                                         ARROW HWY.
                                                        (
                                                        !                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                           8TH ST.
                   City of                                                                                                                                                 7TH ST.                                                                             City of
                  Montclair                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ontario
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ¨             GROVE AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    10
           0                                       0.5                               1 Miles
          County Boundary                                  Street Type
                                                                               Major Arterials
          Sphere of Influence
          City Limits                                                          Secondary Arterials
                                                                               Collector Streets
          Upland Parcel
          Southern Pacific Trail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FIGURE CIR-1
          Rail Line
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ROADWAY SYSTEM
    (
    !     Metrolink Station


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CITY OF UPLAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GENERAL PLAN UPDATE
Map Date: 07/31/12; Source: Fehr & Peers
         Class I Bikeway (Bike Path)                                                                                                                                                                                                       Class II Bikeway (Bike Lane)
     Provides a completely seperated                                                                                            San Bernardino Mountains                                                                               Provides a striped lane for one-way
     right-of-way for the exclusive use                                                                                                                                                                                                 bike travel on a street or highway.
      of bicycles and pedestrians with
            cross flow minimized.
                                                                                                                                                         EU
                                                                                                                                                          C
                                                                                                                                E                              LI D
                                                                                                                             AV
                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                               MOUNT A I N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       City of
                                                                                                                                                                        VE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Rancho Cucamonga
                                                                                                                                                    23RD ST.
                                                                          el
                                                                        h an n                                                                                                                                    Cu
                                                                       nio C                                                                                                                                      c om
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   on g
                              City of                          A nt o                                                                               21ST ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       aC
                             Claremont                   Sa n
                                                                                                     VE
                                                                                                       .                                                                                                                 h an
                                                                                                   NA                                                                                                                       ne l
                                                                                                                                                                                      V
                                                                                                                                                                                      U
                                                                                               O
                                                                                            NS
                                                                                         BE                                                                                            210
                                                                                                           V
                                                                                                           U
                                                                                                                                                    19TH ST.
                                                                                                                    30
                                                                BASELINE ST.                                                                        16TH ST.
                                         n ty    unty
                                      C ou
                                                                                                                                SAN ANTONIO AVE.
                                             o Co
                                                                                                           MOUNTAIN AVE.
                                   eles
                                          ardin
                                                                                                                                                                      EUCLID AVE.              CAMPUS AVE.
                                  A ng                  Cable                                                                                       14TH ST.
                                         B ern
                               L os                     Airport
                                      S an
                                                                                                                                                                                    FOOTHILL BLVD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             V
                                                                                                                                                                                                             U
                                                                                                                                                                                                             66
                                                        CENTRAL AVE.             BENSON AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                        V
                                                                                                                                                                        U      83
                                                                                                                                                   ARROW HWY.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Class III Bikeway (Signed Bike Route)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          With Optional Sharrow Pavement
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Marking. Provides for shared use
                                             !
                                             (                                                                                                       8TH ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                                                       (                                                      with motor vehicle traffic.
                             City of                                                                                                                 7TH ST.                                                                            City of
                             Montclair                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ontario
                                                                                                                                                                                                             §
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                             ¨            GROVE AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                       SAN BERNARDINO ST.                                                                                                                                           4TH ST.
           0                   0.6                                     1.2 Miles
         City Limits               Existing Bicycle Routes
                                                  Class I
         Sphere of Influence
                                                  Class II/III
         County Boundary
   !
   (     Metrolink Station
                                                  Existing Class III; Upgrade to Class II
                                   Future Bicycle Routes
         Rail Line
                                                  Class I
         Southern Pacific Trail                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FIGURE CIR-2
                                                  Priority Bike Lanes*                                                                                                                                                                        BICYCLE ROUTES
*Priority Bike Lanes are bike lanes selected according to proximity to Downtown
and to improve connections between Downtown and Memorial Park.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CITY OF UPLAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GENERAL PLAN UPDATE
Map Date: 07/31/12; Source: Fehr & Peers
                                                                                                                                                        EU
                                                                                                                                                         C
                                                                                                                               E                              LI D
                                                                                                                            AV
                                                                                                                              .
                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                MOUNT A I N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       City of
                                                                                                                                                                        VE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Rancho Cucamonga
                                                                                                                                                   23RD ST.
                                                                 el
                                                               h an n                                                                                                                                             Cu
                                                              nio C                                                                                                                                               com
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ong
                   City of                            Anto                                                                                         21ST ST.
                  Claremont                                                                                                                                                                                               ann
                                                Sa n                                                   E.                                                                                                               Ch
                                                                                                     AV
                                                                                                                                                                                     V
                                                                                                                                                                                     U
                                                                                                 N                                                                                                                            el
                                                                                          N   SO
                                                                                    BE                                                                                                210
                                                                                                            V
                                                                                                            U
                                                                                                                                                   19TH ST.
                                                                                                                     30
                                                       BASELINE ST.                                                                                16TH ST.
                               nt y
                                       unt y
                                                                                                                               SAN ANTONIO AVE.
                              Co u
                                      o Co
                                                                                                            MOUNTAIN AVE.
                         eles
                                                                                                                                                                     EUCLID AVE.              CAMPUS AVE.
                        A ng     ardin            Cable                                                                                            14TH ST.
                       Lo s     Bern              Airport
                              S an
                                                                                                                                                                                   FOOTHILL BLVD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                            V
                                                                                                                                                                                                            U66
                                               CENTRAL AVE.                 BENSON AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                       V
                                                                                                                                                                       U      83
                                                                                                                                                  ARROW HWY.
                                                                                                                                                    8TH ST.
                 City of                                                                                                                            7TH ST.                                                                           City of
                 Montclair                                                                                                                                                                                                            Ontario
                                                                                                                                                                                                            §
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ¦            GROVE AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                            10
           0                         0.5                              1 Miles
           County Boundary                                    Pedestrian Multimodal Priority Area*
           Sphere of Influence                                Pedestrian Needs Priority Area**
           City Limits
                                         *Pedestrian Multimodal Priority Areas are areas where pedestrians
                                         will have a variety of transportation choices, including Metrolink,
           Upland Parcel                 bike lanes, and bus stations.
           Southern Pacific Trail        **Pedestrian Needs Priority Areas were identified based on visioning
                                         exercises and field work to determine where the sidewalk network                                                                                                            FIGURE CIR-3
           Rail Line                     is incomplete. Some areas that are not conducive to pedestrian                                                                                                     PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES
                                         use, such as areas with autorepair and wholesale stores, may not
    !
    (      Metrolink Station
                                         have complete sidewalks and were not identified as Needs Priority Areas.


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CITY OF UPLAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                               GENERAL PLAN UPDATE
Map Date: 07/31/12; Source: Fehr & Peers
                                                                                                                                                     EU
                                                                                                                                                      C
                                                                                                                             E                             LI D
                                                                                                                          AV
                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                              MOUNT A I N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of
                                                                                                                                                                     VE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Rancho Cucamonga
                                                                                                                                                23RD ST.
                                                                el
                                                              h an n                                                                                                                                          Cu
                                                             nio C                                                                                                                                            com
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ong
                      City of                        Anto                                                                                       21ST ST.
                     Claremont                                                                                                                                                                                        ann
                                               Sa n                                                  E.                                                                                                             Ch
                                                                                                   AV
                                                                                                                                                                                  V
                                                                                                                                                                                  U
                                                                                               N                                                                                                                          el
                                                                                        N   SO
                                                                                  BE                                                                                               210
                                                                                                          V
                                                                                                          U
                                                                                                                                                19TH ST.
                                                                                                                   30
                                                      BASELINE ST.                                                                              16TH ST.
                              nt y
                                      unt y
                                                                                                                             SAN ANTONIO AVE.
                            Co u
                                     o Co
                                                                                                          MOUNTAIN AVE.
                        eles
                                                                                                                                                                  EUCLID AVE.              CAMPUS AVE.
                       A ng     ardin            Cable                                                                                          14TH ST.
                     Lo s     Bern               Airport
                            S an
                                                                                                                                                                                FOOTHILL BLVD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         V
                                                                                                                                                                                                         U
                                                                                                                                                                                                         66
                                              CENTRAL AVE.                BENSON AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                    V
                                                                                                                                                                    U      83
                                                                                                                                                ARROW HWY.
                                     !
                                     (                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                 8TH ST.
                 City of                                                                                                                         7TH ST.                                                                          City of
                 Montclair                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ontario
                                                                                                                                                                                                         §
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¦           GROVE AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
           0                       0.5                               1 Miles
         County Boundary              Truck Routes
                                                       Unrestricted Access
         Sphere of Influence
                                                       Restricted to 18 Tons
         City Limits
                                                       Restricted to 5 Tons
         Upland Parcel
         Southern Pacific Trail
         Rail Line                                                                                                                                                                                      FIGURE CIR-4
                                                                                                                                                                                           DESIGNATED TRUCK ROUTES
   !
   (     Metrolink Station


OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION ELEMENT
ELEMENT DESCRIPTION FOR HOMEPAGE
The Open Space and Conservation Element emphasizes “growing green” and ensuring environmental
sustainability in terms of Upland’s outdoor spaces and natural resources. Our open space areas provide
important contributions for the community, including flood control, groundwater recharge, mining of mineral
resources, and habitat. Our park system provides a variety of both passive and active recreational
opportunities.
OVERARCHING GOAL
Increased health and quality of life for citizens of Upland as well as environmental sustainability through
conservation of open space and natural resources, and encouraging greenhouse gas reductions and
alternatives to the use of non-renewable resources.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS SECTIONS
•    Open Space and Natural Resources
•    Parks and Recreation
•    Air Quality
•    Greenhouse Gas Emissions
•    Non-Renewable Energy
•    Mineral Resources
GENERAL PLAN FIGURES:
•    Figure OSC-1 (Parks, Trails and Recreation Facilities)
BACKGROUND DOCUMENTS:
•    Upland General Plan Existing Conditions Report: Natural Environment
•    Upland General Plan Existing Conditions Report: Community Services and Facilities
OPEN SPACE AND NATURAL RESOURCES
Upland is located at the southern foothills of the San Gabriel Mountains. Most of the City is fully developed
with urban uses however it still contains a few open space areas that are largely dedicated to active mining,
flood control, and groundwater recharge. These areas provide shelter and habitat for hawks, falcons and a
variety of other birds as well as the occasional coyote, possum and raccoon. Upland’s useable open space is
found in its parks and trails. The City’s residential neighborhoods feature extensive tree canopies which
makes its streets and sidewalks pleasant places to live and provide memorable landscapes for those passing
City of Upland General Plan                                                                       Page OSC-1

through the City. This urban forest also serves the more practical end of absorbing carbon dioxide and
pollution, and producing oxygen that contributes to improved air quality and human health.
Goal OSC-1          Upland’s natural resources such as open space, wildlife and vegetation, are
                    protected and enjoyed as limited and valuable resources and integral parts of a
                    sustainable environment.
Policies
Policy OSC-1.1      Resource Preservation. Preserve open space and habitat areas by promoting
                    conservation and preservation easements that protect habitat areas, habitat corridors,
                    and sensitive biological resources.
Policy OSC-1.2      Open Space Corridors. Focus on areas that are adjacent to larger open space areas and
                    corridors as the first priority in siting preservation areas.
Policy OSC-1.3      Joint Use. Work with property owners and regional agencies to allow safe, joint use of
                    open space areas that are used for other purposes such as flood control, groundwater
                    recharge, utility corridors, and mining for passive recreational activities such as trails or
                    view spots.
Policy OSC-1.4      Regulatory Protection. Ensure that new development meets all federal, State, and
                    regional regulations for habitat and species protection.
Policy OSC-1.5      New Development. Encourage new development to preserve on-site natural elements
                    and incorporate low impact development techniques.
Policy OSC-1.6      Public Education. Support educational programs for residents and visitors about the
                    uniqueness and value of the natural resources, plants, and wildlife in the region, and how
                    to manage development to preserve wildlife populations.
Policy OSC-1.7      Dark Sky Protection. Promote shielded, dark-sky friendly lighting for Upland’s
                    outdoor lighting needs in order to reduce light pollution and glare; increase energy
                    efficiency; protect wildlife; and promote better health.
Goal OSC-2          Upland’s urban forest and rich landscaping tradition is managed and enjoyed as
                    a valuable resource that imparts a character to the community.
Policies
Policy OSC-2.1      Street Tree Canopy. Maintain the City’s tree-lined streets as an integral component of
                    the City’s character by replacing parkway and median trees in conjunction with public
                    and private projects.
Policy OSC-2.2      Streetscapes. Maintain the City’s landscaped parkways and medians as aesthetic buffers
                    that improve the appearance of the community.
Policy OSC-2.3      California-Friendly Species. Encourage new and existing public and private
                    development to incorporate California-friendly and drought-tolerant vegetation into
                    landscape plans to reduce water demand.
Page OSC-2                                                                        City of Upland General Plan

Policy OSC-2.4        Invasive Species. Prohibit the use of plant species known to be invasive according to
                      the California Invasive Plant Inventory. Introduction or spread of invasive plant species
                      during construction of development projects shall be avoided by minimizing surface
                      disturbance; seeding and mulching disturbed areas with certified weed-free native mixes;
                      and using California-friendly, noninvasive species in erosion control plantings.
Policy OSC-2.5        Shade Trees. Prioritize the planting of large street tree species (greater to or equal to
                      50 feet in height) over smaller species to facilitate a larger canopy of trees that will serve
                      to reduce the heat island effect, lower energy costs, sequester carbon dioxide in the
                      atmosphere, reduce stormwater runoff, and increase water retention and water quality.
Policy OSC-2.6        Tree Preservation. Promote the preservation of Upland’s large mature trees that
                      occupy both public and private property through the preparation of a Tree Preservation
                      Ordinance. Include the identification and protection of landmark trees, meaning trees of
                      historic or cultural significance.
PARKS AND RECREATION
Parks and recreational outlets are an important amenity for Upland’s residents. Upland strives to ensure that
the size and number of parks and recreational facilities are adequate for the population served and that they
are of high quality, well-maintained and designed to sustain the environment.
Goal OSC-3            Park lands that are environmentally and fiscally sustainable and meet the needs
                      of residents of all ages and interests.
Policies
Policy OSC-3.1        Park Preservation. Preserve existing park space and discourage the use of parkland for
                      non-park related uses or facilities.
Policy OSC-3.2        Existing Parks. Upgrade and rehabilitate existing parks as necessary to meet the
                      changing needs of the community.
Policy OSC-3.3        New Parks and Recreational Facilities. Ensure that the provision of parks and
                      recreational facilities and services keeps pace with population growth and changing
                      recreational needs in Upland.
Policy OSC-3.4        Underserved Areas. Prioritize the development of new parks in underserved areas and
                      low-income neighborhoods.
Policy OSC-3.5        Quimby Act. Continue to require residential subdivisions to provide at least 3 acres of
                      parkland per 1,000 residents or pay an in-lieu fee or some combination thereof, pursuant
                      to Section 66477 of the California Government Code (the Quimby Act).
Policy OSC-3.6        Infill Development. Encourage new infill development projects to provide mini parks
                      in infill areas to help meet the park standard, as long as they are at least ½-acre in size
                      and include sufficient amenities.
Policy OSC-3.7        Alternative Forms of Parks. Facilitate the development of alternative forms of park
                      and recreational resources, including community gardens, pocket parks and green alleys
                      in Downtown.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                            Page OSC-3

Policy OSC-3.8       Joint-Use Facilities. Combine new parks, where possible, with other compatible
                     facilities such as schools, flood control, or water conservation areas.
Policy OSC-3.9       Connectivity between Parks. Create pedestrian, bicycle and/or equestrian trail links
                     between parks where possible, in order to increase the accessibility of parks to area
                     residents.
Policy OSC-3.10      Trail System. Maintain and expand the off-street trail system to provide a continuous
                     system that loops through the City and connects to regional trails.
Policy OSC-3.11      Funding. Support efforts to sustain a long-term funding source for parks acquisition,
                     development, and maintenance in Upland. All State and federal support for parks and
                     recreation should be explored.
Policy OSC-3.12      Maintenance Practices. Incorporate sustainable practices into the ongoing
                     maintenance of City parks and recreational facilities.
Policy OSC-3.13      Vandalism. Provide a graffiti hotline and other measures to limit vandalism in park and
                     recreational facilities.
Policy OSC-3.14      Sustainable Materials. Use sustainable materials—reused, renewable, locally sourced
                     and/or recycled—to the greatest extent possible in new parks and recreational facilities.
Policy OSC-3.15      California Friendly Plant Species. When feasible, utilize California friendly non-
                     invasive plants for landscaping park and recreational facilities.
Policy OSC-3.16      Stormwater Management. Integrate low impact development techniques that retain
                     natural features for stormwater management to the greatest extent possible for all parks
                     facilities.
Policy OSC-3.17      Trees. Maintain or plant trees where appropriate to provide shade, absorb carbon,
                     reduce the heat island effect and reduce cooling loads in shaded buildings.
Policy OSC-3.18      Development Impact Fees. Require new development to dedicate land or pay in-lieu
                     fees to maintain park standards through the Park Acquisition and Development Impact
                     Fee.
AIR QUALITY
Upland takes steps to promote clean air for its citizens and for the region. These steps include encouraging
compact development and best management practices in the construction and operation of new
development, and through land use measures that control the proximity of sensitive uses to pollution sources.
Upland also promotes the viability of modes of travel other than the car, and coordinates its efforts with
other jurisdictions.
Goal OSC-4           Healthful air quality in Upland and the surrounding region, and reduced locally
                     generated pollutant emissions.
Page OSC-4                                                                          City of Upland General Plan

Policies
Policy OSC-4.1     Land Use Patterns. Promote land use patterns that reduce the number and length of
                   motor vehicle trips.
Policy OSC-4.2     Compact Development. Where development opportunities near shopping areas and
                   transit corridors exist, prioritize higher-density residential development.
Policy OSC-4.3     Mixed Retail Development. Encourage employment areas to include a mix of retail
                   support services, and allow new small-scale retail and service uses within established
                   residential neighborhoods to reduce vehicle trips.
Policy OSC-4.4     Separation of Sensitive Land Uses. To the extent practicable, separate sensitive land
                   uses (schools, senior centers, medical facilities, and residences) from significant sources
                   of air pollutants, toxic air contaminants, or odor emissions.
Policy OSC-4.5     Design of Sensitive Uses. Require new development with sensitive uses located
                   adjacent to mobile and stationary toxic air contaminants to be designed with
                   consideration of site and building orientation, location of trees, and incorporation of
                   appropriate technology for improved air quality (i.e., ventilation and filtration) to lessen
                   any potential health risks.
Policy OSC-4.6     Protect all Residents Equally. Ensure that all land use decisions are made in an
                   equitable manner in order to protect residents, regardless of age, culture, ethnicity,
                   gender, race, socioeconomic status, or geographic location, from the health effects of air
                   pollution.
Policy OSC-4.7     Proximity to Freeways. Require developers of projects that include sensitive land uses
                   (schools, senior centers, medical facilities, and residences) within 500 feet of State Route
                   210 and Interstate 10 to prepare a health impact assessment (HIA) to determine the
                   significance of the impact, and to incorporate project-specific mitigation measures to
                   avoid this risk.
Policy OSC-4.8     Reduction in Commuting. Promote expansion of employment opportunities within
                   Upland to reduce commuting to areas outside of the City.
Policy OSC-4.9     Rideshare Incentives. Encourage employers to offer employees incentives for
                   ridesharing.
Policy OSC-4.10    Vehicle Idling. Continue to enforce the vehicle idling restrictions established by the
                   State.
Policy OSC-4.11    New Development. Review proposed development projects as required by CEQA to
                   ensure projects incorporate feasible measures that reduce construction and operational
                   emissions for reactive organic gases, nitrogen oxides, and particulate matter (PM10 and
                   PM2.5) through project design.
Policy OSC-4.12    Health Risk Assessment. New sources of toxic air pollutants shall prepare a Health
                   Risk Assessment as required by Section 44300 of the California Health and Safety Code.
                   The Assessment shall be used to establish appropriate land use buffer zones around
                   those areas posing substantial health risks based upon the California Air Resources
                   Board’s guidance provided in the Air Quality Land Use Handbook.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                        Page OSC-5

Policy OSC-4.13      Best Management Practices. Require best management practices to reduce air
                     pollution associated with construction of development projects.
Policy OSC-4.14      Construction Mitigation. Review construction plans associated with development
                     projects to determine if all feasible mitigation measures are included.
Policy OSC-4.15      Green Building Practices. Promote green building practices that support healthy
                     indoor living and working environments that are well-ventilated and contaminant-free.
Policy OSC-4.16      Lead Abatement. Support lead-abatement programs.
Policy OSC-4.17      Mold Growth. Disseminate information about methods for reducing mold growth.
Policy OSC-4.18      Coordinated Planning. Coordinate air quality planning efforts with other local,
                     regional and State agencies, and encourage community participation in air quality
                     planning.
Policy OSC-4.19      Community Involvement. Design and conduct efforts to involve the public and
                     affected/interested parties in the implementation of air quality improvement plans and
                     programs. This may include public forums and workshops, community and education
                     programs, informational brochures and web postings, and a variety of other media
                     forms to maximize citizen involvement. (Existing GP)
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
There are a number of steps that Upland will take in order to reduce greenhouse gases. These include
requiring the implementation of green building standards for new developments and taking voluntary steps in
reducing greenhouse gas emissions in municipal activities. Examples of the latter include choosing low-
emissions fleet vehicles and meeting high green-building standards in the design and construction of
municipal buildings. Upland also educates the public in the advantages of green building and provides other
information about ways citizens can reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
Goal OSC-5           Greenhouse gas emissions will be at 1990 levels by 2020.
Policies
Policy OSC-5.1       Citywide Greenhouse Gas Assessment. Comply with pertinent State regulations to
                     assess citywide greenhouse gas emissions for existing land uses and the adopted General
                     Plan buildout.
Policy OSC-5.2       Greenhouse Gas Reduction in New Development. Reduce greenhouse gas
                     emissions from new development by promoting water conservation and recycling;
                     promoting development that is compact, mixed use, pedestrian friendly, and transit
                     oriented; promoting energy-efficient building design and site planning; improving the
                     jobs/housing ratio; and other methods of reducing emissions.
Policy OSC-5.3       Climate Change Assessment and Monitoring. Assess and monitor the effects of
                     climate change on an ongoing basis with periodic inventories of greenhouse gas
                     emissions in the City and compare those to historical levels to monitor the efficacy of
                     climate change mitigation efforts.
Page OSC-6                                                                          City of Upland General Plan
Policy OSC-5.4         CEQA Review. Evaluate greenhouse gas emission impacts from proposed
                       development projects as required by the California Environmental Quality Act.
Policy OSC-5.5         Emissions Reductions. Require development projects that exceed AQMD ROG and
                       NOX operational thresholds to incorporate design or operational features that reduce
                       emissions equal to 15 percent from the level that would be produced by an unmitigated
                       project.
Policy OSC-5.6         Reduced Emissions for City Operations. Promote reduced idling, trip reduction,
                       routing for efficiency, and the use of public transportation, carpooling, and alternate
                       modes of transportation for operating City departments.
Policy OSC-5.7         Fleet Operations. Purchase low-emission vehicles for the City’s fleet and use available
                       clean fuel sources for trucks and heavy equipment, where economically feasible.
Policy OSC-5.8         Zero-Emission and Low-Emission Vehicle Use. Encourage the use of zero-
                       emission vehicles, low-emission vehicles, non-motorized vehicles and bicycles, and car-
                       sharing programs by requiring sufficient and convenient infrastructure and parking
                       facilities in residential developments and employment centers to accommodate these
                       vehicles.
Policy OSC-5.9         Preference for Reduced-Emission Equipment. Give preference to professional
                       maintenance providers using reduced emission equipment for contracts for services
                       (e.g., landscape maintenance), as well as businesses which practice sustainable
                       operations, to the extent that it is economically feasible to do so.
Policy OSC-5.10        Transportation Systems Management and Trip Reduction. Encourage all City
                       employees to use means other than a single-occupant vehicle for their daily work
                       commute.
Policy OSC-5.11        Minimum Green Building Standards. Require new development to comply with the
                       California Green Building Code (CalGreen) adopted by the California Building
                       Standards Commission at the time of building permit application.
Policy OSC-5.12        LEED Standard for Public Buildings. Evaluate the feasibility of constructing new
                       public buildings to meet, at a minimum, a LEED-Silver building standard or an
                       equivalent standard, and construct said buildings toward meeting this standard to the
                       extent feasible, using these buildings to demonstrate green building practices to builders,
                       developers, homeowners and others.
NON-RENEWABLE ENERGY
As with other efforts to promote sustainability, minimizing the consumption of nonrenewable energy
resources requires action in many different areas. For example, our policies encourage the use of trees and the
siting of buildings to reduce the need for heating and cooling. We also promote energy efficiency and
sustainability indirectly by recruiting and maintaining businesses whose products and services promote the
conservation of nonrenewable energy resources.
Goal OSC-6             A community that minimizes the consumption of nonrenewable energy
                       resources.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                          Page OSC-7

Policies
Policy OSC-6.1       Compliance with Energy Efficiency Standards. Require existing residential and
                     commercial buildings to meet adopted energy efficiency standards prior to a completion
                     of sale.
Policy OSC-6.2       New Development. Encourage solar-oriented design and passive solar heating and
                     cooling in all new residential, commercial and civic development.
Policy OSC-6.3       Renewable Energy. Encourage the installation and construction of renewable energy
                     systems and facilities such as wind, solar, hydropower, geothermal, and biomass
                     facilities.
Policy OSC-6.4       Deciduous Trees. Require that deciduous trees be planted on the south- and west-
                     facing sides of new buildings onsite to reduce energy use in the summer and winter
                     months.
Policy OSC-6.5       City Facilities. Set an example for others to follow by using alternative energy sources
                     such as solar for City facilities.
Policy OSC-6.6       Recruitment of Energy-Efficient Businesses. Strive to recruit businesses that
                     research, develop, manufacture, utilize, and promote energy efficiency, conservation and
                     advanced renewable technologies such as waste-to-energy facilities.
Policy OSC-6.7       Citizen Education. Work with appropriate agencies to proactively inform, educate and
                     assist residents and developers regarding the objectives and techniques of sustainable
                     development and resource conservation.
MINERAL RESOURCES
While Upland supports mining operations, we require they be carried out in such a way as to conserve natural
resources, and ensure that adjacent land uses are compatible and buffered from mining operations. We also
recognize that the need for mining can be reduced by recycling aggregate construction material, so we
encourage recycling concrete as an approach to resource conservation.
Goal OSC-7           Mining activities in Upland are compatible with efforts for resource conservation,
                     and with adjacent uses.
Policies
Policy OSC-7.1       Resource Conservation. Conserve the last remaining areas identified as containing
                     significant mineral deposit potential as mapped by the California Geological Survey.
Policy OSC-7.2       Ongoing Extraction Activities. Support ongoing environmentally sensitive mineral
                     extraction activities within the City until these resources are depleted or extraction is no
                     longer economically viable.
Policy OSC-7.3       Regulation and Management. Regulate and manage the extraction of mineral
                     resources through the Surface Mine and Reclamation Act (SMARA).
Page OSC-8                                                                          City of Upland General Plan
Policy OSC-7.4     Compatible Operations. Restrict permitted uses on lands containing and adjacent to
                   important mineral resources to those compatible with mineral extraction, except in cases
                   where such uses offer public benefits that outweigh those of resource extraction.
Policy OSC-7.5     Protection of Adjacent Properties. Enforce established conditions and performance
                   standards to protect properties adjacent to mining operations and ensure the public’s
                   health, safety and welfare.
Policy OSC-7.6     Reuse of Mined Land. Require mined property to be left in a condition suitable for
                   reuse in conformance with the California Surface Mining and Reclamation Act
                   (SMARA).
Policy OSC-7.7     Recycling Aggregate Material. Encourage the reuse and recycling of existing
                   aggregate construction material for new residential, commercial, and industrial
                   developments.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                     Page OSC-9


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CITY OF UPLAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GENERAL PLAN                   UPDATE
Map Date: 07/31/12
                                                                                                                                                                       EU
                                                                                                                                                                         C
                                                                                                                                                                              LID
                                                                                                 San Antonio
                                                                                                                                            E.
                                                                                                                          AV                                                        A
                                                                                                             MOUN T A I N
                                                                                                     Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         City of
                                                                                                                                                                                     VE      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Rancho Cucamonga
                                                                                                                                                                  23RD ST.
                                                                     el
                                                                    ha nn                                                                                                                                                          Cu
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   co m
                                                      Ant o
                                                           nio C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ong
                            City of                                                                                                                                21ST ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           an
                           Claremont                S an
                                                                                                    VE
                                                                                                      .                                                         McCarthy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ch
                                                                                                  NA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ne l
                                                                                           O                                                                      Park
                                                                                      BE
                                                                                        NS
                                                                                                                                                                   19TH ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    V
                                                                                                                                                                                                    U210
                                                                                                               V
                                                                                                               U       30
                                                                            Proposed
                                                                            Sports
                                                                            Park
                                                                                                                               Magnolia Park &
                                                            BASELINE ST.                                                                                           16TH ST.
                                           unty                                                                                          Recreation Center
                                                                                                                                             SAN ANTONIO AVE.
                                      o Co                                      Greenbelt Park                                                                                                       Sierra Vista
                                gele      unty                                                                                                                                                           Park
                                                                                                               MOUNTAIN AVE.
                                    s Co
                                                                                                                                                                                                                CAMPUS AVE.
                                           ardin
                                                                                                                                                                                    EUCLID AVE.
                             Los
                                                     Cable                                                                                                         14TH ST.
                                 An    Bern          Airport
                                      S an
                                                                                               Cabrillo Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                              13th Street 66
                                                                                                                                                                                                  FOOTHILL BLVD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                            Reservoir Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              U     Memorial
                                                     CENTRAL AVE.              BENSON AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Park &
                                                                                                                               Baldy View
                                                                                                                                  Park                                              V
                                                                                                                                                                                    U        83                                     Community
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Building
                                                                                                                                                                ARROW HWY. George M. Gibson
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Senior Center
                                                                                                                                                                                                                8th Street
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Reservoir Park
                                             (
                                             !                                                                                                                  Fern 8TH
                                                                                                                                                                     Reservoir
                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                    Citrus
                                                                                                                                                                          ST.
                                                                                                                                                                      Park
                                                                                                                                    Park                                                               Olivedale
                            City of                                                                                                                                 7TH ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Park
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        City of
                           Montclair                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Ontario
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ¦
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ¨           GROVE AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              10
          0               0.5
                     SAN BERNARDINO ST.                       1 Miles                                                                                                                             4TH ST.
       City Limits             Proposed Priority Trails                                      Existing Trails                                                            Park Facilities
                                              Priority Class l Trail                                 Cucamonga Trail                                                    Proposed Park
       Sphere of Influence
                                              Priority Class ll or lll Trail                         Euclid Trail                                                       Recreational Centers
       County Boundary
                                                                                                     Memorial Park Connector Trail
       Upland Parcel
                                                                                                     San Antonio Wash Trail
       Rail Line
                                                                                                     Southern Pacific Trail                                                    FIGURE OSC-1
 (
 !     Metrolink Station
                                                                                                                                                    PARKS, TRAILS AND RECREATION FACILITIES


PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES ELEMENT
ELEMENT DESCRIPTION FOR HOMEPAGE
The Public Facilities and Services Element addresses the provision of efficient and cost-effective services for
fire prevention, emergency response, law enforcement, education, recreation, library and animal services; and
partners with the school district, outside agencies, the private sector and utility companies for the provision of
other key services necessary for maintaining a high quality of life and attracting residents to the City. We
cooperate with our partners and leverage their efforts to provide excellent facilities and services while
working jointly to fulfill Upland’s long-term commitment to conservation of natural resources and a safe and
healthful environment.
OVERARCHING GOAL
Facilities, utilities and services that support the need of residents for safety, education, health and quality of
life in an efficient and cost-effective manner while meeting Upland’s commitment to environmental
sustainability.
GOALS, POLICIES AND ACTIONS SECTIONS
•    Public Facilities, Infrastructure and Services
•    Fire Prevention and Emergency Response Services
•    Law Enforcement and Crime Prevention
•    Educational Services and Facilities
•    Recreational Programs and Services
•    Library Services
•    Animal Services
•    Water
•    Water Quality
•    Solid Waste
•    Technology and Utilities
GENERAL PLAN FIGURES
•    Figure PFS-1 (Public Facilities and Services)
•    Figure PFS-2 (Schools)
City of Upland General Plan                                                                            Page PFS-1

BACKGROUND DOCUMENTS
•    Fire Department Strategic Plan
•    Emergency Operations Plan
•    Upland General Plan Existing Conditions Report: Community Services and Facilities
PUBLIC FACILITIES, INFRASTRUCTURE AND SERVICES
Upland works with developers, utilities and outside agencies to ensure that the highest quality infrastructure,
facilities and services are available equitably for all citizens. We coordinate the continual expansion and
improvement of facilities, infrastructure and services to meet demands of growth and modernization. We also
maintain our investment in our public facilities and encourage utilities and our private sector partners to do
the same.
Goal PFS-1            A functional and well-maintained City with adequate public facilities,
                      infrastructure and services.
Policies
Policy PFS-1.1        Provision of Adequate Facilities and Services. Manage and maintain existing public
                      facilities, services and infrastructure, at current or improved service levels.
Policy PFS-1.2        Growth and Level of Service. Require new development to provide adequate facilities
                      or pay its fair share of the cost for facilities needed to provide services to accommodate
                      growth without adversely impacting current service levels.
Policy PFS-1.3        Capital Improvement Program. Continue to update and implement the Capital
                      Improvement Program on an annual basis in a way that supports the vision for the City.
Policy PFS-1.4        Safe, Attractive, and Compatible Public Facilities. Ensure that public facilities are
                      designed to be safe, aesthetically pleasing, and compatible with adjacent uses.
Policy PFS-1.5        Sustainable Facilities and Services. Explore ways of promoting sustainable practices
                      in public facilities, services and infrastructure in a cost-efficient manner.
Policy PFS-1.6        Project Coordination. Coordinate and communicate with utilities and service providers
                      early in project planning in order to take advantage of special programs and avoid issues
                      in the development process.
Policy PFS-1.7        Infill Areas. Identify and prioritize infill areas for infrastructure improvements and
                      assist developers in identifying funding mechanisms to cover the cost of providing
                      facilities and services in infill areas.
Policy PFS-1.8        Underground Utilities. Encourage undergrounding of all existing and new publicly
                      owned utility lines, encourage undergrounding of all privately owned utility lines in new
                      developments, and work with electricity and telecommunications providers to
                      underground or minimize the visual impacts of existing overhead lines.
Page PFS-2                                                                              City of Upland General Plan

FIRE PROTECTION AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE
The City of Upland mitigates potential risk to property and life through providing fire prevention and
emergency response services. The Upland Fire Department strives to continually enhance the City’s capacity
to deliver fire services efficiently and cost effectively through continually improving response times, investing
in new technology, and partnering with adjacent cities in the event of a fire. Risks in Upland from wildfires
and from residential and industrial uses in the City are increased by seasonal Santa Ana winds. Residential
fires pose a risk to human life since many of the structures in Upland were built before improvements to
building codes in 1970.
Goal PFS-2             A community protected by fire prevention and emergency response services.
Policies
Policy PFS-2.1         Staffing Standards. Ensure sufficient levels of staff in order to maintain quality fire
                       protection and emergency medical services to the community as measured by the Fire
                       Department’s performance indicators.
Policy PFS-2.2         Response Times. Strive to improve response times according to the Fire Department’s
                       operational Strategic Plan and standards established by the National Fire Protection
                       Association to provide optimum fire protection and emergency medical services to the
                       community.
Policy PFS-2.3         Fire Stations. Plan fire station locations to maintain or enhance current response levels.
Policy PFS-2.4         Response Units and Facilities. Provide additional response units, staffing and related
                       capital improvements, as needed, to ensure quality service to the community as
                       development and growth occur in the City.
Policy PFS-2.5         Mutual Aid. Continue to participate in mutual aid agreements with Rancho
                       Cucamonga, Ontario, Montclair, Claremont, and surrounding jurisdictions to provide
                       automatic aid during fires or other disasters.
Policy PFS-2.6         Strategic Plan. Support and implement the Fire Department Strategic Plan.
Policy PFS-2.7         Firefighter Training. Train and prepare firefighters to be qualified to fill higher level
                       positions as the need arises.
Policy PFS-2.8         Technology. Invest in and incorporate future technological advances that enhance the
                       City’s ability to deliver fire services more efficiently and cost-effectively.
Policy PFS-2.9         Development Review Process. Identify and mitigate fire hazards through the
                       development review process.
Policy PFS-2.10        Fire Prevention. Require new development to incorporate adequate emergency water
                       flow, fire resistant design and materials, early warning systems and evacuation routes.
Policy PFS-2.11        Emergency Vehicle Access. Require new development to be accessible to emergency
                       vehicles and to not impede the ability of service providers to provide adequate
                       emergency response.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                           Page PFS-3

Policy PFS-2.12       Public and Private Roadways. Ensure that new public and private roadways are
                      adequate in terms of width, radius and grade to accommodate fire-fighting apparatus,
                      while maintaining Upland’s neighborhoods and small-town character.
LAW ENFORCEMENT AND CRIME PREVENTION
Upland uses a multilayered approach to law enforcement and crime prevention. This means a range of
measures such as the use of best practices in law enforcement, to indirect approaches such as ensuring that
the siting and landscaping of buildings is a deterrent to crime. Upland also actively partners with neighboring
cities and communities for the purposes of preventing crime.
Goal PFS-3            A community kept safe through law enforcement and crime prevention.
Policies
Policy PFS-3.1        Facilities and Personnel. Continue to maintain sufficient police staffing, performance
                      levels, and facilities to serve Upland’s existing and future population.
Policy PFS-3.2        Response Time Standards. Strive to achieve and maintain appropriate response times
                      for all call priority levels to provide adequate police services for the safety of all City
                      residents and visitors.
Policy PFS-3.3        Response Units and Facilities. Provide additional response units, staffing and related
                      capital improvements, as needed, to ensure quality service to the community as
                      development and growth occur in the City.
Policy PFS-3.4       Reserve Police Officer Program. Continue to provide and utilize an effective and
                     professional Reserve Police Officer program that supports the goals of the Department
                     and community and assists during hazardous events.
Policy PFS-3.5       Mutual Aid. Continue to participate in mutual aid agreements with Rancho
                     Cucamonga, Ontario, Montclair, Claremont and surrounding jurisdictions in an effort to
                     improve local and regional service standards.
Policy PFS-3.6       Use of Resources. Ensure the most effective use of deployed resources on an on-going
                     basis.
Policy PFS-3.7       Technology and Training. Invest in, and incorporate, future technological advances
                     that enhance the City’s ability to deliver police services more efficiently and cost-
                     effectively, and ensure all necessary personnel are sufficiently trained on an ongoing
                     basis to keep current and be able to administer new technology.
Policy PFS-3.8       Crime Prevention. Apply Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED)
                     principles as an effective means of preventing crime, reducing the fear of crime, and
                     improving quality of life. Design new and modify existing residential and non-residential
                     developments, open spaces, landscaping, parking lots, parks, play areas, and other public
                     spaces to ensure visibility, access control, and sense of ownership.
Policy PFS-3.9       Neighborhood Watch. Promote the Neighborhood Watch Program to enhance
                     neighborhood and citywide safety.
Page PFS-4                                                                           City of Upland General Plan

Policy PFS-3.10       Community Policing. Support community policing through such options as walking
                      and biking police patrols that engage community residents.
Policy PFS-3.11       Gang Activity and Graffiti Prevention. Protect the community from gang activity and
                      graffiti through the efforts of City and County operations and programs and through
                      proactive local and regional enforcement of violations.
Policy PFS-3.12       Nuisance Regulations. Regulate uses that sell or serve alcohol and provide live
                      entertainment to operate in a way that upholds community health, safety, and welfare,
                      and minimizes demand on public services.
EDUCATIONAL SERVICES AND FACILITIES
Access to high quality education is important to attract and maintain residents and business in the City.
Although the City does not control education directly, it partners closely with the school district to ensure the
coordination of facilities meet the needs for safety, capacity and access to schools. Upland also teams with the
schools and outside agencies to provide quality preschool, after-school and community recreation and
education opportunities.
Goal PFS-4            A community with educational services and facilities that meet the demands of
                      existing and new development.
Policies
Policy PFS-4.1        Capacity. Support efforts of the school districts to ensure sufficient educational
                      facilities for Upland’s existing and anticipated kindergarten through twelfth grade
                      population.
Policy PFS-4.2        Development Review. Coordinate with the applicable school district during review of
                      significant development proposals to determine and plan for capacity issues over time.
Policy PFS-4.3        School Facilities Master Plan. Coordinate with each school district in conjunction
                      with new development to help implement their School Facilities Master Plan.
Policy PFS-4.4        After-School Programs. Provide after-school programs to support the extracurricular
                      interests of students.
Policy PFS-4.5        Community Education and Service. Work with the school districts and youth
                      organizations in promoting educational opportunities through service projects for
                      children in the community.
Policy PFS-4.6        Life-long Learning. Work with the school districts and other educational institutions
                      in the City to provide educational courses and programs for adults and seniors.
Policy PFS-4.7        Joint Use. Expand joint use programs with the school districts to allow the use of
                      school sites for recreational purposes and expand parkland in the City.
Policy PFS-4.8        Co-Location of Facilities. Work with school districts and private schools to co-locate
                      school facilities, where possible, with community parks and recreation facilities to
                      encourage the joint use of facilities.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                           Page PFS-5

Policy PFS-4.9        Safe Routes to School. Work with school districts and private schools to site new
                      schools away from major streets to minimize vehicular noise and traffic hazards and to
                      encourage walking and biking to school through safe, well-marked routes and bicycle
                      lanes, and bicycle facilities on school grounds.
Policy PFS-4.10       Site Design for Traffic Mitigation. Require private school sites to provide adequate
                      on-site pick-up and drop-off areas and more than one access point to prevent school-
                      related traffic congestion on the fronting and surrounding roadways, and encourage the
                      school districts to meet similar design standards for traffic mitigation.
Policy PFS-4.11       Land Acquisition. Work with developers to reserve land, in cooperation with the
                      school districts, for purchase by the districts for the construction of new schools.
                      Alternatively, work with the school districts to collect school impact fees in accordance
                      with State law.
RECREATIONAL PROGRAMS AND SERVICES
Beyond having safe, clean park facilities, Upland provides opportunities for residents to enjoy varied
recreational opportunities with programs geared to a wide range of abilities, interests and financial
circumstances. The provision of both structured and unstructured recreational opportunities is important for
the health, wellbeing and quality of life for Upland’s residents.
Goal PFS-5            Recreational programs and services that meet the needs of residents of all ages
                      and interests.
Policy PFS-5.1        Program Evaluation. Evaluate recreational programming on an ongoing basis to
                      ensure that the City’s programs and facilities meet the needs of residents of all age
                      groups, abilities, and income levels.
Policy PFS-5.2        Affordable Recreation. Provide affordable recreational opportunities for all residents
                      with special emphasis on seniors and teens.
Policy PFS-5.3        Public-Private Coordination. Coordinate recreational activities and programs with
                      other public and private recreation providers.
Policy PFS-5.4        Public Events and Activities. Support and expand public activities and resources that
                      promote a sense of community and enhance the City’s “small-town feel” such as cultural
                      events, street fairs, parades, the farmers market, outdoor concerts, after-school
                      programs, and community centers.
Policy PFS-5.5        Arts Programs. Promote visual and performing arts programs.
Policy PFS-5.6        General Use Facilities. Encourage the development of general use “drop-in” facilities
                      that offer a gathering place as well as activities that don’t require joining a structured
                      class or on-going program, such as a gym or recreational facility.
Page PFS-6                                                                           City of Upland General Plan

LIBRARY SERVICES
Access to quality library facilities and programs is important to the residents of Upland. The City strives to
provide a library that is responsive to the educational and social needs of residents of all ages and abilities.
Goal PFS-6            Library services that meet the educational, cultural and social needs of Upland.
Policies
Policy PFS-6.1        Library Programs. Continue to provide, improve and expand successful adult, teen and
                      children programs to improve utilization of the library.
Policy PFS-6.2        Joint Use. Encourage joint use of library facilities with public and private agencies at
                      locations such as schools and community centers.
Policy PFS-6.3        Facility Usage. Encourage the use of library facilities as additional venues for arts-
                      related events and programs (e.g., book readings, concerts, art exhibitions, and others).
Policy PFS-6.4        Computer Technology and Access. Encourage use of computers and the Internet to
                      access library resources and other information.
Policy PFS-6.5        Educational Awareness. Promote public awareness of library programs and services.
Policy PFS-6.6        Learning Environment. Ensure that the public library provides a safe and comfortable
                      learning environment for the community.
Policy PFS-6.7        Funding. Explore methods of financing the expansion needs and upgrades to the
                      existing Public Library.
ANIMAL SERVICES
The City of Upland is proactive in promoting animal-related public safety and welfare in the community. The
City operates an Animal Services facility and gives sheltered animals every opportunity to be reclaimed by
their owner, adopted, or rescued. The City strives to increase the number of animals returned to their owners
and improve the adoption rates of animals that come through the facility. The City continues to work with
volunteers, the community, and the University Health Sciences College of Veterinary Medicine to educate and
expand animal support services in Upland, and pursues grant funding and fundraising activities to minimize
reliance on the City’s General Fund.
Goal PFS-7            A community that ensures public safety and welfare through effective animal
                      control measures and supports sheltering for homeless pets until they are
                      recovered by their owners or find new homes through adoption.
Policies:
Policy PFS-7.1        Public Education. Educate the public about responsible pet ownership.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                            Page PFS-7

Policy PFS-7.2       Euthanasia. Increase the number of animals that are returned to their owners or
                     adopted to new owners such that the need for euthanasia of adoptable animals is
                     minimized.
Policy PFS-7.3       Intake Numbers. Reduce intake numbers through programs such as the Targeted
                     Spay and Neuter Program.
Policy PFS-7.4       Funding. Pursue grant funding and fundraising activities to minimize reliance on the
                     General Fund for operational costs.
Policy PFS-7.5       Volunteer Assistance. Recruit and retain volunteer assistance in a variety of activities
                     to supplement and expand shelter programming and enhance the care and socialization
                     of the animals at the Upland Animal Services Facility
Policy PFS-7.6       Foster Care Program. Manage the volunteer foster care program such that it offsets
                     the number of young animals that must be cared for in the Upland Animal Services
                     Facility.
Policy PFS-7.7       Shelter Population. Collaborate with other animal control facilities and rescue
                     organizations that are able to accept animals into their programs to transfer and place
                     homeless pets to reduce the shelter population as much as possible.
Policy PFS-7.8       Surgical Classes. Support Western University Health Sciences College of Veterinary
                     Medicine to continue providing surgical classes on spaying and neutering within the
                     shelter’s medical facility to reduce the cost of adoptions to the public.
Policy PFS-7.9       Shelter Medicine Curriculum. Support efforts by Western University Health Sciences
                     College of Veterinary Medicine to implement a shelter medicine curriculum in addition
                     to their surgical classes currently held at the shelter to provide more comprehensive care
                     for shelter animals at a reduced cost to the City.
WATER
Water is a scarce natural resource in Southern California and as such must be carefully managed. Upland’s
residents and businesses require reliable and cost-effective sources of water for a variety of domestic,
commercial and industrial uses. The uses for water vary, creating opportunities for water to come from
different sources to match the quality required. Upland will continue to explore and implement opportunities
to conserve and recycle water in both the public and private sector. Additionally, stormwater will continue to
be managed in such a way as to not increase demands on Upland’s infrastructure, and instead, serve to
replenish ground water supplies. The Inland Empire Utilities Agency and other agencies partner with the City
of Upland to manage water supply, distribution and disposal.
Goal PFS-8           A community with a reliable and adequate supply of water for all members of the
                     community.
Policies
Policy PFS-8.1       Water System Master Plan. Continue to periodically update and implement the 2010
                     Water System Master Plan.
Page PFS-8                                                                           City of Upland General Plan

Policy PFS-8.2     Water Supply. Continue to acquire additional local supplies of water, including local
                   groundwater, and reduce reliance on imported water from the State Water Project to
                   meet future demands while maintaining a baseline so in times of drought, supplemental
                   supplies will be available.
Policy PFS-8.3     Water Demand. Establish water demand reduction standards for new development and
                   redevelopment to reduce per capita and total demand for water.
Policy PFS-8.4     New Development. Require new developments to dedicate land for water
                   infrastructure such as tanks, pump stations, and wells as needed to support project
                   development.
Policy PFS-8.5     Water Availability. Consider the availability of sufficient, reliable water when reviewing
                   new development.
Policy PFS-8.6     Water Infrastructure. Maintain water storage, conveyance, and treatment infrastructure
                   in good working condition in order to supply domestic water to all users with adequate
                   quantities, flows, and pressures.
Policy PFS-8.7     Facility Capacity. Require all new water facilities to be designed to accommodate
                   expected capacity for buildout of areas served by these facilities.
Policy PFS-8.8     Emergency Supply. Manage the water supply portfolio and system facilities to provide
                   for adequate redundancy to address emergency conditions.
Policy PFS-8.9     Design of Water Systems. Require future water systems and facilities to be designed to
                   minimize the likelihood of damage from vandalism or terrorist activity.
Goal PFS-9         A community that supports the use of water conservation measures and the
                   provision of recycled water to minimize the demand on potable water resources.
Policies
Policy PFS-9.1     Best Management Practices. Require new development projects to adopt best
                   management practices for water use efficiency and demonstrate specific water
                   conservation measures.
Policy PFS-9.2     Conservation Programs and Standards. Implement cost-effective water conservation
                   programs, such as the existing rebates and grants for water efficiency and conservation,
                   and enforce the Upland Municipal Code water conservation standards, to improve
                   water-use efficiency, reduce water demand, and preserve the City’s supplies.
Policy PFS-9.3     Regional Conservation. Coordinate with neighboring water purveyors to address local
                   and regional water issues and implement regional water conservation programs as part
                   of its water resource management strategy.
Policy PFS-9.4     Purple Pipe System. Review new development projects to determine which are
                   appropriate for recycled water piping systems (“purple pipe”) and require these projects
                   to incorporate dual potable and recycled water facilities into their design.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                       Page PFS-9

Policy PFS-9.5  Irrigation. As appropriate, require all businesses and industries to use recycled water for
                irrigation.
Policy PFS-9.6  Recycled Water Facilities. Encourage new industrial/commercial and residential
                developers to construct recycled water backbone facilities for their development.
                Additionally, continue to work with the IEUA to provide facilities for recycled water
                distribution.
Policy PFS-9.7  Captured Rainwater. Encourage the use of captured rainwater for use in landscapes
                and irrigation.
WASTEWATER/SEWER
Goal PFS-10     Wastewater collected, conveyed, treated and disposed of in ways that are safe,
                sanitary and meet Federal and State regulations.
Policies
Policy PFS-10.1 Maintenance of Wastewater System. Maintain wastewater collection and conveyance
                infrastructure in good working condition in order to supply municipal sewer service to
                the City’s residents and businesses.
Policy PFS-10.2 Connection to Wastewater System. Require all new development located within the
                City limits to connect to the public wastewater collection system.
Policy PFS-10.3 Wastewater System Coordination. Promote coordination between land use planning
                and wastewater collection, conveyance, treatment, and disposal.
Policy PFS-10.4 Wastewater System Capacity. Ensure that all wastewater collection and conveyance
                facilities are constructed to serve the ultimate buildout of all developments. This shall be
                done in coordination with the applicable regional agencies, which are responsible for
                providing treatment services.
Policy PFS-10.5 New Facilities. Construct new wastewater conveyance facilities as needed.
Policy PFS-10.6 New Development. Grant conditional approval of new development on the availability
                of sufficient capacity in the wastewater collection and treatment system to serve the
                project. Hold individual development projects responsible for their fair share of
                upgrades.
Policy PFS-10.7 Biosolid Disposal. Work with the applicable regional agency to ensure biosolid
                disposal is managed so as to minimize impacts to the environment and public health.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Goal PFS-11     Water quality in the City’s creeks, basins, and stormwater system is protected
                from contamination.
Page PFS-10                                                                     City of Upland General Plan

Policies
Policy PFS-11.1    Protection of Surface Water Resources. Implement the Santa Ana Regional Water
                   Quality Control Board’s (SARWQCB) Best Management Practices to protect surface
                   water resources from contamination from runoff containing pollutants and sediment.
Policy PFS-11.2    New Development. Require new development to protect the quality of water bodies
                   and natural drainage systems through site design, source controls, stormwater treatment,
                   runoff reduction measures, best management practices (BMPs), Low Impact
                   Development (LID), and hydromodification strategies consistent with the City’s
                   NPDES Permit.
Policy PFS-11.3    No Net Increase. Require all new development to contribute no net increase in
                   stormwater runoff peak flows over existing conditions associated with a 100-year storm
                   event.
Policy PFS-11.4    Post-Development Runoff. Require controlling the volume, frequency, duration, and
                   peak flow rates and velocities of runoff from development projects to prevent or reduce
                   downstream erosion and protect stream habitat.
Policy PFS-11.5    Regional Planning. Work with local, State, and federal agencies and private watershed
                   organizations to improve water quality.
Policy PFS-11.6    Watershed Education. Support watershed awareness and water quality educational
                   programs for City staff and the community.
Goal PFS-12        Storm-water collected, conveyed, stored and disposed of to protect property from
                   flooding and to recharge groundwater.
Policies
Policy PFS-12.1    Stormwater Conveyance. Design storm drain systems to convey stormwater and
                   recycled water to recharge the groundwater basin.
Policy PFS-12.2    Groundwater Recharge. Work with appropriate agencies to locate available facilities
                   and to provide the retaining facilities necessary to recharge the groundwater basin using
                   the City’s stormwater.
Policy PFS-12.3    Maintenance. Maintain stormwater runoff infrastructure in good condition through
                   regular inspections, maintenance, and repair.
Policy PFS-12.4    Capacity. Periodically review stormwater runoff infrastructure to ensure that it
                   minimizes local flooding by attaining capacity that conforms to the Stormwater Master
                   Plan.
Policy PFS-12.5    Improvements. Require that local stormwater runoff drainage improvements be built
                   to carry design-year runoff flows resulting from buildout of the land uses shown in the
                   Land Use Element.
Goal PFS-13        Storm drainage facilities that are adequate for new development projects.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                    Page PFS-11

Policies
Policy PFS-13.1      Best Management Practices. During the construction and operation of projects,
                     promote the use of Best Management Practices (BMPs) to reduce stormwater runoff,
                     improve water quality and reduce the requirements for stormwater runoff drainage
                     infrastructure.
Policy PFS-13.2      Watershed Drainage Plans. Require developers to prepare watershed drainage plans
                     for proposed developments that define needed drainage improvements per City
                     standards, estimate construction costs for these improvements, and comply with the
                     City’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
Policy PFS-13.3      Water Quality. Enforce adopted regulations addressing stormwater runoff from urban
                     uses to protect the quality of surface and ground water and other resources from
                     detrimental conditions.
SOLID WASTE
In keeping with its commitment to environmental sustainability, the City of Upland partners with the public,
outside agencies and the private sector to minimize the generation of waste and dispose of it in ways that are
sanitary and healthful for residents. Municipal operations serve as a model for environmentally responsible
waste management.
Goal PFS-14          Solid waste generation is minimized and collected, stored, transported and
                     recycled in safe, sanitary, and environmentally acceptable ways.
Policies
Policy PFS-14.1      State Diversion Goal. Strive to exceed the State’s goal of diverting solid waste from
                     landfills.
Policy PFS-14.2      Solid Waste Pick-up. Require trash, recycling, and greenwaste pick-up as a means to
                     ensure a safe, sanitary environment.
Policy PFS-14.3      Household Hazardous Waste. Provide for the collection and recycling of household
                     hazardous waste as well as e-waste, used oil and filter container recycling, and sharps
                     disposal (needles/syringes) at the City Yard.
Policy PFS-14.4      Business Recycling and Composting. Support current and future regulations
                     regarding commercial recycling.
Policy PFS-14.5      City Operations. Serve as a role model to businesses and institutions regarding
                     purchasing decisions that minimize the generation of solid waste in addition to
                     encouraging all City staff to recycle at City facilities.
Policy PFS-14.6      Disposable, Toxic or Non-Renewable Products. Reduce the use of disposable, toxic
                     or non-renewable products in City operations.
Policy PFS-14.7      Recycle Asphalt Pavement. Promote the use of recycled asphalt pavement (RAP) for
                     streets and parking lots, where feasible.
Page PFS-12                                                                     City of Upland General Plan

Policy PFS-14.8        Recycled Materials in New Construction. Encourage the use of recycled materials in
                       new construction.
TECHNOLOGY AND UTILITIES
In order for Upland to remain competitive and desirable as a place to live and do business, it must provide
access to the most up-to-date infrastructure for telecommunications, the internet and other utilities. Upland
partners with utilities to ensure that the infrastructure is provided in a way that is in keeping with Upland’s
commitment to environmental sustainability.
Goal PFS-15            A community supported by the most current and sustainable provision of
                       technology and utilities to service residents, businesses and institutions.
Policies
Policy PFS-15.1        Access and Availability. Work with utility and service providers to ensure access to
                       and availability of utilities and telecommunication facilities for households, businesses,
                       institutions, and public agencies throughout the City.
Policy PFS-15.2        Project Coordination. Work with utility and service providers early the development
                       process to ensure utility and service needs can be successfully integrated into projects.
Policy PFS-15.3        Adequate Internet Facilities and Service. Work with service providers to retrofit
                       areas of the City that are not served by current telecommunication and fiber-optic
                       communication technologies.
Policy PFS-15.4        Co-Location. Encourage compatible colocation of telecommunication and internet
                       facilities and work with utility companies and internet service providers to provide
                       opportunities for siting facilities on City-owned property and in suitable public right-of-
                       ways.
Policy PFS-15.5        Incorporation into Public Buildings. Incorporate new technology into public
                       buildings (e.g., Library, City Hall) and operations on an on-going basis to increase
                       productivity and enhance customer service and access to City services.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                           Page PFS-13


                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CITY OF UPLAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                GENERAL PLAN UPDATE
Map Date: 07/31/12
                                                                                                                                                   EU
                                                                                                                                                    C
                                                                                                                           E                             LI D
                                                                                                                        AV
                                                                                                                          .
                                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                            MOUNT A I N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    City of
                                                                                                                                                                   VE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Rancho Cucamonga
                                                                                                                                              23RD ST.
                                                              el
                                                          h an n                                                                                                                                               Cu
                                                         nio C                                                                                                                                                 com
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                ong
                     City of                     Anto                                                                                         21ST ST.
                    Claremont                                                                                                                                                                                          ann
                                            Sa n                                                   E.                      Fire Station                                                                              Ch
                                                                                                 AV
                                                                                                                                                                                V
                                                                                                                                                                                U
                                                              n ty                           N                               No. 162
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           el
                                                                                          SO
                                                           C ou                B     EN                                                                                          210
                                                                                                        V
                                                                                                        U
                                                                                                                                              19TH ST.
                                         nty             rdin                                                                                                                          Fire Station
                                                              o                                                  30
                                        C ou                                                                                                                                             No. 164
                                                     e r na
                                     eles     San
                                  A ng            B
                                 Lo s
                                                  BASELINE ST.                                                                                16TH ST.
                                                                                                                           SAN ANTONIO AVE.
                                                                                                        MOUNTAIN AVE.
                                Fire Station
                                                                                                                                                                                            CAMPUS AVE.
                                  No. 165
                                                                                                                                                                EUCLID AVE.
                              (Helicopter 165)                                                                                                14TH ST.
                                                                        City Yard
                              Cable                                                  Upland Police
                                                           Fire Station
                              Airport
                                                                                                                                                                                                          V
                                                                                                                                                                                                          U
                                                                                      Department
                                                             No. 163
                                                                                                                                                                              FOOTHILL BLVD.              66
                                          CENTRAL AVE.                 BENSON AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                  V
                                                                                                                                                                  U      83
                                                                                                                                                                                 Fire Station
                                                                                                                                                                                 No. 161
                                                                                                                                                                                            San Antonio
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Animal
                                                                                                                                                                                                           Shelter
                                                                                                                                              City                                      Community Hospital
                                                                                                                                   ARROW HWY. Hall
                                                                                                                                                   Upland                          Carnegie
                                                                                                                                                   Public                      Cultural Center
                                                                                                                                                   Library
                                 !
                                 (                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                 (
                                                                                                                                               8TH ST.
                City of                                                                                                                        7TH ST.                                                                             City of
                Montclair                                                                                                                                                                                                          Ontario
                                                                                                                                                                                                          §
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ¦           GROVE AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
          0                   0.5                                 1 Miles
        City Limits                                Community Facilities
        Sphere of Influence
        County Boundary
        Upland Parcel
   !
   (    Metrolink Station
        Rail Line                                                                                                                                                                                  FIGURE PFS-1
                                                                                                                                                                                PUBLIC FACILITIES AND SERVICES
        Southern Pacific Trail


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CITY OF UPLAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GENERAL PLAN UPDATE
Map Date: 07/31/12
                                                                                                                                                                EU
                                                                                                                                                                  C
                                                                                                                                  E                                    LI D
                                                                                                                               AV
                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                                                                                                               A
                                                                                                                   MOUNT A I N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     City of
                                                                                                                                                                                 VE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Rancho Cucamonga
                                                                                                                                               23RD ST.
                                                                el
                                                                                                                                        Valencia Elementary
                                                              h an n                                                                           School                                                                           Cu
                                                             nio C                                                                                                                                                              com
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ong
                  City of                            Anto                                                                                                   21ST ST.
                 Claremont                                                                                                                                                                                                              ann
                                               Sa n                                                     E.                                                                                                                            Ch
                                                                                                      AV
                                                                                                                                                                                              V
                                                                                                                                                                                              U
                                                                                                  N                                                                                                                                           el
                                                                                           N   SO
                                                                                     BE                                                                                                        210
                                                                                                               V
                                                                                                               U
                                                                                                                                                            19TH ST.
                                                                                                                        30                                   Pioneer Junior
                                                                                                                                                              High School
                                                                                                                Pepper Tree
                                                                                                             Elementary School
                                                                                                                                              16TH ST.         St. Mark's
                                                      BASELINE ST.
                                                                                                                                Carden Arbor                Episcopal School
                              nt y                                                                                               View School Magnolia Elementary
                                      unt y
                                                                                                                                         SAN ANTONIO AVE.
                             Co u                                                                                                                   School
                                     o Co
                                                                                                               MOUNTAIN AVE.
                        eles                                                    Foothill Bible
                                                                                                                                                                              EUCLID AVE.              CAMPUS AVE.
                       A ng     ardin            Cable                     Preschool Kindergarden                                                           14TH ST.                    Sierra Vista
                      Lo s     Bern              Airport                                                                                                                             Elementary School
                             S an                                                                                                                                                                                      Foothill Knolls
                                                                                                                 Sycamore                                                                                            Elementary School
                                                                                                             Elementary School
                                                                                                       Baldy View
                                                                                                                    Upland High
                                                                                                                                                                                            FOOTHILL BLVD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         U 66
                                              CENTRAL AVE.
                                                                                                                      School                                                                             St. Joseph
                                                                             BENSON AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                                V
                                                                                                                                                                                U
                                                                                                    Elementary School                                                                                Elementary School
                                                                                   Cabrillo Elementary                                                                                 83
           Calvary Chapel Upland
             Christian Academy                                                            School
                                                                                                                                                                                                     Upland Elementary &
                                                                                                                               Pacific Christian ARROW HWY.                                           Junior High Schools
                                                                                                                                    School
                                                                                                                                                               Upland Christian
                                                                        Hillside                                                                                   Schools
                                      !
                                      (
                                                                       Highschool                                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                 Mountain Green 8TH ST.
                                                                                                                                   Preschool
                City of                                                                                       Citrus Elementary
                                                                                                                    School                                   7TH ST.                                                                                  City of
                Montclair                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ontario
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ¦                GROVE AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
          0                         0.5                               1 Miles
          County Boundary                 School Sites
                                                             Private
          Sphere of Influence
                                                             Public
          City Limits
          Upland Parcel
          Southern Pacific Trail
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FIGURE PFS-2
          Rail Line
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SCHOOLS
    !
    (     Metrolink Station


HEALTHY COMMUNITY ELEMENT
ELEMENT DESCRIPTION FOR HOMEPAGE
Our health is one of the most important qualities we have. Secure employment, good neighborhoods,
or quality housing—though important to residents and the community—mean little if we are in poor
health. In recent years, the medical professional and urban planning field have found that our
environment—where we live and work, how we travel, what we eat, and where and when we play,
socialize, and are physically active—has a major impact on health and well-being. Because health is
affected by how we plan our community, improving public health through policy and action is a
desirable goal for Upland.
The Healthy Community Element is intended to promote a living and working environment that
improves the health and well-being of residents, families, and community. This element’s goals and
policies are directed at the natural environment, community design, health care facilities and access,
and lifestyle choices. They span and complement the goals and policies of other general plan
elements that are implicitly related to public health. This element also intends to break new ground
and establish an agenda centered on the health and wellness of Upland residents, workforce, and
visitors.
OVERARCHING GOAL
A community that promotes a positive physical, social, and economic environment that supports the
health and well-being of its members, quality of life, and long-term sustainability.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTIONS SECTIONS
•    Land Use, Transportation, and Design
•    Active Living Environment
•    Environmental Quality
•    Food and Beverage Environment
•    Alcohol, Tobacco, and Drug Use
•    Health Facilities and Services
•    Safe Community
BACKGROUND DOCUMENTS AND RESOURCES
•    Technical Memorandum
•    Parks and Recreation Master Plan
•    Bicycle and Pedestrian Master Plan
•    Upland Unified School District
•    CDC Healthy Communities Program
•    National Prevention Strategy
•    Healthy People 2020 Objectives
City of Upland General Plan                                                                  Page H-1

LAND USE, TRANSPORTATION, AND DESIGN
Goal HC-1              A City that incorporates and prioritizes health and wellness principles in
                       City planning decisions affecting land use, housing, transportation,
                       parks, neighborhoods, services, and the environment.
Upland’s built environment—its transportation, land use, parks, housing, and urban design—affects
our quality of life and the opportunities to choose a healthy lifestyle. Complete streets and safe
transportation routes encourage walking, bicycling, and transit use. Complete neighborhoods with
parks, recreation, food stores, and services improve our choices to be active and healthier. An
appropriate balance of land uses and services creates a more complete community. And a diverse
range of housing types and prices for residents of all ages and abilities help satisfy the life-stage
housing needs of residents. Upland will implement the following land use, transportation, and design
policies that further health.
Policies
Policy HC-1.1          Health in All Policies. Consider how all City land use, development projects,
                       regulations, permitting processes, and other decisions impact community health,
                       and prioritize decisions that positively contribute to the health of residents,
                       workforce, and the community.
Policy HC-1.2          Complete Neighborhoods. Encourage new development to create complete
                       neighborhoods and districts where residents can live within an easy and safe
                       walking distance to daily services, recreational opportunities, and other
                       community amenities that are part of a healthy lifestyle (cf: CC-4).
Policy HC-1.3          Complete Streets. Enhance and improve the safety, convenience, and
                       accessibility of roadways with trees, sidewalks, bicycle lanes, and other amenities
                       to encourage pedestrian, bike, and transit activity for residents of all ages and
                       abilities.(cf: CIR-3)
Policy HC-1.4          Life-Stage Housing. Provide a diversity of housing types by location, tenure,
                       type of unit, and price level throughout the City; support housing
                       accommodations or living arrangements that can accommodate people and
                       households of all ages and abilities.
ACTIVE LIVING ENVIRONMENT
Goal HC-2             An active living environment that offers ample parks, community
                      facilities, recreation activities, and multiuse pedestrian and bicycle trails,
                      and development types that encourage a healthy and active lifestyle.
Being physically active on a regular basis is a key way to improve and maintain our health. In
combination with healthy eating, physical activity helps to maintain a healthy weight, improve mental
health, and reduce the risks and costs of chronic disease. Making available safe, accessible, and
affordable parks, recreational facilities, age-appropriate recreational programs as well as other
community amenities, such as shopping centers and places of employment, can help encourage
people to build exercise into their daily routines and choose healthier lives. Bicycle routes, sidewalks
with trees, and trails also encourage residents to bicycle and walk to and from community
Page H-2                                                                     City of Upland General Plan

destinations rather than drive. Upland will encourage an environment that fosters active living
through the following policies.
Policies
Policy HC-2.1        Parks and Open Space. Improve the availability and accessibility of parks
                     resources through joint use agreements, alternative forms of parks, and other
                     opportunities for recreation. (cf: OSC-2)
Policy HC-2.2        Recreational Facilities. Support the availability and accessibility of age-
                     appropriate recreational facilities, both private or publicly owned, to meet the
                     diverse recreational needs of Upland residents. (cf: OSC-2)
Policy HC-2.3        Recreation Programs. Provide and/or sponsor recreational programs, and
                     services that are accessible and affordable to residents of all ages and abilities
                     and encourage active and healthy living. (cf: OSC-2)
Policy HC-2.4        Bicycle and Pedestrian Routes. Expand and maintain safe bicycle and
                     pedestrian trails, facilities, crosswalks, and connections to various community
                     amenities to encourage residents to be physically active and exercise. (cf: CIR-2)
Policy HC-2.5        Health Education. Provide and/or support the provision of educational
                     campaigns that teach residents about the health benefits of exercise and physical
                     activity and that motivate lifestyle changes.
ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY
Goal HC-3            Clean and healthful natural environment that promotes the health and
                     well-being of Upland residents and workforce and distinguishes Upland
                     as a healthful place to live and work.
Residents choose to live in Upland because of our natural environment, trees and landscape features,
and the health benefits they offer. The water we drink, the air we breathe, and the noise we hear
influence our health, wellness, and quality of life. In southern California, we are surrounded by
environmental pollutants that affect our health and well-being. While we cannot eliminate all
environmental pollutants—and some are beyond our control, such as regional air quality—Upland
recognizes and values the importance of a clean environment that promotes the health and well-
being of residents. The City is committed to providing a clean and healthful natural environment
through the following policies.
Policies
Policy HC-3.1        Air Quality. Improve indoor and outdoor air quality through land use siting,
                     appropriate mitigation, education, enforcement, and coordinated planning with
                     business, government, and residents. (cf: OSC-3)
Policy HC-3.2        Water Quality. Improve and maintain the quality of water resources by
                     controlling runoff, managing the watershed, and implementing other best
                     management practices. (cf: PFS-7)
Policy HC-3.3        Noise Levels. Protect the health of residents from excessive interior and
                     exterior noise through the enforcement of noise standards, land use siting
                     criteria, and appropriate mitigation. (cf: SAF-1)
City of Upland General Plan                                                                   Page H-3

Policy HC-3.4          Hazardous Waste. Work with government agencies, private industry, and
                       stakeholders to manage the generation, transport, and use of toxic and/or
                       hazardous wastes, and reduce their accidental release. (cf: SAF-5)
FOOD AND BEVERAGE ENVIRONMENT
Goal HC-4              A balanced retail food and beverage environment that offers a wide
                       variety of foods and beverages that are affordable and culturally
                       appropriate and that encourage healthy lifestyle choices.
Nutritious food and beverages contribute to our health and well-being. However, which foods and
beverages are consumed is largely determined by availability and cost. As is the case for cities in the
Inland Empire, Upland has an abundance of unhealthy food and beverage stores compared to
healthier alternatives. In combination with lack of physical activity, this may contribute to poorer
food choices and poorer health. A balance of healthy and unhealthy retail food and beverage stores,
coupled with a better understanding of the benefits of good nutrition, can encourage residents to
choose healthier food alternatives. Upland will implement the following policies to encourage
healthier lifestyle choices.
Policies
Policy HC-4.1          Healthy Food Sources. Attract and support a wider range and number of
                       healthy food sources, including full-service grocery stores, ethnic food markets,
                       healthy restaurants, and farmers’ markets.
Policy HC-4.2          Sit-down Restaurants. Attract sit-down restaurants that offer a broader choice
                       of foods, including healthier options, as an alternative to convenience food
                       establishments.
Policy HC-4.3          Community Education. Support programs that educate residents about
                       healthy eating habits and lifestyles, including topics such as nutrition, healthy
                       cooking, life-stage nutrition needs, and similar topics.
ALCOHOL, TOBACCO, AND DRUGS
Goal HC-5              A community free of alcohol dependency, tobacco use, and drug abuse
                       by creating an environment that supports healthy choices, provides
                       access to prevention and treatment services, and enforces laws that
                       protect residents and the community.
Many Upland residents know there is no better place to live or raise a family. This quality is not
accidental, but evolved through proactive policies and actions that create community and institutional
structures to support families and children. Cities must continually address the availability of alcohol,
tobacco, and drugs to limit not only the harm to individuals but also the far-reaching consequences
to families, school and job performance, and our community. The causes of alcohol, tobacco, and
drug use are many and require an approach aimed at environmental prevention, intervention,
treatment, and enforcement. Upland will implement the following policies to address these issues:
Page H-4                                                                     City of Upland General Plan

Policies
Policy HC-5.1           School Programs. Support programs of the Upland Unified School District to
                        educate students and change social norms in an effort to involve youth, parents,
                        and educators in developing programs that prevent and treat alcohol, tobacco,
                        and drug use among youth.
Policy HC-5.2           Public Education. Work with local organizations to educate residents,
                        businesses, and others about the harmful effects of tobacco, alcohol, and drug
                        use and the need for effective control strategies; support organizations that
                        educate the community.
Policy HC-5.3           Land Use/Permitting. Consider the concentration of alcohol and/or tobacco
                        retail outlets in land use decisions; consider regulating the permitting of
                        additional alcohol and/or tobacco retail outlets where an undue concentration
                        exists.
Policy HC-5.4           Social Services. Continue to support the permitting of sites and services for
                        substance abuse treatment, rehabilitation services, mental health services, or
                        other social service programs that reach individuals and families commensurate
                        with the need in Upland.
HEALTH FACILITIES AND SERVICES
Goal HC-6               A community where all members have convenient access to a full range
                        of quality primary, preventative, and specialty health care, including
                        mental health, vision, and dental care.
Access to health and wellness services is an important part of a healthy community. Upland residents
benefit from affordable and quality dental, medical, and specialty care services that provide
prevention and treatment services in the community. This includes private, public, and nonprofit
organizations providing health and auxiliary services affordable to residents of all income levels, ages,
families, and abilities. Many of these social, health, and community organizations also educate Upland
residents about how to make healthier lifestyle choices. Because of the importance of health in the
community, Upland is committed to encouraging and supporting health facilities and services
through both policies and programs:
Policies
Policy HC-6.1           Hospital Facilities. Support and facilitate the periodic plans for expansion,
                        rehabilitation, and renovation of San Antonio Community Hospital to meet the
                        diverse needs of Upland and the greater region.
Policy HC-6.2           Health Services. Support the relocation and availability of organizations
                        providing a broad range of health prevention and treatment services
                        commensurate with the diverse needs of Upland residents.
Policy HC-6.3           School Health Programs. Support community groups, the San Bernardino
                        County Public Health Department, and Upland Unified School District to
                        support school health education and services.
Policy HC-6.4           Special Needs. Support organizations serving the health needs of seniors and
                        disabled people; ensure that land use, zoning, and permitting standards
                        encourage the siting of special needs facilities in Upland.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                   Page H-5
Policy HC-6.5         Community Needs Collaboration. Foster collaboration among community
                      based organizations, education and faith based sectors, businesses, and
                      clinicians to identify community needs and ensure that prevention-focused
                      healthcare and services are available, integrated, and mutually reinforcing.
SAFE ENVIRONMENTS
Goal HC-7            A community that is safe and welcoming to residents of all ages and
                     contributes to a healthy and active lifestyle.
A healthy community is fundamentally one that is safe for all residents living in Upland. It provides
safe, attractive, and clean neighborhoods and public spaces. Roadways and pedestrian connections
are safe for residents to walk, bicycle, and travel on. Residents feel safe from crime and can take
walks during the evening or walk around town. Schools provide a safe environment for children to
learn and be active. Residents are safe from environmental hazards that lead to poor health and
diminish quality of life. Although Upland is known as a safe community, efforts need to be
continued. The City will continue to implement policies and programs to make Upland a safe place
for residents.
Policies
Policy HC-7.1         Safe Streets. Incorporate improvements to street designs, pedestrian routes,
                      and enforcement that make it safer to walk and bicycle to activity centers,
                      including shopping, schools, parks, and other destinations.
Policy HC-7.2         Safe Schools. Support efforts at the Upland Unified School District to
                      maximize the safety of students during school hours and after school through
                      education and enforcement of regulations.
Policy HC-7.3         Safe Neighborhoods. Support safe and healthy neighborhoods through
                      neighborhood watch efforts, community policing techniques, and targeted
                      efforts in certain neighborhoods or apartments.
Policy HC-7.4         Safe Community Planning.                  Apply Crime Prevention Through
                      Environmental Design principles when reviewing new development and
                      addressing crime prevention opportunities within the community.
Policy HC-7.5         Safe Environment. Continue to support policies and programs that ensure an
                      environment that is safe from air, water, noise, hazardous waste, and other
                      manmade environmental hazards (cf: HC-2).
Page H-6                                                                    City of Upland General Plan
SAFETY ELEMENT
ELEMENT DESCRIPTION FOR HOMEPAGE
The City of Upland is proud of its safe environment and is committed to the protection of life and property
from the risks of natural and man-made hazards. Upland is susceptible to natural hazards such as
earthquakes, flooding, and wildfires; and by man-made threats caused by exposure to harmful noise sources,
hazardous materials, sickness and crime. Protection from natural and man-made hazards is essential in
establishing a sense of well-being for residents and attracting new residents and quality businesses to the City
that help to sustain a thriving economy. Upland will continue to collaborate with outside agencies and
educate the community to ensure ongoing emergency preparedness, prevention and response in the event of
a hazardous incident.
OVERARCHING GOAL
A community protected from natural and man-made hazards including noise, floods, earthquakes, fire, and
hazardous materials, through prevention, preparedness, and emergency response.
GOAL AND POLICY SECTIONS
•   Noise
•   Flood Hazards
•   Earthquakes and Geologic Hazards
•   Wildland and Urban Fires
•   Hazardous Materials
•   Airports
•   Preparation and Emergency Response
GENERAL PLAN FIGURES
•   Figure SAF-1 (Faults and Fault Zones)
•   Figure SAF-2 (100-Year and 200-Year Flood Zones)
•   Figure SAF-3 (High Fire Hazard Zones)
BACKGROUND DOCUMENTS
•   Upland General Plan Existing Conditions Report: Natural Environment
City of Upland General Plan                                                                         Page SAF-1

NOISE
Upland protects residents, the labor force and visitors from the harmful effects of noise by establishing
exterior and interior noise standards. Higher exterior noise standards are permitted for mixed-use and
residential infill projects, as long as the interior noise standard is maintained. Policies in this section help
mitigate for noise by requiring the implementation of noise reduction techniques in site design and
construction to ensure the compatibility of uses. Mobile sources of noise, such as vehicles and aircraft, are
also regulated by the enforcement of Upland’s noise standards.
Goal SAF-1                  Upland is protected from interior and exterior noise levels that cause harm to
                            safety, health and well-being.
Policies
Policy SAF-1.1              Exterior Noise Standards. Require noise mitigation for all development where the
                            projected exterior noise levels exceed those shown in Table SAF-1, to the extent
                            feasible.
Table SAF-1           Exterior Noise Compatibility Standards
                                                                                                 Highest Level of Noise Exposure
                                                                                                          that is Regarded as
                                                                                                        “Normally Acceptable”
                                 Land Use Type                                                               (Ldn of CNEL)
Residential – Low Density Single-Family, Duplex, Mobile Homes                                                      60 dBA
Residential – Multi-Family                                                                                         65 dBA
Mixed-Use                                                                                                          70 dBA
Transient Lodging – Hotels, Motels                                                                                 65 dBA
Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals, Nursing Homes                                                             70 dBA
Auditoriums, Concert Halls, Amphitheaters                                                         Mitigation based on site-specific study
Sports Arena, Outdoors Spectator Sports                                                           Mitigation based on site-specific study
Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks                                                                                    70 dBA
Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Water Recreation, Cemeteries                                                         75 dBA
Office Buildings – Commercial, Office/Professional                                                                 70 dBA
Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities, Agriculture                                                                  75 dBA
Source: Governor’s Office of Planning and Research, State of California General Plan Guidelines 2003, 2003, pages 244-254.
Policy SAF-1.2              Exterior Incremental Noise Standards. Require noise mitigation for all development
                            that increases existing noise levels by more than the allowable increment shown in Table
                            SAF-4, to the extent feasible.
Page SAF-2                                                                                                    City of Upland General Plan

TABLE SAF-4          EXTERIOR I NCREMENTAL NOISE IMPACT STANDARDS                        FOR  NOISE-SENSITIVE
                     USES (DBA)
           Residences and Buildings                            Institutional Land Uses with Primarily
         Where People Normally Sleep                                  Daytime and Evening Uses
                                 Allowable Noise                  Existing Peak            Allowable Noise
    Existing Ldn                     Increment                       Hour Ldn                 Increment
           45                              8                             45                       12
           50                              5                             50                        9
           55                              3                             55                        6
           60                              2                             60                        5
           65                              1                             65                        3
           70                              1                             70                        3
           75                              0                             75                        1
           80                              0                             80                        0
Source: Federal Transit Administration, Transit Noise and Vibration Impact Assessment, 2006.
Policy SAF-1.3             Interior Noise Standards. Require new development to include noise mitigation to
                           assure acceptable interior noise levels appropriate to the land use type: 45 dBA Ldn for
                           residential, transient lodgings, hospitals, nursing homes, and other uses where people
                           normally sleep; and 45 dBA Ldn (peak hour) for office buildings and similar uses.
Policy SAF-1.4             Location of Noise-Sensitive Land Uses. Prevent noise-sensitive land uses (schools,
                           medical centers and hospitals, senior centers, and residences) from locating in areas with
                           noise levels that exceed those considered normally acceptable for each land use unless
                           measures can be implemented to reduce noise to acceptable levels.
Policy SAF-1.5             Noise Impact Study. Require a noise impact study to evaluate impacts of projects that
                           may exceed 65 Ldn as part of the design review process.
Policy SAF-1.6             Acoustical Study. Require an acoustical study for all new residential developments that
                           lie within the 65 Ldn noise contour on the Future Noise Contour Map, to ensure indoor
                           levels will not exceed City standards. In addition, the City shall continue to enforce the
                           California Building Code for indoor noise levels.
Policy SAF-1.7             Noise Reduction in Site Design. Require measures that attenuate exterior and/or
                           interior noise levels to acceptable levels to be incorporated into all development projects
                           where current and/or future outdoor noise levels may be unacceptable. Require noise
                           reduction features, the focus of which shall be on site design techniques, so long as they
                           do not conflict with the goals of the Community Character Element. Techniques
                           include:
City of Upland General Plan                                                                                   Page SAF-3
                      a.   Designing landscaped building setbacks to serve as a buffer between the noise
                           source and receptor.
                      b. Placing noise-tolerant land uses such as parking lots, maintenance facilities, and
                           utility areas between the noise source and receptor.
                      c.   Orienting buildings to shield noise-sensitive outdoor spaces from a noise source.
                      d. Locating bedrooms or balconies on the sides of buildings facing away from noise
                           sources.
                      e.   Utilizing noise barriers, such as landscaped berms, to reduce adverse noise levels in
                           noise-sensitive outdoor activity areas, avoiding sound walls wherever possible.
Policy SAF-1.8        Vibration Screening Distances. Require new residential and commercial projects
                      located adjacent to major freeways, rail lines or other vibration sources to follow the
                      Federal Transit Administration screening distance criteria.
Policy SAF-1.9        Alternative to Sound Walls. Encourage the use of design strategies and other noise
                      reduction methods along transportation corridors in lieu of sound walls to mitigate noise
                      impacts and enhance aesthetics.
Policy SAF-1.10       Motor Vehicle Code. Enforce California Motor Vehicle Code that prohibits amplified
                      sound that can be heard 50 feet or more from a vehicle, and that addresses excessive
                      exhaust noise.
Policy SAF-1.11       Construction Noise.          Require construction projects to adhere to the City’s
                      construction hours and incorporate measures to minimize impacts.
Policy SAF-1.12       Operational Noise. Require mixed-use, commercial, and industrial projects to mitigate
                      operational noise impacts to adjoining sensitive uses to meet operational noise
                      thresholds.
Policy SAF-1.13       Airport Compatibility. Prohibit new residential development within the 60 dBA
                      CNEL airport noise contour, and only approve noise-compatible land uses consistent
                      with the ALUCP.
Policy SAF-1.14       Noise Level Reduction Near Airport. Require new structures within any Airport
                      Land Use Compatibility Zone except D or E to incorporate exterior-to-interior noise
                      level reduction design features sufficient to meet the interior noise level criteria specified
                      in the ALUCP.
Policy SAF-1.15       Coordination with Cable Airport. Work with Cable Airport to monitor aircraft noise,
                      implement noise-reducing operation measures (i.e., Fly Quiet, Fly Neighborly programs),
                      and promote pilot awareness of noise sensitive land uses.
FLOOD HAZARDS
By understanding and anticipating potential risks, Upland can protect life and property from flooding
hazards. Policies in this section protect Upland residents through interagency coordination in flood
management, ensuring full compliance with national standards, and requiring maintenance of the City’s
existing floodplain storage areas. The City will evaluate new development for potential flood hazards prior to
Page SAF-4                                                                           City of Upland General Plan

approval to minimize flooding risk and impervious surfaces. Upland will also educate the public and ensure
evacuation procedures are in place in the event of the San Antonio Dam failure.
Goal SAF-2          A community protected from injury or loss of life and damage to property due to
                    flood hazards.
Policies
Policy SAF-2.1      Interagency Flood Management. Continue to work with appropriate local, State and
                    federal agencies to maintain the most current flood hazard and flood-plain information
                    and use it as a basis for project review and to guide development.
Policy SAF-2.2      National Flood Insurance Program. Continue to participate in the National Flood
                    Insurance Program (NFIP) and ensure that City regulations are in full compliance with
                    the standards adopted by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
Policy SAF-2.3      Floodplain Storage Maintenance.                Maintain and improve storm drainage
                    infrastructure, including the City’s urban creeks, to maintain existing floodplain storage.
Policy SAF-2.4      Floodplain Requirements. Regulate development within floodplains in accordance
                    with State and federal requirements and maintain the City’s eligibility under NFIP.
Policy SAF-2.5      Flood Control Channels. Maintain a healthy riparian corridor in City-maintained flood
                    control channels to reduce the risk of flooding due to erosion, siltation, blockage and
                    heavy undergrowth.
Policy SAF-2.6      Existing Development. Minimize flood risks associated with existing development.
Policy SAF-2.7      New Development. Require evaluation of potential flood hazards prior to approval of
                    development projects.
Policy SAF-2.8      Construction Methods. Identify construction or other methods to minimize damage if
                    new development is located in flood hazard zones.
Policy SAF-2.9      Impervious Surfaces. Minimize impervious surfaces to reduce stormwater runoff and
                    increase flood protection.
Policy SAF-2.10     Development in the 100-Year Flood Zone. Prohibit new development within the
                    100-year flood zone unless it can be shown that the development will not:
                    a.   Create danger to life and property due to increased flood heights or velocities
                         caused by excavation, fill, roads and intended use.
                    b. Create difficult emergency vehicle access in times of flood.
                    c.   Create a safety hazard due to the unexpected heights velocity, duration, rate of rise
                         and sediment transport of the flood waters at the site.
                    d. Create excessive costs in providing governmental services during and after flood
                         conditions, including maintenance and repair of public facilities.
                    e.   Interfere with the existing waterflow capacity of the floodway.
                    f.   Substantially increase erosion and/or sedimentation.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                         Page SAF-5

                      g. Contribute to the deterioration of a watercourse or the quality of water in any body
                           of water.
                      h. Require storage of material, or any substantial grading or placement of fill.
                      i.   Change the water storage/volume capacity of the flood basin.
Policy SAF-2.11       Flood Barriers. Prevent the construction of flood barriers within the 100-year flood
                      zone which will divert flood water or increase flooding in other areas.
Policy SAF-2.12       Siting and Design of Essential Public Facilities. Require that essential public
                      facilities be located and designed to mitigate potential flood risk to ensure long term
                      operation.
Policy SAF-2.13       Dam Failure. Plan for the evacuation of people from areas subject to inundation from
                      San Antonio dam failure.
Policy SAF-2.14       Public Education. Promote public education on flooding hazards.
EARTHQUAKES AND GEOLOGIC HAZARDS
Upland is in an area susceptible to seismic and geologic hazards. The City protects the public from these
hazards through the enforcement of safety standards, state-of-the-art site design and construction methods,
and regulating the retrofitting of existing critical facilities.
Goal SAF-3            A community protected from earthquakes and other geologic hazards.
Policies
Policy SAF-3.1        Building Codes. Enforce the building codes adopted by the State of California in all
                      new construction and renovations.
Policy SAF-3.2        Geologic Mapping. Rely on the most current and comprehensive geological hazard
                      mapping available to assist in the evaluation of potential seismic hazards to proposed
                      new development.
Policy SAF-3.3        Geotechnical Investigations. Require site-specific soils and/or geologic reports for
                      development in areas where potentially serious geologic risks exist. These reports shall
                      address the degree of hazard, design parameters for the project based on the hazard, and
                      the appropriate mitigation measures.
Policy SAF-3.4        Mitigation Monitoring. Monitor and enforce mitigation measures to reduce risks for
                      projects where seismic and geological hazards can be mitigated.
Policy SAF-3.5        Prohibiting Development. Prohibit development in known areas where seismic and
                      geological hazards cannot be mitigated.
Policy SAF-3.6        Retrofit Critical Facilities. Promote the upgrade, retrofitting, and/or relocation of all
                      existing critical facilities (e.g., hospitals, schools, police stations, fire stations, water
                      facilities, emergency operation centers, emergency access routes, public works yard,
Page SAF-6                                                                            City of Upland General Plan
                       public refuge areas) and other important public facilities that do not meet current
                       building code standards and are within areas susceptible to seismic or geologic hazards.
Policy SAF-3.7         Utility Lines. Work with utility providers to ensure that utility lines are designed to
                       withstand seismic forces, are accessible for repair, and are provided with safety features
                       such as automatic shutoff valves, switches and expansion joints.
Policy SAF-3.8         Future Decision-Making. Continue to incorporate geotechnical hazard data into
                       future land use decision-making, site design and construction standards.
WILDLAND AND URBAN FIRES
The City of Upland provides for coordinated fire protection for all areas of the City to ensure that the level of
response to fires is met through staffing, equipment and access to adequate water resources. Policies in this
section ensure that Upland proactively educates and informs its residents and businesses about the potential
risks of fire and fire prevention techniques, and the City will continue to work with developers to ensure that
threats by fire are minimized in new projects.
Goal SAF-4             A community protected from loss of life, injury, damage to property and loss of
                       natural resources caused by wildland and urban fires.
Policies
Policy SAF-4.1         Public Education. Promote educational programs for the public related to fire safety
                       and prevention.
Policy SAF-4.2         Prevention Programs. Participate in fire and life safety prevention programs with
                       neighboring jurisdictions and other governmental agencies as needed.
Policy SAF-4.3         Development. Continue to require all development, new and existing, to provide
                       necessary service, fire hydrants and road improvements consistent with the California
                       Fire Code.
Policy SAF-4.4         Development Review. Include the Fire Department in the review of development
                       proposals to ensure projects adequately address safe design and on-site fire protection
                       and comply with applicable fire and building codes.
Policy SAF-4.5         Fire Sprinkler Systems. Promote the installation of fire sprinkler systems for both
                       commercial and residential use and in structures where sprinkler systems are not
                       currently required by the Municipal Code or California Fire Code.
Policy SAF-4.6         High Fire Hazard Safety Zones. Require all development in areas of potential
                       wildland fire hazards, as shown in the High Fire Hazard Map, to include clearance
                       around structures, fire-resistant ground cover and fire-resistant roofing materials.
Policy SAF-4.7         City-Owned Property Maintenance. Continue to remove excessive/overgrown
                       vegetation and rubbish from City-owned property to prevent and minimize fire risks to
                       surrounding properties.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                           Page SAF-7
Policy SAF-4.8       Private Property Maintenance. Require property owners to maintain property in a
                     manner that minimizes fire hazards through the removal of vegetation and hazardous
                     structures, materials and debris.
Policy SAF-4.9       Landscaping. Encourage the use of drought-resistant and fire-resistant plants in areas
                     subject to wildland fires.
Policy SAF-4.10      Fire Services. Ensure an acceptable level of fire safety and emergency medical services
                     throughout the City.
Policy SAF-4.11      Water Supplies for Fire Suppression. Ensure that adequate water supplies are
                     available for fire-suppression throughout the City.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Industrial uses within the City and proximity to major transportation routes by rail and truck make Upland
susceptible to contamination from accidents involving hazardous materials. Upland protects its residents and
businesses through the location and regulation of land uses and through the enforcement of County, State
and federal requirements. Policies in this section continue practices for the documentation, monitoring, clean
up, and re-use of hazardous materials and sites for the protection of Upland’s air and groundwater and for
the reduction of greenhouse gases.
Goal SAF-5           A community protected from harmful effects of hazardous materials and waste.
Policies
Policy SAF-5.1       Sensitive Uses. Require adequate separation between areas where hazardous materials
                     are present and sensitive uses such as schools, senior centers, hospitals and medical
                     centers, residences and public facilities.
Policy SAF-5.2       Investigate Sites for Contamination. Ensure buildings and sites are investigated for
                     the presence of hazardous materials and/or waste contamination before development
                     and periodically during operation for which City discretionary approval is required. The
                     City shall ensure appropriate measures are taken to protect the health and safety of all
                     possible users and adjacent properties.
Policy SAF-5.3       Transport of Hazardous Materials. Ensure the safe transport of hazardous materials
                     through Upland through implementation of the following measures:
                     a.   Restrict transport of hazardous materials within Upland to designated routes.
                     b. Prohibit the parking of vehicles transporting hazardous materials on City streets.
                     c.   Require that new pipelines and other channels carrying hazardous materials avoid
                          residential areas and other immobile populations to the greatest extent possible.
Policy SAF-5.4       Reduction of Hazardous Waste. Work with households, businesses and others who
                     generate hazardous waste to reduce overall hazardous waste in Upland.
Policy SAF-5.5       Green Building. Encourage the use of green building practices to reduce the use of
                     potentially hazardous materials in construction.
Page SAF-8                                                                        City of Upland General Plan

Policy SAF-5.6        Clean Industries. Strive to maintain and attract clean industries to the City and
                      discourage the expansion of businesses, with the exception of health care and related
                      medical facilities, that require on-site treatment of hazardous industrial waste.
Policy SAF-5.7        Dry Cleaners. Prohibit the use of Perchloroethylene (PERC) in new dry cleaning
                      facilities and require that dry cleaners in mixed-use developments use clean technology.
Policy SAF-5.8        Household Hazardous Waste Collection Programs. Continue to work with the San
                      Bernardino County Fire Department Hazardous Materials Division to provide
                      household hazardous waste collection programs for convenient access and the proper
                      disposal of products containing hazardous materials or hazardous wastes.
Policy SAF-5.9        Storage of Hazardous Waste. Work with the Upland Fire Department to monitor
                      and regulate the storage of hazardous materials in conformance with the Uniform Fire
                      Code.
Policy SAF-5.10       County Regulations. Continue to work with the San Bernardino County Fire
                      Department Hazardous Materials Division to ensure that businesses in Upland follow
                      the hazardous materials regulations and guidelines outlined in the County of San
                      Bernardino Hazardous Waste Management Plan.
Policy SAF-5.11       State and Federal Laws. Continue to enforce State and federal laws and regulations
                      pertaining to the reporting, clean-up, transport, and management of hazardous materials,
                      including the guidelines and procedures mandated by the State legislature for evaluating
                      hazardous waste facility applications.
Policy SAF-5.12       Emergency Response Plans. Require applicants proposing to generate hazardous
                      waste to submit emergency response plans to the Upland Fire Department and San
                      Bernardino County Fire Department Hazardous Materials Division.
Policy SAF-5.13       Education. Educate residents and businesses on how to reduce or eliminate the use of
                      hazardous materials and products, and encourage the use of safer, nontoxic,
                      environmentally friendly equivalents.
AIRPORTS
Upland benefits from the presence of Cable Airport, and from the proximity of Ontario International
Airport, but the advantages also come with risks to public safety and nuisances such as noise. Airports
present special constraints for nearby land uses and for emergency response capacity. Policies in this section
support the local airports, while protecting surrounding land uses in accordance with policies set forth in the
respective Airport Land Use Plans.
Goal SAF-6            Risks associated with aircraft operations at Cable Airport and Ontario
                      International Airport are minimized.
Policies
Policy SAF-6.1        Land Use Compatibility. Evaluate the compatibility of proposed land uses within the
                      influence area of Cable Airport and the Ontario International Airport in accordance
                      with the policies set forth in the respective Airport Land Use Plans.
City of Upland General Plan                                                                            Page SAF-9
Policy SAF-6.2        Development Restrictions. Require all development in Upland to be consistent with
                      the required setbacks and height restrictions for Cable Airport and the Ontario
                      International Airport as determined by the Federal Aviation Administration and the
                      respective Airport Land Use Plans.
PREPARATION AND EMERGENCY RESPONSE
Upland mitigates threats posed by a variety of natural and man-made hazards for the safety of Upland
residents and businesses, including earthquakes, floods, fires, windstorms, and terrorist events. The City
achieves this by promoting awareness in the community and by collaborating with outside agencies, cities,
State and federal authorities that provide procedures for preparedness, response and recovery from disaster.
Goal SAF-7            Government, businesses and households protected from and prepared for natural
                      or man-made disasters.
Policies
Policy SAF-7.1        Emergency Operations Plan. Maintain, update and implement, as needed, the
                      Emergency Operations Plan to address disasters such as earthquakes, flooding, dam
                      failure, hazardous materials spill, epidemics, fires, extreme weather, major transportation
                      accidents, and terrorism.
Policy SAF-7.2        Department-Specific Emergency Operations Plans. Ensure the maintenance of
                      department-specific Emergency Operations Plans.
Policy SAF-7.3        Staff Trainings. Conduct periodic trainings with staff on emergency operations, based
                      on the Emergency Operations Plan.
Policy SAF-7.4        Mutual Aid Agreements. Continue to participate in mutual aid agreements with
                      Rancho Cucamonga, Ontario, Montclair, Claremont and surrounding jurisdictions to
                      ensure adequate resources, facilities, and other support for emergency response.
Policy SAF-7.5        Collaboration with Agencies and Businesses. Work with other agencies and
                      businesses within the City to assist and support their disaster preparedness efforts.
Policy SAF-7.6        Post-Disaster Response. Plan for the continued function of critical facilities following
                      a major seismic or geologic disaster to help prevent major problems during post-disaster
                      response such as evacuations, rescues, large numbers of injuries, and major clean-up
                      operations.
Policy SAF-7.7        Infrastructure. Regularly review the adequacy of local infrastructure to withstand a
                      hazardous event.
Policy SAF-7.8        Public Education. Continue to provide information to residents and businesses on
                      emergency preparedness, such as preparing emergency kits, developing a
                      communications plan, implementing evacuation procedures and updating emergency
                      plans.
Page SAF-10                                                                          City of Upland General Plan
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CITY OF UPLAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GENERAL PLAN UPDATE
Map Date: 06/21/12; Source: California Geologic Survey, USGS
                                                                                                      t
                                                                                                     faul
                                                                                                                                                                                               l   t
                                                                                                    nio
                                                                                                                                                                                        n   fau
                                                                                                                                                                                    nyo
                                                                                                                                                                                 Ca
                                                                                              An to
                                                                                                                                                                 d
                                                                                            San                                                          d   dar
                                                                                                                                                     Sto
                                                                                                      San Antonio fau
                                                                                                                                                             San Bernardino Mountains
                                                                                                                     lt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        aul
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             iol
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ist   -Pr
                                                                                                                                                                                                        u
                                                                                                                                                                                       EU            Alq
                                                                                                                                                                                        C
                                                                                                                                                                                             LI D
                                                                                                                                                       VE
                                                                                                                                                         .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             City of
                                                                                                                                       M OUNT A I    NA                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                                                     VE      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rancho Cucamonga
                                                                                                                                                                                  23RD ST.
                                                                                          an n e
                                                                                                l
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cu co
                                                                                    io C h
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        mo
                                                     City of              Anto
                                                                               n                                                                                                  21ST ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nga
                                                    Claremont            S an
                                                                                                                            VE
                                                                                                                                 .                                                                                                                         Ch
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             a nn
                                                                                                                     O    NA                                                                                                                                   el
                                                                                                              BE
                                                                                                                NS
                                                                                                                                                                                  19TH ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    U210
                                                                                                                                     V
                                                                                                                                     U      30
                                                          Los
                                                              Ang                                                                                                                 16TH ST.
                                                                  eles
                                                                                   BASELINE ST.
                                                        San
                                                            Bern       C
                                                                ardin ounty
                                                                                                                                                              SAN ANTONIO AVE.
                                                                                                                                     MOUNTAIN AVE.                                                                                  CAMPUS AVE.
                                                                     o Co
                                                                                                                                                                                                    EUCLID AVE.
                                                                        Cable                                                                                                     14TH ST.
                                                                         unty                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               lt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         fau
      Indian Hill fault                                                 Airport                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ue
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ven
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              aA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         nd
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ti   wa
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FOOTHILL BLVD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  V
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  U
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  66
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         il   l-E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      dH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Re
                                                                           CENTRAL AVE.                BENSON AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                    V
                                                                                                                                                                                                    U        83
                                                                                                                     ARROW HWY.                                                    10TH ST.
                                                                                                                                                                                   8TH ST.
                         lt
                     fau                            City of                                                                                                                                                                                                                 City of
                se
             Jo
                                                    Montclair
                                                                                                                                                                                   7TH ST.
      Sa
         n                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ontario
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  §
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ¦            GROVE AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                 SAN BERNARDINO ST.                                                                                                                                               4TH ST.
                     0             0.75         1.5 Miles
             City Limits                  Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Zones
             Sphere of Influence          Fault Lines
             County Boundary
             Upland Parcel
             Southern Pacific Trail
             Rail Line                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FIGURE SAF-1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               FAULTS AND FAULT ZONES
  (
  !          Metrolink Station


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CITY OF UPLAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                               GENERAL PLAN UPDATE
Map Date: 07/31/12; Source FEMA 2008
                                                                                                                                                     EU
                                                                                                                                                      C
                                                                                                                             E                             LI D
                                                                                                                          AV
                                                                                                                            .
                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                              MOUNT A I N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   City of
                                                                                                                                                                     VE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                              Rancho Cucamonga
                                                                                                                                                23RD ST.
                                                                el
                                                              h an n                                                                                                                                          Cu
                                                             nio C                                                                                                                                            com
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   a
                                                                                                                                                                                                               ong
                      City of                        Anto                                                                                       21ST ST.
                     Claremont                                                                                                                                                                                        ann
                                               Sa n                                                  E.                                                                                                             Ch
                                                                                                   AV
                                                                                                                                                                                  V
                                                                                                                                                                                  U
                                                                                               N                                                                                                                          el
                                                                                        N   SO
                                                                                  BE                                                                                               210
                                                                                                          V
                                                                                                          U
                                                                                                                                                19TH ST.
                                                                                                                   30
                                                      BASELINE ST.                                                                              16TH ST.
                              nt y
                                      unt y
                                                                                                                             SAN ANTONIO AVE.
                            Co u
                                     o Co
                                                                                                          MOUNTAIN AVE.
                        eles
                                                                                                                                                                  EUCLID AVE.              CAMPUS AVE.
                       A ng     ardin            Cable                                                                                          14TH ST.
                     Lo s     Bern               Airport
                            S an
                                                                                                                                                                                FOOTHILL BLVD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         V
                                                                                                                                                                                                         U
                                                                                                                                                                                                         66
                                              CENTRAL AVE.                BENSON AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                    V
                                                                                                                                                                    U      83
                                                                                                                                                ARROW HWY.
                                                                                                                                                 8TH ST.
                 City of                                                                                                                         7TH ST.                                                                          City of
                 Montclair                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ontario
                                                                                                                                                                                                         §
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ¦           GROVE AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
           0                       0.5                               1 Miles
         City Limits                  Flood Zones and Water Features
                                                        100-Year Flood Plain
         Sphere of Influence
                                                        200-Year Flood Plain
         County Boundary
                                                        Water Feature
         Upland Parcel
   !
   (     Metrolink Station
         Rail Line                                                                                                                                                                 FIGURE SAF-2
                                                                                                                                                             100-YEAR and 200-YEAR FLOOD ZONES
         Southern Pacific Trail


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CITY OF UPLAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GENERAL PLAN UPDATE
Map Date: 07/31/12
                                                                                                                                                    EU
                                                                                                                                                      C
                                                                                                                            E                              LI D
                                                                                                                         AV
                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                             MOUNT A I N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      City of
                                                                                                                                                                     VE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Rancho Cucamonga
                                                                                                                                               23RD ST.
                                                               el
                                                             h an n                                                                                                                                              Cu
                                                            nio C                                                                                                                                                com
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      a
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ong
                    City of                         Anto                                                                                        21ST ST.
                   Claremont                                                                                                                                                                                             ann
                                              Sa n                                                  E.                                                                                                                 Ch
                                                                                                  AV
                                                                                                                                                                                  V
                                                                                                                                                                                  U
                                                                                              N                                                                                                                              el
                                                                                       N   SO
                                                                                 BE                                                                                                210
                                                                                                         V
                                                                                                         U
                                                                                                                                                19TH ST.
                                                                                                                  30
                                                     BASELINE ST.                                                                              16TH ST.
                             nt y
                                     unt y
                                                                                                                            SAN ANTONIO AVE.
                            Co u
                                    o Co
                                                                                                         MOUNTAIN AVE.
                       eles
                                                                                                                                                                  EUCLID AVE.              CAMPUS AVE.
                      A ng     ardin            Cable                                                                                           14TH ST.
                     Lo s     Bern              Airport
                            S an
                                                                                                                                                                                FOOTHILL BLVD.
                                                                                                                                                                                                           V
                                                                                                                                                                                                           U66
                                             CENTRAL AVE.                BENSON AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                    V
                                                                                                                                                                    U      83
                                                                                                                                               ARROW HWY.
                                                                                                                                                 8TH ST.
                   City of                                                                                                                       7TH ST.                                                                             City of
                   Montclair                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ontario
                                                                                                                                                                                                           §
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ¨
                                                                                                                                                                                                           ¦            GROVE AVE.
                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
          0                        0.5                              1 Miles
       County Boundary              FireHazardZones
                                                 Very High
       Sphere of Influence
                                                 High
       City Limits
                                                 Moderate
       Upland Parcel
                                                 Non-Wildland/Non-Urban
       Southern Pacific Trail
       Rail Line
                                                 Urban Unzoned                                                                                                                                                      FIGURE SAF-3
                                                                                                                                                                                                         HIGH FIRE HAZARD ZONES
 !
 (     Metrolink Station


City of Upland General Plan
Housing Element, 2013–2021
Adopted: January 27, 2014
                            CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT i

Contents
         This page intentionally left blank.
Contents
1. Introduction .............................................................................................................1 
    A.  Background ....................................................................................................1 
    B.  Related Plans..................................................................................................2 
    C.  Public Outreach ............................................................................................3 
2. Housing Needs ........................................................................................................7 
    A.  Demographic Trends ..................................................................................7 
    B.  Housing Characteristics .......................................................................... 12 
    C.  Special Housing Needs............................................................................ 20 
    D.  Affordable Housing At Risk of Conversion ....................................... 28 
3. Constraint Analysis ............................................................................................. 33 
    A.  Market Constraints.................................................................................... 33 
    B.  Land Use Controls ..................................................................................... 37 
    C.  Building Standards ................................................................................... 44 
    D.  Permitting Process .................................................................................... 52 
4. Housing Resources ............................................................................................. 59 
    A.  Regional Housing Needs ........................................................................ 59 
    B.  Site Identification ...................................................................................... 62 
    C.  Implementation Resources.................................................................... 73 
5. Program Evaluation ............................................................................................ 77 
    A.  Accomplishments ..................................................................................... 78 
    B.  Evaluation .................................................................................................... 81 
6. Housing Plan ......................................................................................................... 83 
    A.  Background ................................................................................................. 83 
    B.  Goals and Policies ..................................................................................... 84 
    C.  Housing Programs .................................................................................... 87 
                                                                                                                 CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT i

Contents
                                 TABLES
                                 Table 2-1: Population Characteristics in Upland ............................................. 8 
                                 Table 2-2: Household Composition in Upland ................................................. 9 
                                 Table 2-3: Employment in Upland, 2010 ......................................................... 10 
                                 Table 2-4: Household Income in Upland, 2010 ............................................. 11 
                                 Table 2-5: Housing Composition in Upland ................................................... 12 
                                 Table 2-6: Age of Housing, 2010 ........................................................................ 14 
                                 Table 2-7: Housing Sale Prices and Rents in Upland ................................... 15 
                                 Table 2-8: Affordability of Housing in Upland ............................................... 16 
                                 Table 2-9: Housing Overpayment and Overcrowding in Upland........... 18 
                                 Table 2-10: Extremely, Very Low, and Low Income Households ............ 19 
                                 Table 2-11: Housing for Seniors.......................................................................... 21 
                                 Table 2-12: Housing for People with Disabilities.......................................... 23 
                                 Table 2-13: Housing for Families ........................................................................ 25 
                                 Table 2-14: Publicly Assisted Multiple-Family Affordable Housing ....... 28 
                                 Table 2-15: Market Value of At Risk Units ....................................................... 30 
                                 Table 2-16 Rental Subsidies Required .............................................................. 31 
                                 Table 2-17: Preservation Alternatives............................................................... 32 
                                 Table 3-1: City of Upland Development Fees ................................................ 35 
                                 Table 3-2: Total Fees for Residential Development in Upland ................ 36 
                                 Table 3-3: Primary Land Use Designations Allowing Housing ................ 37 
                                 Table 3-4: Specific Plans Allowing Housing ................................................... 38 
                                 Table 3-5: Permitted Uses in Zones Allowing Residential Uses .............. 39 
                                 Table 3-6: Residential Development Standards ........................................... 44 
                                 Table 3-7: Parking Standards for Residential Uses ....................................... 46 
                                 Table 3-8: Multiple-Family Parking Standards .............................................. 47 
                                 Table 3-9: Multiple-Family Projects Approved or Built .............................. 48 
                                 Table 3-10: Permit Process and Time Frame for Housing Projects ........ 53 
                                 Table 4-1: Upland Regional Housing Needs Allocation, 2013–2021 ..... 59 
                                 Table 4-2: Development Capacity of Housing Sites .................................... 71 
                                 Table 5-1: Program Accomplishments, 2008–2014 Housing Element . 81 
                                 Table 6-1: Housing Element Quantified Objectives .................................... 98 
II    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                                                                 Contents
FIGURES
Figure 2-1: Population Growth (1980–2035) ....................................................7 
Figure 4-1: Specific Plan Map .............................................................................. 64 
Figure 4-2: Downtown Specific Plan Map ....................................................... 66 
APPENDICES
Appendix A .............................................................................................................. A-1 
Appendix B ............................................................................................................... B-1 
Appendix C .............................................................................................................. C-1 
                                                                                                                   CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT    III

Contents
                                 This page intentionally left blank.
IV    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT
1. Introduction
A.        BACKGROUND
The State of California recognizes that an adequate supply of affordable
housing for all income levels is a fundamental need for all communities. To
achieve that goal, it is critical that all local governments share in the
responsibility of implementing solutions to address local and regional
housing needs. To that end, all California local governments are required to
prepare a housing element (or housing chapter of the General Plan) that
specifies how the community will plan for its housing needs.
The detailed statutory requirements for preparing a housing element are
codified in the California Government Code (sections 65580–65589). As stated
therein, the housing element must contain an identification and analysis of its
existing and projected housing needs; an analysis of the various
governmental and nongovernmental constraints to meeting that need; and a
series of goals, policies, and scheduled programs to further the development,
improvement, and preservation of housing.
The Upland Housing Element has six sections:
   Chapter 1, Introduction, provides an introduction to the statutory
    authority and requirements for the housing element, related planning
    efforts, and a description of the public outreach process.
   Chapter 2, Community Profile, provides an analysis of demographic, social,
    and housing characteristics; current and future housing needs due to
    population growth and change; and other housing issues and needs.
   Chapter 3, Constraint Analysis, provides an analysis of the governmental
    and nongovernmental constraints that affect the development,
    maintenance, and improvement of housing for all income groups.
   Chapter 4, Housing Resources, provides an analysis of the available land
    for housing, as well as the financial resources and administrative capacity
    to manage housing programs.
   Chapter 5, Program Evaluation, provides a review of accomplishments
    from the prior housing element, including the relevance of current goals,
    policies, and programs.
   Chapter 6, Housing Plan, contains specific goals, policies, and
    implementation programs to address the development, improvement,
    and conservation of housing that will address housing needs in Upland.
                                                                       CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT 1

Introduction
                                  B.        RELATED PLANS
                                  Upland’s 2013–2021 Housing Element is related to many other local planning
                                  efforts, some of which are mandated by the State of California and the federal
                                  government. The housing element is required to maintain consistency with
                                  each of them. The following list describes these documents and how the City
                                  will maintain consistency with each of them.
                                     General Plan Consistency. The 2013–2021 Housing Element is drafted to
                                      be consistent with other General Plan elements. The sites designated for
                                      housing are capable of accommodating the City’s entire regional housing
                                      needs allocation. The identified housing sites are also consistent with the
                                      land use plan in the general plan and the growth projections analyzed in
                                      the environmental impact report. The City will maintain consistency
                                      between general plan elements by ensuring that proposed changes in one
                                      element, including the housing element, are reflected in other elements
                                      when such amendments of the general plan are needed.
                                     Water and Sewer Services. The Water Division of the Public Works
                                      Department, San Antonio Water Company, West End Consolidated Water
                                      Company, and Water District of Southern California provide water to
                                      Upland residents. The Inland Empire Utilities Agency (IEUA) and City itself
                                      provide sewer services. In accordance with state law, the City transmitted
                                      its 2013–2021 Housing Element to each water and sewer service agency.
                                      The City of Upland will retransmit its draft to the affected agencies along
                                      with a notice of HCD’s technical memorandum informing them of the
                                      requirement to establish a priority system to give water and sewer services
                                      to affordable housing projects serving lower income households in
                                      accordance with Section 65589.7 of the Government Code.
                                     Disadvantaged Communities. State law requires all local governments to
                                      amend their land use element to address the provision of services to
                                      disadvantaged unincorporated communities (DUC) within the sphere of
                                      influence of the local government. The City of Upland has a large
                                      unincorporated community—San Antonio Heights—within its sphere of
                                      influence and north of the City. The area is considered to be an affluent
                                      single-family residential neighborhood with larger homes on large parcels.
                                      Because this area is not a DUC, the City of Upland is not subject to nor
                                      required to amend the land use element to address this area.
                                     City of Upland Consolidated Plan. The City of Upland is an entitlement
                                      jurisdiction and receives housing and community development funds
                                      directly from the federal government. Upland’s Consolidated Plan was last
                                      revised for the 2010–2014 planning period. The housing, community
                                      development, and economic needs identified during that planning effort
                                      and the program commitments made continue to be consistent with the
                                      housing planning priorities and programs identified in the 2013–2021
                                      Housing Element. The housing element is also consistent with the public
                                      housing agency plan prepared by the Upland Housing Authority.
2      CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

C.        PUBLIC OUTREACH
California law requires that local governments include public participation as
part of the housing element. Specifically, Government Code section
65583(c)(7) states “that the local government shall make a diligent effort to
achieve public participation of all economic segments of the community in
the development of the housing element, and the program shall describe this
effort.” State law does not specify the means and methods for participation;
however, it is generally recognized that the participation must be inclusive.
OUTREACH VENUES
The Housing Element Update is one part of a larger comprehensive update of
the City’s General Plan, the first comprehensive revision in nearly 30 years.
The General Plan is the culmination of five years of work by City residents,
business leaders, community representatives, City staff, and elected officials.
Hundreds of people have played a part in shaping a General Plan to address
the needs and desires of the community. Policy direction for the Housing
Element was gathered through General Plan workshops and stakeholder
interviews and now this subsequent update to the Housing Element.
The following outreach activities were held:
    General Plan Stakeholder Interviews: Interviews were conducted with
     all City departments and commissions, community organizations, public
     agencies, School District, businesses, developers, non-profit groups, and
     other community stakeholders. The purpose of the interviews was to
     introduce the General Plan Update process and gain their insight into the
     needs and challenges that should be addressed in the General Plan.
    Community Events and Workshops. The City held four workshops over
     the course of the General Plan Update; two workshops were educational
     in nature and presented information on the General Plan, while the third
     focused on land use alternatives, development choices, and tradeoffs.
     The final workshop presented the draft goals and policies for the General
     Plan to allow the community to comment on them.
    Housing Element Stakeholder Interviews. To supplement the general
     plan and housing outreach, the City interviewed groups representing
     special needs, including rehabilitation and development centers, adult
     daycare facilities, emergency relief services, family and transitional shelter
     providers, affordable housing providers, and senior services to
     understand the housing needs of these individuals and groups in Upland.
    Joint Study Session. After preparing the draft housing element and prior
     to submitting the draft to the Department of Housing and Community
     Development, a joint study session was held with the Planning
     Commission and City Council to review the housing element and its
     goals, policies, and implementation programs. Previous stakeholders
     were invited to attend and make any additional comments.
                                                                          CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT 3

Introduction
                                  OUTREACH THEMES
                                  Following is a summary of themes heard throughout the outreach process
                                  that are related to housing, land use, and community character and are issues
                                  addressed in the housing element:
                                   Location of Housing. New housing developments should be concentrated
                                    in Downtown Upland, along Foothill Boulevard, and in College Heights,
                                    where opportunities exist for new development and where residents can
                                    easily access public transit, neighborhood services, entertainment and
                                    employment opportunities. Locating housing in this manner promotes a
                                    more sustainable urban form consistent with the City’s vision.
                                   Expanded Housing Opportunities. A greater variety of housing is needed
                                    to provide for the diverse needs and affordability levels of Upland residents,
                                    including senior housing, high-density multifamily housing, mixed-use,
                                    live/work, workforce and affordable housing. Special needs housing
                                    opportunities are also important for Upland residents.
                                   Neighborhood Preservation. Preserving and improving neighborhoods
                                    should be a focus of the General Plan and Housing Element. Owners should
                                    be held accountable for the maintenance of their properties so as to
                                    prevent the degradation of neighborhoods. Existing apartments in Upland
                                    are also in need of improvement. Consideration for massing, scale, and
                                    transitional buffers is also important to protect existing residences.
                                   Residential Designs and Quality. Housing developments should be
                                    attractive and well-integrated with the surrounding neighborhood, and
                                    contribute to enhancing the character and quality of the built environment.
                                    Mixed-use development, in particular, should fit in well with the existing
                                    mass and scale of surrounding development.
                                   Historic Preservation. Historic homes and districts should be protected in
                                    Upland, as they contribute to the unique character and identity of Upland,
                                    and support multiple related goals in the City, including economic
                                    development, culture, neighborhood pride, tourism, etc. Adaptive reuse of
                                    historic properties should preserve the historic integrity of the structure.
                                    CalGreen should not be used to change the character of historic structures.
                                   Support for Special Needs Housing. Changes in the economy, service
                                    industry, and public agencies have made it increasingly important to
                                    coordinate efforts to provide housing and services to Upland’s seniors,
                                    people with disabilities, families, the unemployed, and homeless people.
                                    Coordinated efforts are essential for providing homes services, including
                                    job training and placement, services, shelters, and permanent housing.
                                   Financial Constraints. The significant loss of redevelopment funding and
                                    continued decline in federal funding for community development activities
                                    have made it difficult to continue the current menu of housing programs.
                                    Loss of funding has caused programs to be curtailed or completely
                                    shuttered and has hurt nonprofits which formerly managed programs. New
                                    funding solutions are needed to maintain and restore housing programs.
4      CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

 Permanent Housing Solutions. More permanent housing is needed to
  stabilize special needs groups, especially the homeless and single mothers.
  Many clients are on the wait list for housing vouchers, but the wait is
  generally around two years. Life skills training is needed at the beginning of
  permanent housing to teach clients how to live sustainably on a fixed
  income and distance themselves from dependency on social programs.
 NIMBYism. A related challenge involves the perception of affordable
  housing; affordable apartment projects are typically opposed by neighbors
  and make the low-income residents feel disassociated from the rest of the
  community. Building more mixed-use projects that can give low income
  residents the opportunity to integrate with society and be productive
  members of the community is one solution for mitigating this challenge.
 Housing Funding. Innovative financing tools should be explored. These
  include a community land trust, inclusionary requirements, reducing the
  time involved to permit affordable housing projects, offering ground
  leases, or other programs. Through partnerships with market-rate product
  developers, projects with 80 percent market rate and 20 percent affordable
  units may be feasible, coupled with other innovative solutions listed above.
The above topics and public input are incorporated in the goals, policies, and
programs section of the housing element. Topics mentioned above can be
cross-referenced, by heading, to individual policies and programs.
HCD REVIEW
Following completion of the 2013–2021 Housing Element, the draft was sent
to the California Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD)
for the mandated 60-day statutory review. Concurrently, environmental
clearance was prepared for the housing element. The environmental
clearance determined that prior specific plan EIRs had adequately addressed
the selection of potential sites to accommodate the City’s housing goals. No
new significant impacts were found that had not already been fully mitigated
by prior environmental clearance, which were specific plan EIRs.
Upon receipt, HCD reviewed the draft housing element and provided
comments prior to the end of the 60-day review period. HCD required
additional analysis with respect to the housing needs of extremely low
income households, and developmentally disabled people; analysis of
potential constraints to the development of affordable and special needs
housing; and additional information about the suitability of parcels for
addressing the regional housing needs allocation. Program changes were
required to address the needs of homeless people, disabled people, and
extremely low income people, and fair housing, among others.
The Upland City Council adopted the final 2013–2021 Housing Element on
January 27, 2014. The resolution of adoption is included in Appendix A.
Correspondence with HCD is included for reference in Appendix B.
                                                                        CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT 5

Introduction
                                  This page intentionally left blank.
6      CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT
2. Housing Needs
To provide a context for housing planning, this chapter provides an overview
of Upland and discusses a variety of demographic, economic, housing, and
special needs characteristics and trends to identify issues that affect the City’s
existing and future housing needs.
A.       DEMOGRAPHIC TRENDS
POPULATION GROWTH
Regional and local population growth is the strongest factor affecting
housing demand. In recent decades, San Bernardino County has led other
counties in southern California with respect to population growth. Between
1990 and 2000, San Bernardino County population increased by 17%
compared to Orange (16%), Ventura (12%), and Los Angeles (7.5%). From
2000 to 2010, while the rate of population growth declined across much of
southern California largely due to the national recession and depressed
housing market, San Bernardino County’s population increased by 19%.
Against regional growth trends, Upland experienced an 8% increase in
population during the past decade. According to the 2010 Census, Upland’s
population is 73,732 people, ranking 10th out of 24 cities in the county.
Looking forward, Upland’s population is expected to continue increasing at a
moderate and consistent pace, increasing 4% from 2010–2020 and reaching
80,200 persons by 2035, according to the Southern California Association of
Governments. Figure 2-1 displays Upland’s projected population growth.
90,000
80,000
70,000
60,000
50,000
40,000
             1980       1990        2000       2010         2020         2035
Figure 2-1: Population Growth (1980–2035)
                                                                         CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT 7

Housing Needs
                                 POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Different age groups have different housing needs based on lifestyles, family
                                 types, income levels, and housing preference. Typically, younger households
                                 seek affordable rental housing opportunities as they begin their careers. As
                                 adults spend more time in the workforce and form families, they may seek
                                 larger homes and opportunities to build equity through home ownership.
                                 Seniors may eventually choose to trade down larger homes that once
                                 accommodated children to smaller and more affordable homes.
                                 The City of Upland’s median age of residents is approximately 36 years of age,
                                 which is four years older than San Bernardino County’s median. As shown in
                                 Table 2-1, younger adults ages 25–44 and dependents under the age of 18
                                 years make up the largest share of Upland residents in 2000, although their
                                 shares of the population declined from 2000 to 2010. Seniors and young
                                 adults remained unchanged as a percentage of population. The City of
                                 Upland’s population increase was primarily due to significant increases in the
                                 baby boomer generation, ages 45–64 years and older.
                                 Along with an aging population, Upland has become more evenly distributed
                                 in race and ethnicity, although to a lesser degree than in San Bernardino
                                 County. From 2000 to 2010, Whites declined by 13% in number of residents
                                 and Hispanics increased 49% in Upland. Asians increased 21% as well. All
                                 other races maintained their similar share of population from 2000 to 2010.
                                 These demographic changes can impact housing needs to the extent housing
                                 needs vary between people of different races and ethnic backgrounds.
                                   Table 2-1: Population Characteristics in Upland
                                                                                      2000                    2010
                                                                            Number of       Percent  Number of     Percent
                                   Age Characteristics                       Residents      of Total Residents     of Total
                                   Total Population                           68,393         100%      73,732       100%
                                   Age Characteristics
                                   + 0–17 years (dependent)                   18,699          27%      18,091        25%
                                   + 18–24 years (young adults                 6,567          10%       7,494        10%
                                   + 25–44 years (family forming)             19,960          29%      19,917        27%
                                   + 45–64 years (move up housing)            15,809          23%     19,332         26%
                                   + 65 < years (retirement years)             7,358          11%       8,898        12%
                                                                            Number of       Percent  Number of     Percent
                                   Race and Ethnicity                        Residents      of Total Residents     of Total
                                   + Hispanic                                 18,830          28%      28,035        38%
                                   + White                                    37,456          55%      32,564        44%
                                   + Asian/Pacific Islander                    5,104           7%       6,191         8%
                                   + Black/African American                    4,990           7%       5,031         7%
                                   + All Others                                2,013           3%       1,911         3%
                                   Source: U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010.
                                   Note: Figures may not total to exactly 100% due to rounding.
8     CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                       Housing Needs
HOUSEHOLD CHARACTERISTICS
Household type also influences housing need. For instance, single-person
households often occupy smaller apartments or condominiums, such as one-
bedroom units. Couples often prefer larger single-family homes, particularly if
they have children. As the baby boom generation ages, there has been an
increased demand from empty nesters and retirees to downsize to more
affordable units that are easier to maintain. These patterns underscore the
need for housing opportunities for people of different ages and income.
Table 2-2 identifies household composition for Upland in 2000 and 2010. In
2010, married family households with children comprised 22% of Upland’s
households, down from 25% and lower than the county average of 27%.
Upland’s married family households without children increased slightly to
28% and are higher than the county at 26%. Upland has a lower percentage
of one-person households than the county (20% versus 28%) and smaller
household size (2.8 in Upland compared to 3.3 in the county).
Over the past decade, the number of Upland households increased by 1,272
and the population increased by 5,530. There were also slight shifts in the
share of different types of households. The largest decline was in married
family households with children, which fell by 350 households, or 6%. Married
with no children increased by 695, and other family households increased by
770 (the majority represented by female householders without husbands).
Nonfamily household trends have remained consistent over this time.
In summary, the City of Upland has seen some changes, such as the increase
in married families with children. This is due in part to the aging of the baby
boomer generation. Others trends, such as the increasing number of
residents and households, suggest an increasing number of people within a
household. This is due in part to a changing race and ethnic mix in the
community. Table 2-2 summarizes many of the above-mentioned changes.
  Table 2-2: Household Composition in Upland
                                               2000                   2010
                                      Number of     Percent  Number of     Percent of
  Household Type                      households    of Total households      Total
  Total Households                      24,551       100%      25,823        100%
  Family Households
  + Married with Children                6,107        25%       5,757         22%
  + Married No Children                  6,948        28%       7,643         30%
  + All Other Families                   4,813        20%       5,583         22%
  Nonfamily Households
  + Single Persons                       5,176        21%       5,159         20%
  + Unrelated Persons                    1,507         6%       1,681          7%
          Average household size                2.8                    2.9
  Source: U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010.
                                                                             CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT      9

Housing Needs
                                 ECONOMIC CHARACTERISTICS
                                 Economic characteristics, such as employment, also affect housing needs. In
                                 2010, approximately 38,504 Upland residents older than 16 years (or 68%)
                                 were in the labor force, higher than the 63% county average. As shown in
                                 Table 2-3, Upland residents work in a diversity of business sectors, the
                                 dominant sector being retail (21%) by at least 7% over the next leading sector
                                 goods production (14%). The number of jobs held by residents are generally
                                 even across all other sectors. On the other hand, jobs offered in Upland are
                                 largely in the health care sector (21%) and retail (22%). The “Other” sector
                                 ranks third in terms of jobs in Upland (17%), and chiefly consists of 2,680 jobs
                                 in administrative support and waste management and remediation.
                                 Overall, Upland has a ratio of 1.1 residents in the labor force for every job,
                                 with slight variations across industries. Within the education, public
                                 administration, and utilities industries, Upland has one job for every two
                                 residents working in those industries, indicating that 2,886 residents must
                                 commute to surrounding cities for work. In contrast, the City has one job for
                                 every resident working in the retail, goods production, knowledge-based, and
                                 public administration industries. However, the City has 2,463 more jobs in the
                                 healthcare and “other sectors” than residents working in those fields, due to
                                 San Antonio Hospital.
                                 This means that employers in the healthcare industry, administrative support,
                                 and waste management and remediation fields must recruit employees from
                                 out of town. Table 2-3 below summarizes the jobs held by Upland residents
                                 (regardless of the location of the job) versus the jobs offered in Upland.
                                   Table 2-3: Employment in Upland, 2010
                                                                                    Jobs (in and outside            Jobs Available in
                                                                               Upland) Held by Resident                  Upland
                                   Economic Sector                                Number          Percent         Number        Percent
                                   Health Care and Social Assistance                3,247           12%             4,951         21%
                                   Educational Services                             3,644           13%             1,677          7%
                                   Retail, Services, Entertainment                  5,711           21%             5,198         22%
                                   Goods Production                                 3,811           14%             3,033         13%
                                   Public Administration                            1,511            6%              592           3%
                                   Knowledge-Based Industries                       3,116           11%             2,957         12%
                                   Utilities and Distribution                       3,025           11%             1,373          6%
                                   All Other Sectors                                3,320           12%             4,079         17%
                                                                       Total       27,385          100%           23,860         100%
                                   Source: LEHD, 2010 for Upland.
                                   Notes:
                                   Goods Producing–forestry, fishing, mining, oil and gas; construction; manufacturing.
                                   Utilities & Distribution–utilities; wholesale; transportation and warehousing.
                                   Retail, Service, Entertainment–retail, food, arts, entertainment and recreation.
                                   Knowledge-Based–professional, scientific, technical; information, finance, real estate, etc.
                                   Health and Education–predominantly health care and educational services.
10    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                                      Housing Needs
HOUSEHOLD INCOME
Household income is a fundamental factor affecting housing opportunity. In
2010, the City’s median household income was approximately $68,000, or
approximately 120% of the $56,000 in the county. This is a slight relative
increase from the past decade—the median income in Upland was $49,000 or
117% of the median county household income in 2000. This suggests that
Upland median income is increasing slightly faster than in the county.
The State of California Department of Housing and Community Development
(HCD) surveys households in each county to determine the median income.
The median income is adjusted for households of different sizes. Households
are then grouped into income groups for determining the need for
assistance. Based on 2013 categories, these categories are:
   Extremely low: households earning up to 30% of the county median family
    income (CMFI), or a maximum of $19,500 for a household of four.
   Very low: households earning 31% to 50% of CMFI, or a maximum income
    of $32,500 for a household of four.
   Other low: households earning 51% to 80% of CMFI, or a maximum of
    $52,000 for a household of four.
   Moderate: households earning 81% to 120% of CMFI, or a maximum
    income of $78,000 for a household of four.
   Above moderate: households earning above 120% of CMFI, which is more
    than $78,000 for a household of four.
As shown in Table 2-4, approximately 34% of Upland residents are low
income, which is 10% lower than in San Bernardino County (44%). Extremely
low and very low incomes make up slightly more than half the lower income
total. Moderate income households total 14%. The majority of Upland
households are in the above-moderate income category (51%).
  Table 2-4: Household Income in Upland, 2010
                                                                       Total
                                                   Total Number of               Percent of Total
  Income Category                                    Households                    Households
  Extremely Low Income                                   2,123                           9%
  Very Low Income                                        2,227                           9%
  Other Low Income                                       3,809                          16%
  Moderate Income                                        3,319                          14%
  Above Moderate Income                                 12,175                          51%
                                    Total              23,654*                         100%
  Source: Southern California Association of Governments, 2012.
  Note: Total households by income level are based on the 5-Year Average 2005–2009 ACS used for
    federal housing planning purposes. The household total is different than the 2010 Census.
                                                                                            CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     11

Housing Needs
                                 B.         HOUSING CHARACTERISTICS
                                 This section describes housing characteristics and trends to provide a basis
                                 for assessing the match between the demand and supply of available housing
                                 in Upland. These include housing growth, housing characteristics, age and
                                 condition of housing, housing prices and rents, and homeownership rates.
                                 HOUSING COMPOSITION
                                 A range in housing types and prices allows residents of all ages and incomes
                                 the opportunity to find adequate housing in Upland. As shown in Table 2-5,
                                 single-family detached housing units increased by more than 1,700, but the
                                 percentage remained at 57% due to equally proportional increases in
                                 attached units and multifamily. This is due to the development of larger tracts
                                 of single-family homes, such as the Colonies in the San Antonio Specific Plan
                                 in northeast Upland.
                                 The City of Upland has a higher proportion of multifamily units (32%) than the
                                 county (25%). Over the past decade, multifamily housing with 5 or more units
                                 increased from 22% to 23% of total housing units. This change is largely due
                                 to the construction of apartment projects such as the College Park
                                 Apartments, Broadstone Foothills Apartments, and Rancho Monte Vista
                                 Apartments. The revised General Plan anticipates additional growth in
 New Broadstone Apartments       apartments in focus areas of the community, such as downtown.
                                 Looking forward, the City of Upland anticipates continued residential growth
                                 in several focus areas or specific plan areas in the community. Among others,
                                 these include along Foothill Boulevard, in College Heights, and Downtown.
                                 Multiple-family housing is projected to be built in all of these locations, and
                                 new projects in the Downtown will have access to regional commuter rail.
                                 Table 2-5 below shows trends in housing composition in Upland.
                                  Table 2-5: Housing Composition in Upland
                                                                              2000                     2010
                                                                      Number of    Percent of Number of     Percent of
                                  Housing Products                      Units        Units      Units         Units
                                  Single-Family Units
                                  + Single-Family Detached             14,580         57%       15,688         57%
                                  + Single-Family Attached              1,733         7%         1,762         6%
                                  Multiple-Family Units
                                  + Multiple-Family (2 to 4 units)      2,675         11%        2,860         10%
                                  + Multiple-Family (5 or more)         5,636         22%        6,180         23%
                                  Mobile Home Units                      845           3%         865           3%
                                                             Total     25,469        100%      27,355         100%
                                  Source: U.S. Census, 2000 and 2010.
12    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                Housing Needs
HOUSING TENURE
Tenure refers to whether a household owns or rents a home. Ample
homeownership and rental opportunities allow people of all incomes and
household sizes to choose the type of housing and location best suited to
their needs and preferences. Vacancy rates, in combination with housing
tenure, also affect the prices and rents charged for housing.
Homeownership
The American dream is often intertwined with the goal of homeownership,
which is associated with independence, economic success, safety, and more
long-term permanence within a community. Because of the initial
investment, home owner commit to a long-term economic interest, this
typically results in increased investment in the property. Although many
people still choose to rent housing for a variety of reasons, the concept of
homeownership remains an important goal for communities.
As of 2010, the majority of Upland households (58% or 14,948) own a home,
and 42% (10,875 households) rent a home. Upland’s homeownership rate has
incrementally declined from the 59% homeownership rate a decade ago. In
San Bernardino County, the homeownership rate is higher—63% of the units
are owner occupied and 37% are renters in 2010. The county’s higher
homeownership rate is largely due to its lower home prices versus Upland.
Although homeownership rates are lower than the county, Upland’s share of
homeowners has persevered despite the high level of foreclosures.
Vacancy Rates
Housing vacancies are a measure of how well the supply of housing matches
the demand for specific types of housing. Typically, housing vacancy rates of
5% to 6% for apartments and 1% to 2% for homes are considered optimal.
This rate of housing vacancies assures that consumers have sufficient choices
for different types of housing products, that prices are generally moderated
because a balanced supply is available, and that developers have a financial
incentive to continue building housing. Higher vacancy rates lead to price
depreciation. Lower vacancy rates are also not desirable; they indicate a tight
market and cause housing rents and prices to increase.
According to the 2010 Census, the City of Upland’s vacancy rate is
approximately 1.6% among owner-occupied units and 8.3% among renter-
occupied units, versus countywide vacancy rates of 3.0% and 8.7%,
respectively. While the owner-occupied rate has remained consistent at 1.6%,
the rental-occupied vacancy rate is much higher than 2000, when the rate
was 3.9%. According to recent ASCS data, however, the number of vacant
rental units has dropped by approximately 50% in the past few years,
suggesting that the rental vacancy rate is now around 4%.
In this light, the current vacancy rate for homes and apartments seems to
indicate a match between the supply of housing and current demand. This is
true despite the foreclosures currently offered for sale in Upland.
                                                                      CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     13

Housing Needs
                                 HOUSING AGE AND CONDITION
                                 Well-maintained housing is important to residents who take pride in the
                                 quality of life offered in Upland. Well-maintained housing stabilizes property
                                 values, attracts residents to a community, and contributes to neighborhood
                                 quality. However, the majority of homes in Upland are over 50 years old, and
                                 maintaining the quality of housing will remain an ongoing priority and
                                 require strong housing rehabilitation programs.
                                 Generally, Upland’s housing stock is mature, with 88% built prior to the 1990s.
                                 Most of the housing (54%) was built in the 1970s and 1980s or earlier. Homes
                                 generally begin to show age after 30 years and require minor to moderate
                                 levels of maintenance. This typically includes roof repair, painting,
                                 landscaping, and exterior finishes. Homes between 30 and 50 years typically
                                 require more significant maintenance and even renovation. Generally, homes
                                 built 50 or more years ago (unless well maintained) are more likely to require
                                 substantial repairs or need renovation to meet current building codes.
                                 Another concern related to the age of housing is lead-based paint hazards.
                                 Homes built prior to 1978 typically contain lead-based paint, which can cause
                                 a number of hazardous health conditions for children (specifically,
                                 developmental delays). Health hazards occur when the paint chips and is
                                 inhaled by residents, particularly children. Since 1978, the federal government
                                 has banned the use of lead-based paint. Still, older homes may need to paint
                                 over lead-based paint or remove peeling paint to reduce potential health
                                 hazards.
                                 Table 2-6 shows when Upland’s housing stock was built. The U.S. Census
                                 reports that less than 1% of housing units lack complete kitchens, bathrooms,
                                 or heating—the vast majority of housing has these facilities. In the absence of
                                 specific surveys, City staff estimate that approximately 1% of single-family
                                 units and 1% of multiple-family units need rehabilitation, which is not atypical
                                 for many communities like Upland in the Inland Empire.
                                   Table 2-6: Age of Housing, 2010
                                                                                                     Housing Age
                                   Decade Built                                   Number of Units             Percent of Units
                                   Built 2000 or later                                  1,653                       6%
                                   1990s                                                1,643                       6%
                                   1980s                                                6,882                       26%
                                   1970s                                                7,363                       28%
                                   1960s                                                4,332                       16%
                                   1950s                                                2,677                       10%
                                   Before 1950                                          2,003                       8%
                                                                      Total            26,553                      100%
                                   Source: American Community Survey, 2006–2010.
                                   Note: Sample counts do not take into account vacant units or all units.
14    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                                Housing Needs
HOUSING PRICES
San Bernardino County has experienced unprecedented changes in housing
prices. From 2003 to the peak in 2007, the median home sales price increased
90%, from $195,000 to $368,000. However, as the recession impacted the
region, the median home sales price plummeted to $180,000 by 2010. In
Upland, the median price increased 204% between 2003 and 2006, from
$303,000 to $617,000. Then the values subsided back to $336,000 by 2009.
In 2010, the median home sales price in the City of Upland was $376,000, over
double the county median for the same year. Specific housing prices and
rents for different types of housing are summarized below and in Table 2-7.
    Single-Family. Upland primarily consists of single-family homes.
     According to a sample of 288 single-family homes sold City-wide in 2013,
     the average home price is about $429,000. Newer homes, such as in
     College park, sell for more than $500,000 on average. Smaller, older homes
     in central Upland are the most affordably priced.
    Townhomes/Condominiums. According to a sample of approximately
     100 townhomes and condominiums sold in Upland since June 2011, the
     average home sales price was $278,000. Prices vary considerably
     depending on location, size of unit, and amenities. Prices range from
     $90,000 for a 2-bedroom unit to $430,000 for a 3-bedroom unit.
     Apartments. The rental housing market in Upland is composed primarily
      of apartments and single-family homes. Apartment projects rent for an
      average of $1,200 for a one-bedroom unit, $1,400 for a two-bedroom
      unit, and $2,000 for a three-bedroom unit. Older projects in the                                       Foothill Walk
      community can be rented at considerably lower rents.
     Mobile homes. Mobile homes average $56,000 and range from
      approximately $18,000 to $120,000, depending on the location and size
      of unit. Mobile homes and manufactured housing are located primarily in
      mobile home parks, and while they provide an affordable option for
      home ownership, the units usually lease the land on which they are sited.
  Table 2-7: Housing Sale Prices and Rents in Upland
                                                        Average Prices by Unit Size
  Projects                 Average            1 bed          2 bed            3-bed   4-bed
  Condominiums              $278,000             –          $266,000       $285,000  $342,000
  Single-family             $429,000             –          $300,000       $375,000  $454,000
  Mobile homes               $56,000             –          $38,000          $68,000    –
  Apartments                   N/A           $1,200          $1,400          $2,0000    –
  Source: Redfin.com, 2011–2013; Zillow.com and other internet rental sites.
  Notes: Apartment survey excludes publicly subsidized affordable units.
                                                                                      CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     15

Housing Needs
                                 HOUSING AFFORDABILITY
                                 Housing affordability refers to how much a household can afford to pay each
                                 month for an apartment, townhome, or single-family home. Typically,
                                 housing affordability is defined as the ratio of housing expenses to income,
                                 referred to as a “cost burden.” It is assumed that households should not spend
                                 more than a certain proportion of income toward housing expenses;
                                 otherwise, they are deemed to be overpaying.
                                 The housing industry typically assumes that the “affordable” payment for a
                                 homeowner should range from 30% to 40% of gross monthly income, with
                                 the latter figure being used in the California Association of Realtors’ first-time
                                 homebuyers’ index. For renters, the appropriate cost burden also varies from
                                 30% to 40%, with the latter being used under the federal housing choice
                                 voucher program. The Health and Safety Code uses 35% as the appropriate
                                 cost burden. This housing element uses a midpoint of 35% for ownership (as
                                 many expenses are tax deductible) and 30% for renters as the thresholds.
                                 A mortgage payment typically includes several components—loan principal,
                                 interest, taxes, and insurance. For purposes of calculating affordability, we
                                 assume a conventional 30-year, FHA-insured loan at 5% interest in the
                                 housing affordability calculation. Other costs may come into the housing
                                 affordability equation on a case-by-case basis, such as HOA fees. Table 2-8
                                 shows the amount that households of different sizes and income levels can
                                 afford to pay for a single-family home or apartment unit.
                                   Table 2-8: Affordability of Housing in Upland
                                                                                  Household and Unit Size
                                                                                       Maximum                Maximum
                                                                                       Affordable             Affordable
                                   Income Category1               Annual Income1     Rent Payment2         Purchase Price3
                                   Two-Person Household
                                   Very Low (>50%)                     $26,800            $633                 $109,000
                                   Low (51-80%)                        $42,900           $1,013                $184,000
                                   Moderate (81-120%)                  $60,750           $1,520                $285,000
                                   Above Moderate (120%)              >$60,750          >$1,520               >$285,000
                                   Four-Person Household
                                   Very Low (>50%)                     $33,500            $791                 $140,000
                                   Low (51-80%)                    $33,501-53,600        $1,266                $234,000
                                   Moderate (81-120%)              $53,601-75,950        $1,899                $360,000
                                   Above Moderate (120%)              >75,950           >$1,899                >360,000
                                   Source: The Planning Center|DC&E, 2013.
                                   Notes:
                                   1
                                     Based on HUD Income Limits, January 2013.
                                   2
                                     Calculated as 30% of income.
                                   3
                                     Calculated as 35% of income and assumes 10% down payment, 5% interest rate, and 1.25% tax
                                     and homeowners insurance.
16    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                  Housing Needs
Housing Affordability by Income Level
The following summarizes the general affordability of rental and ownership
housing to households of different income groups based on the assumptions
for market rents and housing affordability in Tables 2-7 and 2-8. This analysis
will be used later in this housing element to help determine how the City will
meet its regional housing needs assessment planning requirement.
Housing affordability for specific income groups are summarized below.
   Very Low Income. Very low income households in Upland can afford to
    purchase a home priced up to approximately $109,000 for a two-person
    household and up to $140,000 for a four-person household. Given the
    $140,000 maximum spending threshold, this income group can afford
    mobile homes, but other types of for-sale housing products are too costly.
    A very low income household could afford up to approximately $800 in
    monthly rent, but this is also well below the market-rate lease rates
    starting at around $1,200 per month for apartments in Upland.
   Low Income. Low income households can afford a home priced up to
    approximately $184,000 for a two-person household and up to $234,000
    for a four-person household. Given the $234,000 maximum spending
    threshold, this income group can afford any existing mobile homes, 34%
    of the condominiums surveyed, and 4% of single-family homes surveyed.
    Overall, for-sale housing is too costly for low income households. Low
    income households can afford up to $1,250 in monthly rent, which is
    sufficient for an average-priced 2-bedroom apartment in Upland.
   Moderate Income. Moderate income households have a realistic chance
    of purchasing a single-family home; they can afford a home priced up to
    $285,000 for a two-person household and up to $360,000 for a four-person
    household. Given the $360,000 maximum spending threshold, this income
    group can afford any existing mobile home, 83% of the condos surveyed,
    and 31% of single-family homes surveyed. Moderate income households
    can afford up to $1,900 in monthly rent, which is sufficient for an average-
    priced 2-bedroom apartment and the average 3-bedroom monthly rent.
   Above Moderate Income. Above moderate income households can
    afford to purchase or rent any mobile home, apartment, condominium
    and entry level single-family home in Upland. However, households
    earning in the lower ranges of above moderate incomes would need to
    make significantly more than the median household income in order to
    purchase a 4-or-more-bedroom single-family home in Upland.
Generally, the City of Upland is denoted as one of the more expensive places
to rent and own homes in San Bernardino County, but it is still more
affordable than many of the surrounding communities, such as Claremont.
Coupled with the desirable environment, proximity to the mountains, and
quaint downtown, Upland remains a highly sought-after community.
                                                                        CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     17

Housing Needs
                                 HOUSEHOLD PROBLEMS
                                 Housing problems refer to overpayment, overcrowding, or substandard
                                 housing. Housing overpayment and overcrowding most often occur when a
                                 household cannot afford suitably sized and priced rental and ownership
                                 housing. In other cases, life changes (retirement, children moving back home,
                                 loss of job, etc.) can also cause housing problems. In these situations, a
                                 household can choose to either overpay for housing or double up with others
                                 into too small a unit to afford housing, which can result in overcrowding.
                                 Table 2-9 and the following text show the prevalence of housing problems in
                                 Upland according to the 2005–2009 American Community Survey.
                                     Overcrowding. Overcrowding refers to a situation where a household has
                                      more members than habitable rooms in a house. Overcrowding can be the
                                      cause of health, livability, and neighborhood quality concerns.
                                      Overcrowding occurs when there is more than one person per room. Less
                                      than 1% of homeowners and 5% of renters in Upland live in overcrowded
                                      housing conditions, which are below the county average of 4% for
                                      homeowners and equal to the county average of 5% for renters.
                                     Overpayment. Housing overpayment refers to paying more than 30% of
                                      income toward housing. Overpayment is a problem in that it makes it
                                      more difficult to afford food, services, insurance, and transportation.
                                      Approximately 38% of owners and 54% of renters in Upland overpay for
                                      housing, which are below the county average of 48% for homeowners but
                                      significantly higher than the 42% of renters in the county.
                                 Housing overpayment and overcrowding are typically most prevalent among
                                 certain special needs groups. For instance, seniors tend to have the highest
                                 prevalence and severity of overpayment due to their fixed incomes. Similarly,
                                 larger families with children have the highest prevalence and severity of
                                 overcrowding, because of the difficulty of finding affordable apartments that
                                 are large enough to accommodate children.
                                   Table 2-9: Housing Overpayment and Overcrowding in Upland
                                                                     Overpayment               Overcrowding
                                   Housing Problem             Renters           Owners  Renters         Owners
                                   None1                         4,404            8,915    8,673         14,371
                                   Moderate                      3,051            3,119    1,168          162
                                   Severe                        2,449            2,398     293             0
                                                     Total      9,904            14,432   10,134         14,533
                                   None                          46%              62%      86%            99%
                                   Moderate                      30%              21%      12%             1%
                                   Severe                        24%              17%       2%             0%
                                   Source: American Community Survey, 2005–2009.
                                   1
                                     Includes “Not Computed” households.
18    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                                  Housing Needs
LOWER INCOME HOUSEHOLDS
Housing problems occur significantly more frequently among lower income
households (defined as households earning less than 80% of the median
family income adjusted for household size) and among special needs groups.
Compared to overpayment rates of 54% among renters and 38% of owners,
the needs of people with lower incomes are more significant:
   Extremely low income households. Approximately 80% of renters and 72%
    of homeowners experience a housing problem. Of that total, the majority
    of housing problems are due to overpayment; 76% of renters and 71% of
    homeowners overpay for housing.
   Very low income households. Approximately 93% of renters and 62% of
    homeowners experience a housing problem. Of that total, the majority of
    housing problems are due to overpayment; 88% of renters and 58% of
    homeowners overpay for housing.
   Other low income households. Approximately 80% of renters and 72% of
    homeowners experience a housing problem. Of that total, the majority of
    housing problems are due to overpayment; 67% of renters and 57% of
    homeowners overpay for housing.
In summary, the housing overpayment rates of lower income households are
typically double to triple that of all Upland households. Moreover, it should
be noted that certain subgroups among lower income households in the City
of Upland experience a disproportionately greater incidence of housing
problems. These include senior renters and large families who are renters.
Table 2-10 highlights the housing problems facing extremely low and very
low income households in Upland.
    Table 2-10: Extremely, Very Low, and Low Income Households
                                                            Total Households
    Housing Problem                             Renters          Owners             Total
    Income < 30% of MFI                          1,430             535              1,965
    Any housing problems                          80%             72%               77%
    Cost burden > 30%                             76%             71%               75%
    Income 30–50% of MFI                         1,540             665              2,205
    Any housing problems                          93%             62%               84%
    Cost burden > 30%                             88%             58%               78%
    Income 50–80% of MFI                         2,280            1,525             3,805
    Any housing problems                          81%             58%               72%
    Cost burden > 30%                             67%             57%               63%
    Source: Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) Data; Table S10708.
Renters Owners Total
                                                                                        CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     19

Housing Needs
                                 C.        SPECIAL HOUSING NEEDS
                                 This section contains a discussion of the housing needs of special needs
                                 groups, as defined in state law, who reside in the City of Upland. Special
                                 needs households include seniors, large families, single-parent households,
                                 people who are homeless, and people with disabilities. Also included are
                                 major programs available to address their unique needs.
                                 SENIOR CITIZENS
                                 Seniors are defined as persons 65 years or older, although for some housing
                                 purposes the age may be as low as 55 years. Upland has an estimated 8,898
                                 residents 65 or older, representing 12% of the population. These residents live
                                 in 6,266, or 24% of the City’s households (U.S. Census 2010). Among this
                                 population, the majority of Upland’s senior households (4,210 or 80%) own
                                 their own homes, and 1,053 senior households (20%) rent housing.
                                 Overall, some of the more pressing senior issues are:
                                    Disabilities. Seniors have a higher prevalence than other age groups of
                                     disabilities that can make it increasingly difficult to go outside or take care
                                     of personal needs. This underscores a need for housing that is accessible
                                     to those with disabilities. Approximately 31% of Upland’s elderly
                                     population has disabilities.
                                    Limited Income. Seniors tend to have lower incomes due to fixed
                                     retirements. This makes seniors, especially renters, more susceptible to
                                     increases in rental housing costs and housing overpayment, which leaves
                                     less disposal income for other expenses. Approximately 13% of Upland’s
                                     elderly population is living below the poverty level.
                                    Overpayment. Senior renters have the highest rates of overpayment,
                                     while many senior homeowners find it difficult to trade down to smaller
                                     units or make repairs to housing. This underscores the need for affordable
                                     housing options and repair programs.
                                 Providing appropriate housing for seniors has become an increasingly
                                 important issue for many communities. In past years, the baby boomer
                                 generation provided the impetus and majority of demand for single-family
                                 housing. However, as this group ages and approaches retirement or elderly
                                 years, many communities will see an increased demand for all types of senior
                                 housing, from smaller condominiums to independent age-restricted housing
                                 to assisted residential settings for those requiring more supportive services.
                                 In addition to housing, an appropriate mix of affordable support services
                                 provided locally can benefit seniors living in Upland. Support services are
                                 essential in facilitating the ability of seniors (and any household) to live as
                                 independently as possible without having to change their residences.
                                 Services can include transportation, health care, home maintenance
                                 assistance, and low cost loans or grants to rehabilitate homes.
20    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                                      Housing Needs
Housing Accommodations
Many Upland seniors reside in conventional single-family homes. Beyond
conventional housing, however, Upland also has been active in providing a
variety of housing options that are age-restricted for seniors, including new
senior housing, maintaining existing senior housing, permitting assisted
living facilities, and assisting with home repairs and provision of services.
As summarized below and in Table 2-11, housing accommodations for seniors
include the following:
    Affordable Senior Housing. The City offers 111 affordable housing units
     reserved for moderate income seniors in the Coy D. Estes Senior
     Apartments, and 100 units in Sycamore Terrace. The majority of the units
     are 1-bedroom units intended for independent senior living. Sycamore
     Terrace has a date of potential conversion by 2021.
    Senior Mobile Homes. The City offers 1 rent-controlled park for senior
     citizens ages 55+ called El Dorado Mobile Home Park with approximately
     210 trailers. The City does have rent stabilization in place, although it is
     unknown how many trailers are regulated under the ordinance. It is
     assumed that rents are generally affordable to lower income seniors.
    Housing Vouchers. The Housing Authority of San Bernardino County
     (HACSB) also provides housing choice vouchers to very low income
     seniors for rental assistance. These vouchers are not tied to a specific
     project but can be used anywhere they are accepted. In 2012 HACSB
     provided 157 vouchers to elderly households in Upland.
Several agencies provide supportive services for Upland seniors. Meals on
Wheels and Old-Timers Foundation Food Delivery serve home delivered
meals for frail, homebound, disabled, and isolated seniors. The City’s
Department of Recreation and Community Services coordinates a
transportation services program for seniors and individuals with disabilities.
Seniors can also access a myriad of services and classes, and participate in
special interest groups facilitated at the George M. Gibson Senior Center.
   Table 2-11: Housing for Seniors
                                                            Senior Housing
   Housing Options                     Housing Units                      Affordability
   Age-Restricted Senior                                     Affordable rents for lower income
                                         211 units
   Apartments                                                seniors
   Age-Restricted Mobile                 210 units           Market rate rents affordable to low
   Homes                                                     income households
   Housing Vouchers (not                                     Extremely low and very low income
                                         157 units
   tied to a specific project)                               senior households
                           Total         578 units                              --
   Source: City of Upland, 2013; Upland Housing Authority, 2013.
                                                                                            CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     21

Housing Needs
                                 DISABLED PEOPLE
                                 Physical, mental, and/or developmental disabilities are impairments that
                                 substantially limit life activities and make it difficult to care for oneself.
                                 Because of that, disabled persons have special needs for accessible housing.
                                 Many disabled persons live on fixed incomes, thus limiting their ability to
                                 afford housing. Persons with a disability may also have limited housing
                                 choices (e.g., single-story homes or projects with elevators). Someone with a
                                 visual impairment may require a home that allows service animals.
                                 In 2010, the Census Bureau defined a disability as a long-lasting physical,
                                 mental, or emotional condition that can make it difficult for a person to do
                                 activities such as walking, climbing stairs, dressing, bathing, learning, or
                                 remembering. This condition can also impede a person from being able to
                                 leave the home alone or to work at a job or business. According to the latest
                                 sources, Upland has 7,320 individuals living with a disability—or
                                 approximately 10% of residents (ACS 2009–2011). These include:
                                    Sensory: Blindness, deafness, vision or hearing–4,174 people
                                    Physical disability: Substantially limited movement–2,945
                                    Mental disability: Impaired learning, memory, or concentrating–2,481
                                    Self-care disability: Restricted ability to care for oneself–1,409
                                    Developmental Disabilities–490
                                    Restricted ability to leave home–2,096
                                 State law also requires that housing elements include an analysis of the
                                 housing needs of residents with developmental disabilities. A developmental
                                 disability is a severe and chronic disability that causes a mental or physical
                                 impairment that begins before adulthood. These disabilities include mental
                                 retardation, cerebral palsy, epilepsy, autism, and closely related disabling
                                 conditions. According to the California Department of Developmental
                                 Services Inland Regional Center (IRC), less than 1% of residents in Upland
                                 (490) have a developmental disability.
                                 Upland has a variety of services available for people with disabilities.
                                 Centerbest Neurofeedback Centers for Success, Scheu Family YMCA, OPARC,
                                 and Easter Seals Child Development Center provide programs to enhance the
                                 independent living skills of disabled individuals. Services provided include
                                 advocacy, counseling, employment assistance, housing referrals, and
                                 transportation to medical appointments. The Regional Center for the
                                 Developmentally Disabled in Upland provides resources such as education,
                                 health, welfare, rehabilitation, and recreation for persons who are
                                 developmentally disabled as well as those for accessing affordable housing.
                                 The 2013 Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing (AI) reported that 50% of
                                 the complaints for fair housing violations are reported by people with
                                 disabilities. The AI proposed a program for the City and Inland Fair housing
                                 and Mediation Board (IFHMB) to work collaboratively by expanding
                                 education, outreach, monitoring, and testing in an effort to reduce the
                                 incidence of potential fair housing concerns.
22    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                          Housing Needs
Housing Accommodations
Providing a sufficient quantity and quality of housing for disabled people is a
significant challenge. Most single-family homes are inaccessible to disabled
people without wider doorways and hallways, access ramps, larger
bathrooms with grab bars, lowered countertops, and other features. Location
is also important for disabled people because they often rely on public transit
to travel to services, like grocers or medical offices. In some cases, more
severely disabled individuals require a group living environment where
supervision and assistance with activities of daily living is provided.
OPARC is a key service provider to developmentally disabled residents.
OPARC provides a wide variety of programs, including academic instruction,
speech pathology classes to enhance communication skills, community
access, behavior management, onsite assistance with the activities of daily
living, and the opportunity to engage in paid and volunteer work. Through its
Upland branch, OPARC provides additional support and training to clients
with a dual diagnosis of developmental and behavioral challenges. Speech
pathology classes and academic instruction are also available
Upland’s facilities for people with disabilities, including developmental
disabilities, are shown below and in Table 2-12.
    Youth facilities. These facilities provide 24-hour nonmedical care for
     youth and children with a variety of disabilities. Upland has three group
     homes for youth, each serving six residents. The breakdown by disability
     of the client served is unknown.
    Adult facilities. These facilities serve persons 18–59 who are disabled.
     Upland’s 10 facilities serve 136 residents, the majority of whom has a
     developmental disability. Moreover, an additional 14 adult care facilities
     serve 84 developmentally disabled individuals.
    Elderly facilities. These facilities serve persons 60 years of age and over
     who have a disability (physical, mental, or developmental) or need
     extended care services. Upland has 18 facilities serving 235 residents.
     Upland also has 3 skilled nursing facilities serving 375 clients.
    Table 2-12: Housing for People with Disabilities
                                                   Housing Accommodations
                                                                      No. of    No. of
   Type of Housing                          Type of Housing          Facilities  Beds
   Group/Small Family Home        Children Services                      3        18
   Adult Residential Care         Developmental Disability               9         76
   Adult Care                     Adults with Any Disability             1         60
   Elderly Residential Care       Any Elderly Individual                18        235
   Skilled Nursing Facility       Any Individual                         3        375
   Intermediate Care Facility     Developmentally Disabled              14        84
                                                               Total    48       848
   Source: The Planning Center|DC&E, 2013.
                                                                                CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     23

Housing Needs
                                 FAMILY HOUSEHOLDS
                                 California law requires that the housing element include an analysis of the
                                 housing needs of three types of family households—large families with five or
                                 more members, female-headed households, and single-parent households.
                                 The reasons for their special need status differ, but generally include lower
                                 incomes, higher cost of living, and the lack of adequately sized rental and
                                 ownership housing.
                                 Large families with five or more persons clearly have special housing needs.
                                 The reasons for classification as a special need are generally due to a lower
                                 per capita income, the need for affordable childcare, and the need for
                                 affordable, larger-size units that can accommodate children. Upland has 3,646
                                 large family households (Census 2010). Among this group, 2,016 of large
                                 families (55%), own a home, and 1,630 large households (45%) rent housing.
                                 The Census Bureau has not published data on the percentage of Upland large
                                 households that overpay for housing or live in overcrowded conditions.
                                 Single-parent households also have greater housing needs than other
                                 households due to their limited income and higher expenses. The City has
                                 2,817 single-parent households with children, of which 2,075 are female-
                                 headed households. According to the Census, there are 462 single-female-
                                 parent households with children living below the poverty level, which is 16%
                                 of the total single-parent households with children. There are no single-male
                                 parent households living below the poverty level in Upland. As is common,
                                 lower income single parents, particularly renters, experience the highest
                                 prevalence and severity of overpayment and overcrowding.
                                 Summarized below, the key needs of families in Upland are similar to other
                                 communities and are as follows:
                                    Income Support. Public assistance includes health care, food assistance,
                                     and cash assistance offered to lower income residents or those who meet
                                     eligibility thresholds. According to 2011 U.S. Census American
                                     Communities Survey 1-Year Estimates, 1,293 Upland households received
                                     food stamps, or approximately 5% of the total households.
                                    Childcare. For working parents, child care is essential to maintain a job.
                                     The City has 22 licensed child care centers and large family day care homes
                                     that serve 1,255 children. Numerous other smaller homes serving 8 or
                                     fewer children operate in Upland. Yet even if childcare is available, the
                                     high cost of childcare subsumes a significant share of income.
                                    Housing Problems. Lower income families, particularly single parents and
                                     large families, have the highest prevalence of housing problems. For
                                     single-parent families, the usual issue is overpayment. For larger families
                                     who rent housing, overpayment and overcrowding are the most prevalent
                                     housing issues. In 2012, HACSB provided 276 rental housing vouchers to
                                     households with minors to rent housing in Upland.
24    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                         Housing Needs
Housing Accommodations
Providing housing opportunities for families in Upland is a challenging task.
Family households, particularly those with dependent children, are the future
of any community, and resources should be targeted to assist where possible.
Certainly, the majority of families earns higher incomes and lives in housing
and neighborhoods of their choice. For others, though, the housing
downturn has left them with high mortgages and, in some cases, foreclosures.
Summarized and described below in Table 2-13, the City of Upland does have
the following affordable housing options for lower income families.
   Family mobile homes. The City of Upland offers 5 mobile home parks
    that provide a total of 868 spaces for trailers. Many of the units are under
    rent stabilization. Given the presence of rent stabilization and the
    generally affordable cost of mobile home units, however, mobile homes
    units are presumed to be affordable to lower income families.
   Single-family homes. The present housing stock presumably offers a
    number of affordable homes for families. These single-family units and
    condominium units are typically in older parts of Upland and are generally
    not in as good condition as other units. The Census does not provide
    information on these types of units.
   Publicly assisted apartments. According to City records, Upland has 14
    deed-restricted apartment projects that provide 1,809 units of housing
    affordable to lower income families. Additional affordable family
    apartment projects are located just outside the City’s borders.
   Housing vouchers. Section 8 housing choice vouchers are provided to
    606 households earning low and moderate incomes in 2012. These
    vouchers are portable and not tied to a specific apartment project. The
    City’s Family Self Sufficiency Program also provided assistance to nine
    households that helped them transition off of the voucher program.
  Table 2-13: Housing for Families
                                                Family Housing
                                Number of Housing
  Affordable Housing             Projects  Units                Affordability
  Family Mobile Home                                  Market rate rents affordable to
  Parks                               5     868       low income households
  Family Affordable                                   Deed restricted as affordable for
  Apartments                         14    1,809      low income family households
  Various Scattered                                   Housing choice vouchers for very
  Apartments                          –     606       low income resident households
                       Total        20     3,346
  Source: The Planning Center|DC&E, 2013.
                                                                               CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     25

Housing Needs
                                 HOMELESS PEOPLE
                                 Homeless persons are defined as those who lack a fixed and adequate
                                 residence. Homelessness is a pressing issue for many communities, and the
                                 varied dimensions involved have implications for housing programs. People
                                 who are homeless may be chronically homeless (perhaps due to substance
                                 abuse) or situationally homeless resulting from job loss, family strife,
                                 incarceration, or violence. Homeless people face critical housing challenges
                                 due to their very low incomes and lack of appropriate housing. Thus, state law
                                 requires cities to plan to help meet the needs of their homeless population.
                                 Counting the homeless population is problematic due to its transient nature,
                                 different definitions of homelessness, and political and funding issues. The
                                 2013 San Bernardino County Point-in-Time Homeless Count reported 2,321
                                 homeless people in the county, a 19% decrease from the 2011count. The last
                                 complete count of homeless people in Upland is also included. According to
                                 the 2013 study, Upland has up to 159 sheltered and unsheltered homeless
                                 people, of which 92 or 58% are unsheltered.
                                 Upland’s homeless population is diverse, representing individuals and
                                 families from all walks of life, income levels, and demographics. Of the 115
                                 homeless adults in Upland, 63% are males, the race and ethnic distribution
                                 mirrors that of the community, and 30% have children living with them. In
                                 terms of status, 72% consider themselves residents and 25% work part-time.
                                 Homeless people report primary reasons for homelessness include domestic
                                 violence or divorce (28%), job loss (15%), and disability or injury (11%). In
                                 addition, 30% were released from a correctional institutional in the past year.
                                 As part of the homeless count, recommendations were made to create a more
                                 integrated and self-sustaining approach to address homelessness in Upland.
                                 The City is implementing the following recommendations.
                                    Establish a Coordinated Community Outreach, Engagement,
                                     Treatment, and Permanent Supportive Housing Initiative. The City is
                                     working with the Upland Housing Authority on this recommendation.
                                    Implement a Housing First/Rapid Rehousing Approach. The City is also
                                     working with the Upland Housing Authority on this recommendation,
                                     along with the Riverside County Housing Authority.
                                    Establish Coordinated Collaborative Network of Community and
                                     Mainstream Resources. The City of Upland created a service council to
                                     help coordinate the provision of services for homeless people.
                                 Along with the above strategies, the City is completing a zoning code update
                                 that will designate zones where emergency shelters can be permitted. In
                                 addition, the zoning code update will also include provisions to allow for
                                 transitional and permanent supportive housing in residential zones. These
                                 zoning code updates will help further the City’s Housing First approach.
26    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                     Housing Needs
Housing and Service Accommodations
Housing accommodations for homeless people include three levels—
emergency shelter, transitional housing, and permanent supportive housing.
Each level serves distinctly different housing and supportive service needs.
Facilities serving Upland residents are briefly summarized below.
  Foothill Family Shelter. Foothill Family Shelter is the primary facility
   serving Upland’s homeless. This facility provides emergency shelter,
   transitional housing, and permanent housing in one center for homeless
   individuals and families. It includes 75 emergency beds, 7-two bedroom
   apartments which are offered for free to homeless families with children
   for 120-day periods, 12-two bedroom apartments for transitional housing,
   and 8-two bedroom apartments for affordable permanent housing.
  Pacific Lifeline Ministry. Pacific Lifeline Ministry in Upland is a faith-based
   ministry that empowers women and children facing chronic homelessness
   to achieve personal and social stability. Pacific Lifeline provides 28 beds for
   women and their young children at a transitional shelter in Upland. As part
   of the transitional housing, Pacific Lifeline provides services that include
   case management, individual group and family therapy, tutoring and
   counseling services, clothes, food, and limited housing services.
  Substance abuse. Inland Valley Recovery Services provides a number of
   programs for the Upland community. The Women and Children
   Program/Staying Sober provides a support base for recovering parents to
   restore relationships with children. The program assisted 132 people with
   drug and alcohol treatment during the 2010–2011 fiscal year. IVRS also
   offers residential treatment in the City of Upland to adult men and women
   in a large state-of-the-art treatment center with a capacity of 75 beds.
  Service agencies. Several service agencies assist homeless people in
   Upland. One example is Inland Valley Hope Partners, which provides
   emergency assistance with food, utilities, and educational classes. Inland
   Valley Hope Partners assisted 1,751 people during fiscal year 2010–2011
   Additional service agencies assist the homeless population in Upland.
   Other groups, such as OUR Homeless, links local ministries to community
   service providers and other congregations implementing solutions to
   ending homelessness on the west end of San Bernardino County.
  Housing Authority. The County Housing Authority has jurisdiction over a
   number of housing voucher programs, including those for homeless
   people. The Upland Housing Authority recently entered into an
   memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the San Bernardino County
   Housing Authority (HACSB) to administer housing assistance contracts
   with landlords in the City of Upland for applicants/participants of HACSB
   special purpose homeless voucher programs (Housing Opportunities for
   Persons with AIDS, Shelter Plus Care, Veterans Affairs Supportive Housing).
                                                                           CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     27

Housing Needs
                                 D. AFFORDABLE HOUSING AT
                                 RISK OF CONVERSION
                                 Affordable housing that has received public subsidies in return for covenants
                                 is a large part of the City of Upland’s affordable housing inventory. In
                                 accordance with Government Code section 65583(a)(9), the housing element
                                 must analyze of multiple-family projects built with public subsidies. The
                                 housing element must inventory the projects and show whether the housing
                                 is at risk of converting to non–low income uses due to the expiration of use
                                 restrictions, prepayment of mortgage, or other reasons. Table 2-14 contains a
                                 summary of each publicly assisted multiple-family housing project in Upland.
                                    Table 2-14: Publicly Assisted Multiple-Family Affordable Housing
                                                                                 Project Characteristics
                                                                                                                           Expiration
                                    Project Name         Target     Total     Affordable          Unit         Project       Date of
                                    and Address          Group      Units        Units            Size        Funding      Covenants
                                    At Risk by 2024
                                   Parc Claremont        Family       136     12 VLI; 16 LI       2 BR            DB          2014
                                   Village Green         Family       186     24 VLI; 23 LI     1 & 2 BR         MRB          2014
                                   Highland Hills        Family        64       6 VLI; 7 LI       3 BR           N/A          2015
                                   Rancho Lindo          Family        16          4 LI           2 BR         HOME           2016
                                   Richland Apts.        Family        33          8 LI           2 BR         HOME           2016
                                   Ricca Villa           Family        17           4 LI          2 BR         HOME           2017
                                   Sycamore Terrace      Senior       100        100 VLI          1 BR        HUD 202         2021
                                   Northwoods            Family       324          64 LI          2 BR           MRB          2024
                                    Not at Risk
                                   Arbor Park            Family       260         104 LI          2 BR           MRB          2028
                                                  1
                                   Sunset Ridge          Family       108         16 VLI        1 & 2 BR      MRB|RDA         2029
                                   Village Apts 1        Family        72         20 VLI        1 & 2 BR      MRB|RDA         2029
                                   Alpine Woods          Family       137         137 LI        1 & 2 BR        LIHTC         2029
                                   Mountain Springs      Family       340      3 VLI; 65 LI       2 BR           MRB          2030
                                                                               18 VL; 18 LI
                                   Magnolia Colony1      Family        40     36 Moderate       2 & 3 BR     HOME; RDA        2058
                                                                                  110 LI
                                   Coy D. Estes          Senior       130     20 Moderate       1 & 2 BR        LIHTC         2067
                                   Los Olivos            Family        97         97 VLI          2 BR      Public Hsng     Perpetual
                                   9th Street Terrace    Family        24         24 VLI        1 & 2 BR      Section 8     Perpetual
                                    Source: The Planning Center|DC&E, 2013.
                                    VLI: Very low income                                  MRB: Mortgage Revenue Bonds
                                    LI: Low income                                        LIHTC: Low Income Housing Tax Credit
                                    DB: Density bonus                                     RDA: Upland Redevelopment Department
                                    HUD 202: Dept. of Housing and Urban Development       Section 8: Federal Housing Voucher program
                                                                                          1
                                    HOME: Federal Home Investment Partnership Funds         Projects owned by the City of Upland
28    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                  Housing Needs
AT-RISK STATUS
State law requires the housing element to include an assessment of the
likelihood that the publicly assisted affordable projects will be at risk of
conversion to non–low income uses. This determination of “at risk” status
depends on: 1) whether the original deed restrictions that accompany public
assistance are expiring; 2) the desire of the property owner to convert the
project to market rates; and 3) current housing market conditions. At-risk
projects are those considered to be at risk of conversion to market rate
housing within 10 years following adoption of the housing element, or 2024.
Of the 859 total assisted units within 17 developments, 260 units in seven
developments are at risk of converting to market rate during the 2014 to 2024
period. These projects are briefly described below
   Section 8 Assistance. Upland has two affordable housing projects that
    are at risk of conversion to market rents and receive Section 8 assistance.
    These projects include a 100-unit senior project called Sycamore Terrace
    and the 64-unit Highland Hills, of which 13 units are set aside for lower
    income families. Although neither project has expressed an interest to
    convert from affordable to market rents, both are technically at risk of
    conversion because the federal government must periodically reauthorize
    funding for the Section 8 rental housing voucher program.
   Home Funds. The City has three affordable housing projects originally
    funded with HOME funds. The 16-unit Rancho Lindo project consists of 16
    two-bedroom units, 4 of which are set aside for low-income families. Ricca
    Villa Apartments is a 17-unit complex with 4 units set aside for low-income
    families. The Richland Apartments was a substantial rehabilitation project,
    not new construction. These projects used HOME funds. The affordability
    of these four projects is set to expire in 2014 through 2017.
   Mortgage Revenue Bonds (MRB). The City has six projects funded with
    mortgage revenue bonds, of which two projects are at risk of conversion.
    The 186-unit Upland Village Green has covenants on 25% (47) of the units
    and will expire in 2014. The 324-unit Northwood Apartments has 20% (64
    units) set aside as lower income units, and the covenant expires in 2024.
    The City owns three MRB-funded projects–Village Apartments, Sunset
    Ridge, and Magnolia Colony–offering 72 affordable housing units. Due to
    the dissolution of the redevelopment agency and upcoming expiration of
    the MRB financing and covenants, the City will review those projects.
   Regulatory Agreement. Parc Claremont is a 136-unit project with 28 two-
    bedroom units set aside for very low and low income families. Project
    affordability was historically governed by a density bonus restriction to
    provide affordable housing for 25 years after initial occupancy. The
    Housing Authority, City, and property owners are party to the agreement.
    The regulatory agreement is set to expire in November 2014 and new
    terms would need to be drafted in order to continue the covenant.
                                                                        CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     29

Housing Needs
                                 PRESERVATION AND REPLACEMENT ALTERNATIVES
                                 Local governments have four primary ways to preserve affordable housing
                                 projects that have expired affordability controls: 1) facilitate transfer of the
                                 project to another entity capable of keeping the project affordable for an
                                 extended period of time; 2) offer incentives to purchase and/or rehabilitate
                                 the project (and renew affordability covenants); 3) replace the expired rental
                                 subsidies; and 4) build new affordable units.
                                 The cost to preserve affordable multiple-family housing depends on market
                                 rents, feasibility of acquiring new housing vouchers, availability of funding
                                 sources, and the administrative capacity of groups willing to purchase at-risk
                                 projects. These options are further described below.
                                 Purchase of Project
                                 Purchasing the project (for purposes of transferring ownership to a nonprofit)
                                 depends on the price of the project. The estimated market value for the at-
                                 risk units in the remaining eight projects is provided in Table 2-15. As
                                 indicated below, the estimated market value of the 268 assisted units is $24.7
                                 million. These estimates are provided for purposes of comparison and
                                 understanding the magnitude of costs involved and do not represent the
                                 precise market values of these projects. The actual market values depend on
                                 market, property conditions, and a number of other factors.
                                    Table 2-15: Market Value of At Risk Units
                                            Project Information                                          Total
                                 One-Bedroom Units                                                         123
                                 Two-Bedroom Units                                                         132
                                 Three-Bedroom Units                                                        13
                                 Total Units                                                              268
                                 Annual Gross Income                                                   $2,149,224
                                 Annual Operating Cost                                                 $1,059,750
                                 Net Annual Income                                                     $1,089,474
                                 Estimated Market Value                                             $11,984,214
                                  Market value for project is estimated with the following assumptions:
                                  1. Average market rent is estimated to be $879 for a one-bedroom unit, $1,116 for a two-
                                      bedroom unit, and $1,577 for a three-bedroom unit.
                                  2. Bedrooms per unit: Upland Village Green (23 one-bedroom and 24 two-bedroom); Parc
                                      Claremont (28 two-bedroom units); Highland Hills (13 three-bedroom units); Rancho Lindo (4
                                      two-bedroom units); Ricca Villa (4 two-bedroom units); Richland (8 two-bedroom units); and
                                      Northwood (64 two-bedroom units).
                                  3. Average unit size is estimated at 700 sq. ft. for a one-bedroom unit, 850 sq. ft. or a two-
                                      bedroom unit, and 1,050 sq. ft. for a three bedroom unit.
                                  4. Vacancy rate is assumed at 0% since the projects are usually fully occupied.
                                  5. Annual operating expenses per square foot are estimated to be $5.00.
                                  6. Market value = Annual net project income x multiplication factor.
                                  7. Multiplication factor for a building in moderate condition is 11.
                                  8. Total excludes three City-owned RDA and MRB-funded projects.
30    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                    Housing Needs
Purchase of Affordability Covenants
The City could also preserve the affordability of at-risk projects by providing
incentives to purchase and/or rehabilitate the project in return for renewing
affordability covenants. Incentives could include writing down the interest
rate on the remaining loan balance, providing a lump-sum payment, and/or
supplementing the rents to market levels. By providing lump sum financial
incentives, ongoing subsides in rents, or reduced mortgage interest rates to
the owner, the City can ensure that some or all of the units remain affordable.
The feasibility of this option depends on whether the project is too leveraged.
Based on recent acquisitions and rehabilitations of affordable housing
projects in the vicinity of Upland, the costs for acquisition and rehabilitation
range from $85,000 to $100,000 per unit. Therefore, the total cost to acquire
and rehabilitate the 268 at-risk affordable multiple-family housing units in
Upland is estimated to be $22.7 to $27.0 million. As was the case with the
earlier option, the cost of acquisition and rehabilitation cost is not an actual
estimate because it depends on the condition of the property at time of sale.
However, it does provide a general magnitude order of estimate for purposes
of comparison with other preservation opportunities.
Rental Subsidies
The third option for preserving affordable units is to provide rental assistance.
Rent subsidies could be structured to mirror the Section 8 program, where
HUD pays the difference between what tenants can afford (defined as 30% of
household income) and HUD’s estimates of the fair market rent. The feasibility
of this alternative is highly dependent upon the availability of reliable funding
sources necessary to make rent subsidies and the willingness of property
owners to participate in the program. As indicated in Table 2-16 (Rental
Subsidies Required), the total cost of subsidizing the rents at all 268 at-risk
units is estimated to be $20 million over a 40-year period.
  Table 2-16 Rental Subsidies Required
                             Fair                 Hhld       Affordable
    Unit        Total       Market     Hhld      Annual        Cost –          Total Subsidy –
    Size        Units       Rent1      Size     Income2       Utilities3           40 years
  1-BR           123         $879       2        26,800         $570            $18.24 million
  2-BR           132        $1,116      3        48,250        $1081            $2.20 million
  3-BR            13        $1,577      5        57,900        $1,298           $1.74 million
  Total          268                                                            $19.99 million
  Source: The Planning Center|DC&E, 2013.
  1
   Fair Market Rent is determined by HUD
  2
   San Bernardino County 2012 Area Median Income (AMI) limits set by the California Department of
    Housing and Community Development (HCD)
  3
   Affordable cost = 30% of Household minus utility allowance determined by the Housing Authority
    of San Bernardino County.
                                                                                          CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     31

Housing Needs
                                 Construction of Replacement Units
                                 The construction of new low income housing units is the most costly means
                                 of replacing the at-risk units should they be converted to market-rate units.
                                 The cost of developing housing depends upon a variety of factors, including
                                 density, size of the units (i.e., square footage and number of bedrooms),
                                 location, land costs, and type of construction. Assuming an average
                                 construction cost of $200,000 per unit (including the cost of land), it would
                                 cost approximately $53 million to construct 268 new assisted units. This does
                                 not include the cost of land or site improvements.
                                 Transfer of Project to Other Entity
                                 Table 2-17 shows that preserving affordable units ranges from $20 to $53
                                 million over 40 years depending on the preservation option chosen. Few
                                 cities have this amount of revenue available for preservation activities. Due to
                                 the high cost of preservation, the City of Upland would be better served in
                                 assisting a private or nonprofit entity to preserve the project. For example, in
                                 the City of Whittier, the city is dedicating $300,000 to a for-profit developer to
                                 assist them in the acquisition and rehabilitation of a senior project. The
                                 developer has found this an attractive option, because they have been
                                 awarded low income housing tax credits to purchase the project. Then the
                                 city financially benefits by adding minimally to the equity to the project and
                                 avoids the cost of shouldering the financial cost of preservation.
                                   Table 2-17: Preservation Alternatives
                                       Housing                              Estimated     Ranking
                                     Preservation                          Cost (over 30  (Least to
                                        Option           Cost of Subsidy       years)    Most Costly) Benefits/Costs
                                                                                                        Uncertain to
                                   Rental Subsidies       Monthly Rent
                                                                            $20 million       3            annual
                                   (vouchers)                 Subsidy
                                                                                                       authorization
                                                          Purchase price                                 Long-term
                                   Purchase of
                                                         based on project   $25 million       1         affordability
                                   Project
                                                               value                                     preserved
                                                                                                         Long-term
                                   Acquisition/             $85,000 to       $22 to $27
                                                                                              2         affordability
                                   Rehabilitation       $100,000 per unit     million
                                                                                                         preserved
                                                                            $53 million                  Long-term
                                   New Unit             $200,000 per unit
                                                                             (does not        4         affordability
                                   Construction          for construction
                                                                           include land)                 preserved
                                   Source: The Planning Center|DC&E, 2013.
32    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT
3. Constraint Analysis
This chapter of the housing technical report contains an analysis of potential
and actual market, governmental, and environmental constraints to the
production, maintenance, and improvement of housing for persons of all
income levels, including persons with disabilities.
A.        MARKET CONSTRAINTS
In recent years, communities have seen a dramatic decline in the number of
new housing units built. This decline in housing construction is due to a
convergence of factors, including limited supply of vacant, unconstrained
land; tighter lending policies; declining home values; foreclosures; cost of
materials; and even local government policy. This section analyzes the impact
of these “market” factors on the development of new and affordable housing.
DEVELOPMENT COSTS
Development costs, in tandem with projected rents and sale prices of
housing, affect the feasibility of building housing. Land costs include the costs
of raw land and site improvements (e.g., grading, cut and fill, and cleanup). If
an existing use is on the parcel, the developer must also factor in the price of
an existing structure that must be demolished. Other factors affecting land
prices include: availability, environmental site conditions, public service and
infrastructure availability, aesthetic considerations, and parcel size.
Upland is an established and nearly built-out community. Only two
undeveloped residential land parcels were listed for sale in June 2013: one on
E 26th Street for $425,000 (for 0.7 acres) and one on N Euclid for $1.1 million
(for 0.9 acres). The limited availability of undeveloped and unconstrained land
for residential uses drives up the cost of housing. Significant future housing
construction is anticipated in mixed-use and specific plan areas in the
southwest portion of the City near Cable Airport (i.e., College Heights). Given
the lack of vacant parcels, existing land prices often include a structure that
must be either reused or demolished to build on the property. Based on
properties sold over the past three years, parcels used for residential
development ranged from approximately $17 to $30 per square foot.
Housing construction constitutes a substantial portion of construction costs.
The cost of new housing averages $100 to $150 per square foot for a single-
family detached unit. For a 2,000-square-foot home, the cost of construction
ranges from $200,000 for a standard home to upwards of $300,000 for a
luxury single-family homes. Some of the newer condominium projects cost
more depending on the location. Apartments can achieve some economy of
scale with construction costs. According to the R.S. Means cost estimator,
apartments range from $125 to $175 per square foot, which translates into a
price of $125,000 to $175,000 for a 1,000-square-foot unit.
                                                                         CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT 33

Constraint Analysis
                                  ACCESS TO FINANCING
                                  Changes in construction lending practices for housing projects have had a
                                  significant impact on the financial feasibility of new construction. In past
                                  decades, housing developers could receive construction loans for 100% or
                                  more of a project's estimated future value. Following the housing market
                                  crash of the early 1990s, financial institutions tightened regulations for
                                  approving construction loans. After the boom period of the early to mid-
                                  2000s, this cycle repeated itself during the late 2000s. Loan underwriting has
                                  grown more conservative, with maximum leveraging topping out at 75%, and
                                  equity requirements increasing from 10% in past years to 30% in 2009.
                                  The feasibility of building is also affected by the required equity contribution.
                                  Although there is no hard threshold for how much up-front cash equity is too
                                  much before a project would be deemed infeasible (or at least unattractive
                                  compared to other investment opportunities), the higher the proportion of
                                  equity required, the more unlikely a developer will proceed with the project.
                                  Not only would it require more up-front cash, but higher equity contribution
                                  means a project must be able to achieve an even higher value at completion
                                  in order to generate the cash flow needed to meet acceptable cash-on-cash
                                  returns. These trends are anticipated to continue through at least 2014.
                                  GOVERNMENT ASSISTANCE
                                  The economic downturn also impacted the financing for affordable housing.
                                  One example is the Low Income Housing Tax Credit Program. LIHTCs provide
                                  affordable housing developers an allocation of tax credits, which are sold to
                                  investors to raise equity for projects. Investors that purchase tax credits are
                                  able to reduce their federal tax liability dollar for dollar, so that the purchase
                                  of $1,000 in tax credits reduces tax liability by $1,000. As a result of the equity
                                  made available through the sale of tax credits, a developer can complete
                                  projects with less debt and pass on cost savings in the form of lower rent.
                                  The LIHTC equity market has been volatile for the past few years. Following
                                  the market bust in 2006/2007, LIHTC prices collapsed in 2008 and 2009.
                                  Historically, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac provided 40% of LIHTC investments,
                                  and banks motivated by the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) provided
                                  40%. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac no longer make new investments. In
                                  addition, the substantial losses that many financial institutions continue to
                                  incur eliminated or reduced the ability to use tax credits. In 2010, the LIHTC
                                  market began a recovery and investment continues to increase.
                                  Finally, Governor Brown appropriated the last major source of affordable
                                  housing funds—redevelopment housing set-aside funds—to temporarily
                                  ameliorate the state budget shortfall. The governor’s actions resulted in the
                                  taking of billions of dollars, locally approved over decades that were raised
                                  and earmarked to eliminate blight, stimulate economic development, finance
                                  the construction and improvement of affordable housing, and otherwise
                                  improve the lives of residents living in underserved areas. This action will
                                  continue to have a long-term deleterious impact on the economies of cities.
34     CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                          Constraint Analysis
DEVELOPMENT FEES
The City of Upland, like other communities in the region, charges a range of
service fees to cover the cost of processing development applications. More
importantly, the City also charges development impact fees to finance the
construction of adequate public facilities, water and sanitation treatment, and
other “hard” infrastructure needed to support new residential developments.
These fees are almost always assessed through a pro-rata share system, based
on the magnitude of the project’s impact or extent of benefits to be derived.
Table 3-1 shows the typical fees charged to residential developers.
  Table 3-1: City of Upland Development Fees
                                                           Amount of Fee
  Fee Category                                  Single Family            Multiple Family
  Planning Permit Fees
  Design Review                                      N/A                      $1,050
  Site Plan Review                                  $600                       $600
  Conditional Use Permit                            $900                      $1,800
  Tentative Parcel Map                               $1,840 each plus $18 per lot
  Tentative Tract Map                                $2,390 each plus $24 per lot
  General Plan Amendment or Specific Plan                        $3,500
  Variance                                                       $1,400
  Zone Change                                                    $3,500
  Building Permit
  Building valuation $50,000 to $100,000      $414.50 for the first $50,000 plus $4.50 for
                                              each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof
  Building valuation $100,000 to $500,000    $639.50 for the first $100,000 plus $3.50 for
                                              each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof
  Building valuation $500,000 to $1,000,000 $2,039.50 for the first $500,000 plus $3.00 for
                                              each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof
  Building valuation > $1,000,000            $3,539.50 for the first $1,000,000 plus $2.00
                                            for each additional $1,000 or fraction thereof
  Environmental
  Environmental Exemption                                         $125
  Negative Declaration                                            $575
  Environmental Impact Report                           20% of total EIR costs
  Development Impact Fees
  General                                       $993 per unit             $853 per unit
  Park Fees                                   $10,700 per unit           $9,182 per unit
  Fire Facility                                 $504 per unit             $432 per unit
  Water                                        $3,768 per unit               $2,900
  Police                                        $902 per unit             $774 per unit
  Drainage                                     $2,856 per unit           $2,315 per unit
  City Sewer Connection                        $5,978 per unit            $918 per unit
  City of Upland, 2009.
                                                                                    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT      35

Constraint Analysis
                                  Analysis of Fees
                                  To determine the impact of fees on the cost of developing housing, the City
                                  developed three prototypes for single-family, apartment, and condominium
                                  residential projects, each on one-acre lots: 1) a six-unit single-family housing
                                  project consisting of an average unit size of 1,200 square feet; 2) a 20-unit
                                  condominium project consisting of an average unit size of 1,000 square feet;
                                  and 3) a 40-unit apartment complex consisting of an average unit size of 900
                                  square feet. The City then calculated all of the applicable development fees,
                                  including fees charged by outside agencies (e.g., sewer, water, and school).
                                  Shown in Table 3-2, total residential development fees range from $32,000 to
                                  $44,000 per unit. Based on standard development costs (excluding land
                                  prices), total fees as a proportion of construction costs (excluding land) are
                                  18% for a single-family home, 16% for a condominium, and 22% for an
                                  apartment. These fees should not constrain the development of housing. For
                                  affordable housing, the developer can request incentives (such as increased
                                  density, reductions in standards, or modification to a zoning code
                                  requirement) that can be monetized and reduce project costs.
                                    Table 3-2: Total Fees for Residential Development in Upland
                                                                               Fees per Housing Unit
                                                                        Single
                                    Fee Category                       Family    Condominium          Apartment
                                    City Fees
                                    Planning                             $668           $217              $37
                                    Engineering                         $6,472         $1,942            $2,079
                                    Building                            $3,746         $2,165            $3,877
                                    Fire                                  $45           $100              $50
                                    Impact Fees
                                    General                              $993         $853                $853
                                    Police and Fire                     $1,406       $1,206              $1,206
                                    Park - Quimby                      $10,700       $9,182              $9,182
                                    Traffic                             $1,904       $1,169              $1,169
                                    Water                               $3,768       $2,900              $2,900
                                    Sewer - SSFEF                       $1,305        $918                $918
                                    Storm Drain                         $2,856       $2,315              $2,315
                                    Water Connection                    $1,867        $280                $280
                                    School Fees                         $3,564       $2,673             $2,673
                                    IEUA Fees                           $5,007       $5,007              $5,007
                                    Total Fee Burden
                                    City Fees                          $10,931         $4,424            $6,043
                                    Impact Fees                        $33,370        $27,080           $26,503
                                                            Total Fee $44,301         $31,504          $32,546
                                                   Construction Cost  $250,000       $200,000          $150,000
                                       Percent of Construction Cost      18%            16%               22%
                                    Source: City of Upland 2013.
36     CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                                Constraint Analysis
B.         LAND USE CONTROLS
This section introduces the City’s Municipal Code regulations that affect the
location, density, and types of permitted residential land uses in Upland and
the general impact on the types and prices of housing. This section also sets
the foundation for identifying sites for housing in the land inventory.
GENERAL PLAN LAND USE
Each city and county in California must prepare a comprehensive, long-term
general plan to guide its future. The land use element of the general plan
establishes the basic land uses and density of development within the various
areas of the city. Under state law, the general plan elements must be
internally consistent, and the city’s zoning must be consistent with the
general plan. Thus, the land use plan must provide suitable locations and
densities to implement the policies of the housing element.
Upland’s comprehensive general plan is the blueprint for the growth and
development of the community. The updated general plan will provide for
five residential land use designations tailored to different locations in the City.
To encourage additional housing opportunities in focused areas of the
community, the general plan land use element also allows high density
residential uses in two mixed-use designations—the Business/Residential
Mixed-Use and Commercial/Residential Mixed-Use land use districts.
Table 3-3 describes the primary general plan land use designations allowing
housing, the intensity and density of uses allowed, and primary residential
uses. Specific designations for different areas of the community that allow
residential uses are described on the following page.
  Table 3-3: Primary Land Use Designations Allowing Housing
      General Plan         Permitted                       Primary Residential
      Designation           Density                           Use Allowed
  Single-Family Low         0–4 units     Single-family detached units
                            per acre
  Single-Family            4–10 units     Single-family detached units
  Medium                    per acre
  Mobile Home              8–14 units     Mobile home parks
                            per acre
  Multi-Family Low        10–20 units     Multifamily attached units (i.e., townhomes)
                            per acre
  Multi-Family            20–30 units     Multi-family attached units (i.e., stacked flats, etc.), as
  Medium                    per acre      detached product types
                                          Areas in which business and/or light industrial uses
  Business/Residential    20 units max    are compatible with multifamily or single-family
  Mixed-Use                               residential
  Commercial/Reside                       Combination of retail, service commercial and
                          30 units max
  ntial Mixed-Use                         medium-density multifamily residential
  Source: City of Upland General Plan, 2013.
                                                                                          CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT      37

Constraint Analysis
                                  SPECIFIC PLAN LAND USE
                                  The City of Upland has adopted eight specific plans that offer a range of
                                  housing types, densities, and mix of uses. The City anticipates that much of its
                                  new residential growth will occur in these Specific Plan areas. Combined,
                                  these Specific Plans have the capacity to accommodate approximately 1,500
                                  new housing units. These Specific Plans are summarized briefly in Table 3-4.
                                    Table 3-4: Specific Plans Allowing Housing
                                        Specific Plan          Status                                Purpose
                                                                           The DTSP promotes the development of housing, work
                                    Historic Downtown                      places, shops, entertainment, schools, parks, and civic
                                    Upland                   212 acres     facilities within easy walking distance. The plan
                                    (Adopted 2011)                         encourages multifamily, single-family, second
                                                                           dwellings, live/work, mixed-use, senior housing, etc.
                                                                           Establishes a clearly recognizable mixed use
                                    Colony at San            440 acres     community. The specific plan is developed with 1,050
                                    Antonio (Adopted           Nearly      residential units, 115 acres of commercial, and 71 acres
                                    2003)                     built out    of recreational/community uses. A key feature is a
                                                                           23.5-acre retention basin surrounded by a greenbelt.
                                                                           Located near the Montclair Transit Center and the
                                                                           Claremont Colleges, this plan provides a mixed-use
                                    College Park               Nearly
                                                                           activity center, providing housing, commercial
                                    (Adopted 2005)            built out
                                                                           services, bicycle and pedestrian connections, and
                                                                           amenities for residents and the Claremont Colleges.
                                                                           Located off Route 66 near Foothill Boulevard and
                                                                           Benson Avenue, these specific plans provide an
                                    Foothill Walk and
                                                               8 acres     attached single-family residential development with a
                                    Terrace Specific
                                                              Built out    cohesive design and high-level amenities, including a
                                    Plans (Adopted 2005
                                                                           recreation area and extensive landscaping, adjacent to
                                                                           commercial and transportation facilities.
                                                                           A 40-unit single-family detached residential
                                                                           community that fosters a sense of place through the
                                    Wyeth Cove                4.3 acres
                                                                           provision of a safe and logical street system, including
                                    (Adopted 2006)            Built out
                                                                           landscaped streets and sidewalks linking residential
                                                                           units to a central park.
                                                                           Park View is a mixed-use development in a “village-
                                                                           like” setting, providing a comprehensive system of
                                    Park View                42 acres      greenbelts and walkways connecting residences,
                                    (Adopted 2008)           Not built     parks, and the commercial center. Housing types
                                                                           include paired homes, duplexes, and multifamily
                                                                           stacked flats or townhomes.
                                                                           The plan proposes 355 condominiums, commercial-
                                                                           retail, and two recreation areas integrated into a
                                    Upland Crossing           32 acres
                                                                           master planned community consistent with the City’s
                                    (Adopted 2006)            Not built
                                                                           desire to revitalize this site with a variety of housing
                                                                           types and recreational opportunities.
                                    Source: City of Upland General Plan, 2013.
                                  Many of these specific plan areas and specific focus areas will be discussed
                                  later as strategies for addressing the City’s regional housing needs goals. This
                                  is covered in Chapter 4, Housing Resources, of the housing element.
38     CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                                     Constraint Analysis
RESIDENTIAL USES BY ZONE
Housing element law requires cities to facilitate and encourage a range of
housing types for all economic segments of the community. This includes the
housing to meet the needs of seniors, families, people with disabilities,
farmworkers, homeless, and others. The City of Upland is in the process of
preparing and adopting a new comprehensive general plan and a revision to
the Zoning Code, which are both slated for adoption in 2014. The zones that
will allow for residential uses are listed below and in Table 3-5.
            RS – Residential Single-Family Low Zones
            RS-MH – Single-Family Mobile Home
            RM – Residential Multi-Family Zones (RM-1, RM-2, RM-3)
            C/R-MU – Commercial Residential Mixed-Use
            B/R-MU – Business Residential Mixed-Use
            C/O MU – Commercial Office Mixed-Use
            C/I – Commercial Industrial Mixed-Use
Table 3-5: Permitted Uses in Zones Allowing Residential Uses
                                                        Zones Allowing Residential Uses
                                            RS        RS-      RM 1       C/R      B/R      C/O       C/I
                                          Zones       MH       RM2        MU       MU       MU        MU
Type of Unit                                                   RM3
Residential
+ Single-Family Detached                     P         P         P                  P
+ Single-Family Attached                                         P         P        P
+ Multi-Family Residential                                      AUP       AUP       P       CUP      CUP
+ Mobile Home Park                                     P
+ Live/Work                                                                P        P       CUP      CUP
+ Second Units Detached1                     P         P         P                  P
+ Second Units Attached2                   AUP        AUP       AUP                AUP
+ Accessory Use/Guest Houses                 P         P         P                 AUP
Special Needs
+ Assisted Living/Convalescent                                  CUP                CUP      CUP
+ Residential Care (6 or fewer)              P         P         P         P        P
+ Residential Care (7 or more)                                  CUP                CUP      CUP
+ Senior Housing                                                 P        AUP       P       CUP      CUP
+ Single-Room Occupancy                                                   CUP
Homeless Facilities
+ Emergency Shelter                                               See Program 19
+ Transitional Housing                                            See Program 19
+ Supportive Housing                                              See Program 19
Source: Upland Zoning Code, 2014.
Notes: All classifications will be approved with the Zoning Code update slated for adoption in Winter
   2014.
1. In RS zones, a second unit is permitted only on lots with an area greater than the minimum lot size
   requirement. In RM zones, a second unit shall only be permitted on lots larger than 10,000 square feet.
2. Residential development shall only be permitted as part of a mixed-use project that: a) includes non-
   residential development that meets or exceeds a minimum FAR of .25 and b) meets or exceeds the
   minimum residential density requirement for the given zone.
                                                                                               CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT      39

Constraint Analysis
                                  The following provisions of the Zoning Code describe how a variety of
                                  housing types are allowed in different zones in Upland.
                                  Single-Family Housing Opportunities
                                  Single-family units are permitted by right in all residential and residential MU
                                  zones. Like all developments, each residential single-family zone requires a
                                  minimum parcel area, parcel width, and floor area per dwelling unit, and
                                  maximum lot coverage and density. The relatively large minimum lot sizes
                                  combined with low densities render many single-family zones too expensive
                                  for affordable housing, limiting opportunities for affordable housing even in
                                  single-family zones permitting smaller lot sizes and higher densities. A special
                                  zone (RS-MH) is created to reserve areas for mobile/manufactured housing.
                                  Second Dwelling Units
                                  Second dwelling units also offer opportunities for affordable housing. The
                                  City of Upland allows for the development of second dwelling units by right
                                  in all residential zones and in the Pleasant View District in Downtown. In RS
                                  zones and in the Pleasant View District, a second unit shall only be permitted
                                  on lots with an area greater than the minimum lot size requirement. In RM
                                  zones, second units are permitted on lots greater than 10,000 square feet. The
                                  City of Upland also allows guest units classified as an accessory dwelling unit.
                                  Approximately 5 second and/or guest units are built each year, incrementally
                                  adding to Upland’s inventory of affordable market rate housing.
                                  Mobile Home Parks
                                  Mobile homes also provide an affordable housing option for many Upland
                                  senior residents and families with children. The City of Upland presently has
                                  865 mobile homes situated in 6 trailer parks, of which 1 park is age-restricted
                                  for seniors and the other 5 parks are for families. These units comprise
                                  approximately 3% of Upland’s housing stock. Upland’s mobile homes are
                                  relatively inexpensive, and most are fully occupied. Because of the increasing
                                  cost of leasing space in mobile home parks, the City also implements a rent
                                  stabilization ordinance for its mobile home parks, further ensuring that some
                                  of the mobile homes are affordable to its residents. There is no additional land
                                  in Upland zoned for additional mobile home parks.
                                  Manufactured Housing
                                  According to the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Act
                                  of 1974, a manufactured home built and certified after June 15, 1976, and
                                  constructed on a permanent foundation may be located in any residential
                                  zone where a conventional single-family detached unit is permitted subject
                                  to the same restrictions on density and to the same property development
                                  regulations, provided it has received approval of the Architectural Review
                                  Board and receives a Certificate of Compatibility. The City complies with this
                                  act and permits manufactured homes constructed on a permanent
                                  foundation in all residential zones where single-family homes are permitted.
                                  The number of manufactured units in Upland is not known.
40     CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                               Constraint Analysis
Multifamily Housing Opportunities
Multiple-family development (apartments and condominiums) are permitted
with an administrative use permit (AUP) in the RM and C/R MU zones, and
permitted by right in the B/R mixed-use zone. Multifamily development is also
conditionally permitted in the C/O MU and C/I MU zones as part of a mixed-
use development that provides a minimum of 0.25 floor area ratio of
nonresidential development. The minimum densities in the RM and MU zones
are intended to facilitate higher-density multifamily residential. RM zones do
not require a minimum parcel area or maximum lot coverage.
In the Downtown, multifamily residential uses are permitted by right in all
districts, with the exception of the Pleasant View District, which is a single-
family historic neighborhood. Given that Downtown is also the commercial
heart of Upland, multifamily residential is only permitted on upper floors in
Old Town and the Historic Core. Each multifamily project requires minimum
lot dimensions, setbacks, floor area, and outdoor living space, and maximum
lot coverage, development intensities, and height.
Mixed-Use Residential and Live-Work
Mixed-use projects combine nonresidential and residential uses on the same
site. Mixed-use development can help reduce the effects of housing cost
burden by increasing density and offering opportunities for reduced
vehicular trips by walking, bicycling, or taking public transportation. The City
has created four mixed-use zones to provide flexibility and facilitate mixed-
use developments. In Downtown, mixed-use developments are permitted by
right in all districts with the exception of residential-only districts.
A live-work unit is an integrated housing unit and working space, occupied
and utilized by a single household in a structure, either single-family or
multifamily, that has been designed or structurally modified to accommodate
joint residential occupancy and work activity. Live-work is permitted by right
in the C/R MU and B/R MU zones and conditionally in the C/O and C/I MU
zones. The Zoning Code contains special design, development and
operational standards for live-work units. In the Historic Downtown specific
Plan area, live-work units are permitted by right in five of district’s nine
districts provided the residential portion is on upper floors.
Single Room Occupancy
Single Room Occupancy (SRO) units are one-room units intended for
occupancy by a single individual. They are distinct from a studio or efficiency
unit, in that a studio is a one-room unit with a kitchen and bathroom.
Although SRO units are not required to have a kitchen or bathroom, many
SROs have one or the other. The City has amended the Zoning Ordinance to
facilitate the provision of SROs consistent with SB 2 enacted in 2007. SROs are
now conditionally permitted in the C/R MU zone as a use in conjunction with
other multifamily housing or mixed-use developments.
                                                                         CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT      41

Constraint Analysis
                                  Senior Housing
                                  Senior housing is permitted by right in the RM and B/R/MU zones and
                                  permitted through an administrative use permit in the C/R/MU zone. Senior
                                  housing is also conditionally permitted in the C/O MU and C/I MU zones. In
                                  Downtown, senior housing is permitted by right in most districts. Senior
                                  citizen housing developments are required to provide amenities, services,
                                  and facilities to ensure the comfort, health, and recreation of elderly persons,
                                  including health and transportation services. Eligible senior housing
                                  developments can receive increased density (20%) pursuant to state law. In
                                  addition, reduced parking standards (up to 25%) may be granted.
                                  Residential Care Facilities
                                  Residential care facilities have come under increasing review by the
                                  Department of Housing and Community Development due to changes in
                                  federal fair housing law and subsequent changes to California housing
                                  element law. Pursuant to the Lanterman-Petris Act, local governments are to
                                  allow housing opportunities for people with disabilities in normal residential
                                  settings. A residential care facility includes more than eight specific facilities
                                  (which are designed to meet certain needs) as set forth in the Lanterman-
                                  Petris-Short Act, Welfare and Institutions Code, Section 5116.
                                  In accordance with state law, residential care facilities that serve six or fewer
                                  persons must (1) be permitted as a by-right use in all residential zones, (2)
                                  treated the same as a residential use, and (3) not subjected to fees, taxes, and
                                  permits other than those applying to other residential uses in the same zone.
                                  Larger facilities are allowed under state law to have a conditional use permit.
                                  No spacing requirements beyond those allowed under state law are required.
                                  As part of the zoning code update, the City will allow smaller residential care
                                  facilities as a by-right use into two new zones. The updated code will also
                                  allow larger facilities to be conditionally permitted in two additional zones
                                  consistent with assisted and/or convalescent uses.
                                  Emergency Shelters
                                  "Emergency shelter" means housing with minimal supportive services for the
                                  homeless, with occupancy limited to six months or less by a homeless person.
                                  The City amended the Zoning Ordinance to permit emergency shelters
                                  through an AUP in the industrial zones. Under this administrative review
                                  process, applications for emergency shelters are reviewed by City staff and/or
                                  the Planning Commission (as applicable) for compliance with California
                                  Building Code, Uniform Fire Code, and City development standards.
                                  The Industrial Zone is a suitable location for such facilities. The City has 297
                                  parcels zoned industrial. Approximately 25 parcels (38 acres) are significantly
                                  underutilized, and 8 parcels (23 acres) are vacant. The industrial zones are
                                  located along several public transportation routes and near the Montclair
                                  Transportation Center for convenient access. Parcels are also near
                                  commercial/professional office areas where homeless persons can access
42     CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                Constraint Analysis
supportive services. These parcels are therefore suitable for a shelter. The City
will complete changes along with the Zoning Code update in March 2014.
The amount of land needed to accommodate emergency shelters depends
on the number of individuals and families to be housed and the product built.
Assuming a population of 92 unsheltered homeless people in Upland and an
emergency shelter size of I50 square feet per person, one-third of an acre is
needed to accommodate a shelter. With the potential 23 acres of industrially
zoned vacant land and 38 acres of underutilized industrial land that could be
adaptively reused for emergency shelters, the City has more than ample sites
to accommodate the City's projected need for emergency shelters.
Transitional Housing
California Health and Safety Code (Section 50675.2) defines transitional
housing" and "transitional housing development" as buildings configured as
rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements
that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit
to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in
time, which shall be no less than six months. Residents of transitional housing
are usually connected to supportive services that assist them in achieving
greater economic independence and a permanent, stable living situation.
Transitional housing typically offers case management and support services
to help return people to independent living (often six months to two years).
In accordance with state law, the City will amend the zoning code to allow
transitional housing within one year of adopting the housing element.
Supportive Housing
Supportive housing links the provision of housing and social services for the
homeless, people with disabilities, and population with a variety of other
special needs. California Health and Safety Code (Section 50675.2) defines
“supportive housing” as housing with no limit on length of stay that is
occupied by the low income adults with disabilities and is linked to onsite or
offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the
housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability
to live and, when possible, work in the community.
As part of the recent comprehensive update to the Upland Zoning Ordinance,
supportive housing facilities serving six or fewer clients will be permitted by
right in all residential zones. Supportive housing facilities serving seven or
more clients are presently conditionally permitted in the RM zones.
Supportive housing can also take several building forms, including group
quarters with beds, single-family homes, and multifamily apartments. In
accordance with state law, the City will amend the zoning code to allow
supportive housing within one year of adopting the housing element.
                                                                          CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT      43

Constraint Analysis
                                  C.         BUILDING STANDARDS
                                  Residential development and design standards define a community. The City
                                  of Upland has established residential development standards that help to
                                  provide quality living and maintain a high standard of housing. Residential
                                  development must adhere to prerequisites in order to be approved in
                                  Upland. These include development standards, design and parking standards,
                                  and other requirements. These are noted as follows.
                                  DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
                                  Residential development standards are designed to promote a more livable
                                  environment, with adequate yards for children, height restrictions and
                                  setbacks to ensure privacy from adjacent homes, and minimum unit sizes to
                                  ensure adequate living areas for families. These standards are carefully
                                  devised to result in quality housing, while not placing an undue burden on
                                  residential developers to building housing in the community.
                                  Table 3-6 lists residential development standards for housing in Upland.
                                  These standards become increasingly more flexible depending on the
                                  distance of the zone to key employment areas, corridors, or downtown. As
                                  shown below, more rural areas (RS zones) have the largest minimum lot sizes
                                  and lowest lot coverage standards—reflective of historical land use patterns
                                  and topography. RM zones have less restrictive lot coverage and greater
                                  building heights and density to facilitate such uses. The Downtown has the
                                  smallest minimum lot sizes, greatest density, and highest building heights.
                                    Table 3-6: Residential Development Standards
                                                                                   Setbacks                 Lot Coverage Regulations
                                                              Maximum
                                    Zoning       Density      Building                                          Lot           Minimum
                                    District     (du/ac)        Height     Front      Side       Rear        Coverage          Lot Size
                                    RS           1 du/lot        35’       20-40’     5–10’       20’         35–50%             varies
                                    RS-MH          8–14          16’         25’      5–15’         5’         60%             10 acres
                                    RM-1           5–10          40’         25’      5–15’       15’            --                --
                                    RM-2          10–20          45’         25’      5–15’       15’            --                --
                                    RM-3          15–30          55’         25’      5–15’       15’            --                --
                                    C/R MU        15–20          50’          5’      5–10’       10’            --           10,000 SF
                                    B/R MU        10–20          40’         5’       5–10’       10’            --            4,000 SF
                                    C/O MU        10–20          70’          5’       0’           0’           --            7,500 SF
                                    C/I MU        15–30          40’         0’        0’           0’           --           10,000 SF
                                    DTSP           0–55        25’–55’       0’        0’          0’       35%–100%
                                    Source: Upland Zoning Code.
                                    Note: Residential development standards may different slightly in the respective specific plan areas.
44     CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                               Constraint Analysis
Unit Size Requirements
Upland’s development standards require a minimum floor area ranging from
1,000 to 2,000 square feet for single-family homes in RS zones. Given the wide
range of RS Zones (due to topography and lot sizes), the minimum floor area
increases progressively with the minimum lot size. For multiple-family
residential uses, the City requires 700 square feet of gross living area per
apartment (one bedroom) with an additional 200 square feet for each
additional bedroom. When adopted, the Zoning Code will require a minimum
of 600 square feet for a studio apartment, 700 square feet for one-bedroom
apartment, and an additional 200 square feet for each additional bedroom.
Senior units are allowed up to a 30% reduction in minimum unit sizes.
Open Space Requirements
Given the higher densities in multiple-family housing, such projects must
include a minimum of 50–100 square feet of private open space per unit and
on average 50–100 square feet of common open space per residential unit.
These minimum open space requirements are not considered a constraint to
the development of housing; they are intended to provide a desired level of
privacy and recreational opportunities for residents of multiple-family
housing. The update to the zoning code does not propose any changes to the
lot size requirement for sites that are designated for the RHNA.
Density Standards
Upland’s zoning code provides significant flexibility in the density of
residential products—reflective of the topography, location, and type of
development. In particular for multiple-family housing, projects are allowed
to be permitted at a maximum of 20 to 55 dwelling units per acre, depending
on location. For instance, corridor housing is typically permitted at up to 20
units per acre, stand-alone residential in a multiple-family district at up to 30
units per acre, and up to 55 units per acre in the Downtown Specific Plan. As
discussed later, these density standards have been successful in facilitating
ownership and rental housing at a variety of densities and affordability levels.
Height Limitations
The Zoning Code allows for a range in maximum heights standards tailored to
different neighborhoods and housing built in the corresponding zones. For
instance, lower density residential zones with typically single-family homes
are generally allowed to build structures of one to two stories. Multiple-family
residential zones allow structures of 45 to 55 feet and accommodate up to
three or more stories. In the Historic Downtown, where higher residential
densities are desired, the Zoning Code allows up to 55 feet in certain areas to
accommodate desired residential densities and commercial intensities. These
heights allowances are comparable to communities in the Inland Empire, and
are in fact higher than similarly sized communities nearby.
                                                                         CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT      45

Constraint Analysis
                                  Parking Standards
                                  Adequate parking is an important component of well-designed residential
                                  development, contributing to the value of a project, the safety of residents, its
                                  appearance, and the livability of the project. Upland’s residential parking
                                  regulations are intended to promote efficient land use, reduce street
                                  congestion and traffic hazards, promote vehicular and pedestrian safety, and
                                  improve the ability to secure financing for a new residential project.
                                  Upland’s residential parking requirement is generally two spaces per unit,
                                  which matches the demographics, vehicle ownership patterns, and parking
                                  needs of residents. Given community demographics and housing market
                                  preferences, the City has adopted a parking strategy that establishes certain
                                  citywide standards while offering more flexible parking standards in areas
                                  near transit. Table 3-7 provides a summary of parking requirements.
                                    Table 3-7: Parking Standards for Residential Uses
                                    Types of Residential
                                    Development                                           Parking Requirements
                                    Conventional Housing
                                    Single-Family                     2 spaces
                                    Manufactured Housing              Same as single-family units
                                    Second Units                      1 space in addition to that required for a single-family unit
                                    Multiple-Family
                                    - Studio                          1.0 space per unit in garage
                                    - 1–2 bedrooms                    2.0 spaces per unit in garage plus 1 guest space per 4 units
                                    - 3 bedrooms                      2.5 spaces per unit in garage, plus 1 guest space per 4 units
                                    Mixed Use*
                                    - Studio                          1.0 space per unit
                                    - 1 bedroom                       1.0 space per unit
                                    - 2 bedrooms or more              1.5 spaces per unit
                                    Mobile Home Parks                 2 spaces per unit plus 1 guest space for every 5 homes
                                                                      1 space for each unit with half the spaces covered, plus 1
                                    Senior Housing                    guest parking space for each 10 units
                                    Special Needs
                                    Convalescent Care                 1 space for each 3 beds the facility is licensed to provide
                                    Assisted Living                   1 space for each 3 beds the facility is licensed to provide
                                    Residential Care Facilities
                                    --Small (6 or fewer)              2 spaces, plus 1 per employee onsite at any given time
                                    --Large (7 or more)               2 spaces, plus 1 per employee onsite at any given time
                                                                      1 space for every 20 beds plus 1 space for each employee on
                                    Emergency Shelters                the largest shift plus 1 space for each company vehicle
                                    Transitional Housing              See Program ___
                                    Supportive Housing                See Program ___
                                    Single-Room Occupancy             1 space per unit plus 1 guest space for every 3 units
                                    Source: City of Upland Zoning Code, 2014.
46     CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                   Constraint Analysis
The Upland Zoning Code sets forth flexible standards for multiple-family
residential parking that vary by the location and proposed residential use
(Table 3-8). Whereas all areas of the community have the same parking space
requirement for studio units, the number of parking space required increases
gradually for one and two bedroom units. Moreover, mixed use zones
(predominantly commercial corridors and employment districts) and the
historic downtown do not require garages because they are located in TOD
districts or in higher density areas. As the project is located farther from the
Downtown or TOD areas, the Zoning Code requires a higher number of
parking spaces and a garage requirement for multiple-family developments.
     Table 3-8: Multiple-Family Parking Standards
                                             Location of Development
     Housing                       Mixed Use          Historic        Outside
     Characteristics               Corridors         Downtown        Downtown
     Type of Development           Mixed Use       Residential and   Residential
     Allowed                        Projects         Mixed Uses         Only
     Unit Size
     Studio                            1                  1               1
     1 bedroom                         1                  1               2
     2 bedroom                        1.5                2.0             2.5
     Garage Required                 None               None          Required
     Source: City of Upland, 2013.
An analysis of apartment, condominium, and other multiple-family projects
submitted demonstrates that parking requirements have not served to deter
the production of multiple-family projects. Should developers desire
flexibility from the standard parking space requirements, the Zoning Code
(when adopted in 2014) allows for the following flexibility:
  Density bonus projects–developers can obtain mandated reductions in
   parking spaces for projects that meet density bonus requirements
  Senior housing projects–developers can obtain flexibility and provide
   only half the spaces with covered garages
  Transit oriented districts–developers can obtain up to a 20% reduction in
   parking space requirements for projects within ¼ mile of a transit station or
  Shared parking–eligible projects can receive reductions in parking for
   qualified mixed use developments
Although apartments outside the downtown and mixed use corridors are
feasible and built at current parking and garage requirement standards, there
are situations where flexibility in garage requirements may be appropriate.
Therefore, the Housing Incentives Program includes a statement to amend
the Zoning Code to allow half covered/ uncovered spaces for studio and 1-
bedroom units in projects outside the downtown and corridors provided the
project qualifies for a density bonus or is deed restricted as affordable.
                                                                             CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT      47

Constraint Analysis
                                  Cumulative Impact of Standards
                                  Cumulative development standards (such as parking, density, height, open
                                  space, unit size, etc.) are often viewed as a potential constraint to the
                                  development of housing, in particular multiple-family housing. This is not the
                                  case in Upland. Recently approved apartment projects demonstrate that the
                                  City’s residential development standards are not a constraint. As shown in
                                  Table 3-9, three multiple-family projects that include a mix of one-, two- and
                                  three-bedroom units were recently approved. All of these projects were
                                  approved with current and proposed development standards.
                                     Table 3-9: Multiple-Family Projects Approved or Built
                                                                              Multiple-Family Projects
                                             Project
                                        Characteristics            Downtown        Park Central        College Park
                                     Type                       Condominiums       Apartments           Apartments
                                     Status of Project              Approved           Built               Built
                                     Total Units                      203              128                  448
                                     1 bedroom                   Not Proposed           Yes                 Yes
                                     2 bedroom                        Yes               Yes                 Yes
                                     3 bedrooms                       Yes               Yes                 Yes
                                     Source: City of Upland, 2013.
                                  However, if a developer wished to build an apartment project or another
                                  multiple-family rental or ownership project with a different mix of housing
                                  units, the updated zoning code allows considerable flexibility. Developers can
                                  receive flexible or more relaxed standards in the following cases:
                                       1) Downtown Specific Plan. This area allows developers to propose
                                            studio or one-bedroom units with only 1.0 parking space per unit
                                            and less floor area. This is also allowed for senior units as well.
                                       2) Affordable Housing. For affordable housing or senior housing that
                                            qualifies for a density bonus, the City offers significant reductions in
                                            virtually any development standards consistent with state law.
                                       3) Minor Variation. The City Development Services Director has the
                                            authority to grant a minor adjustment over the counter (defined as
                                            10% variation) to virtually every physical development standard.
                                  In summary, the City’s residential development standards, either individually
                                  or cumulatively, have not deterred either the production of condominiums or
                                  apartments Adequate provisions are also in place to allow modifications to
                                  the residential development standards based on the location, affordability,
                                  and type of residential project. Because of these factors, the City’s Zoning
                                  Code residential development requirements are not an actual constraint to
                                  the development, improvement, and maintenance of housing.
48     CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                             Constraint Analysis
BUILDING CODES AND ENFORCEMENT
The City of Upland has adopted the California Building Code, which is based
in large part on the Uniform Building Code. The City has adopted all codes in
their entirety but added a few minor changes to address local conditions.
Because of the local topography and fire hazards, all newly constructed
buildings, of any occupancy group when the gross floor area is equal to or
exceeds 5,000 square feet, are required to have automatic fire sprinklers.
Specific codes the City has adopted include:
   2010 California Building Code
   2010 California Electrical Code
   2010 California Green Code
   2010 California Mechanical Code
   2010 California Plumbing Code
   2010 California Residential Code
   Current California Adopted Standards of Energy & Accessibility Codes
The Building Division provides reasonable controls for construction and
occupancy of buildings and structures throughout the City through the
enforcement of all building-related municipal ordinances. This division serves
and protects the public with plan checking services, the issuance of permits,
the keeping of building-related records, and building inspections. The
division further provides information to its customers through records
research, provision of informational handouts, and development consultation
through all phases of a project from concept to completion.
In addition to building codes mentioned above, the City of Upland has also
adopted a variety of property maintenance codes for the protection of
property values and the general welfare of the community. These are in the
Public Peace and Welfare Code, which addresses graffiti and unnecessary
noise; the Health and Safety Code, which addresses public nuisances as well
as other occupancy requirements; and the Uniform Code for the Abatement
of Dangerous Buildings.
In addition, the Upland Zoning Code has a chapter for property maintenance
and use standards (Chapter 17.21). These standards are designed to enhance
the value, development, appearance, and character of the community. Topics
include storage, structure, fences and walls, parking, and landscape
maintenance. The City’s Code Enforcement Division is tasked with the
responsibility of protecting property values and eliminating blight through
the use of the City's Municipal Code.
                                                                       CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT      49

Constraint Analysis
                                  OFFSITE AND INFRASTUCTURE REQUIREMENTS
                                  After the passage of Proposition 13 and its limitation on local governments’
                                  property tax revenues, local governments have faced increased difficulty in
                                  providing and financing appropriate public services and facilities to serve
                                  residents. In fact, one of the main consequences of Proposition 13 has been
                                  the shift in funding of new infrastructure from general tax revenues to
                                  development impact fees and improvement requirements on developers.
                                  Upland development impact fees were discussed in earlier sections of the
                                  housing element and were found to not be a constraint to developments.
                                  In order to ensure public health and safety, the City of Upland also requires
                                  developers to provide onsite and offsite improvements necessary to serve
                                  proposed residential projects so that the City is not left with underserved
                                  developments and unfunded liabilities. Requirements for on- and offsite
                                  improvements vary depending on the existing improvements, as well as the
                                  size and nature of the proposed development, but the requirements are
                                  standard and do not exceed the basics per the State Subdivision Code.
                                  The City of Upland is largely built out within its core, although there are
                                  newer areas in southern Upland or at the edges of the community. Most
                                  residential areas in Upland identified to address the RHNA are already served
                                  with infrastructure. However, where an area does not have suitable existing
                                  infrastructure, the City requires the following improvements:
                                     Drainage: Including curbs and gutters, storm drains, and culverts in
                                      accordance with acceptable standards. These requirements are standard
                                      among communities and vary little.
                                     Sidewalks and trees: Including sidewalks—of a width and quality suitable
                                      for the local neighborhood use—and parkway trees. Dimensions generally
                                      12 feet on either side of the road, which includes 5 feet of sidewalks.
                                     Streets: Pavement of a width and quality suitable for local traffic.
                                      Specifications include 60’ right-of-way for residential streets and 66’ right-
                                      of-way for collectors. All other streets are already in place. Streets within
                                      PUDs and specific plans are typically narrower than these requirements;
                                     Water and sewer: Adequate domestic water supply, including the
                                      relocation or replacement of water mains, irrigation lines and
                                      appurtenances and appropriate sanitary sewer facilities and connections
                                      for each lot;
                                     Appurtenances: Streetlights utility lines and poles. Sidewalks must be of a
                                      width and quality suitable for the local neighborhood use noted above.
                                      Parkways trees are required to be planted along streets, but the trees are
                                      maintained by the property owner of the home fronting the street.
50     CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                               Constraint Analysis
ENERGY CONSERVATION
In 2006, the state legislature adopted the Global Warming Solutions Act,
which created the first comprehensive, state regulatory program to reduce
GHG emissions to 80% below 1990 levels by 2050. Through both SB 375 and
AB32, promoting energy conservation has become a consistent theme in
regulations, green building practices, and business operations. Cities across
California have become increasingly involved in promoting resource
conservation to make their community more environmentally sustainable.
The City of Upland encourages resource conservation as follows.
  Building codes. In 2010, Upland adopted the California Green Building
   Code (CALGreen), the first statewide green building standards code. The
   Code is designed to help California achieve GHG reduction goals through
   the planning, design, operation, construction, use, and occupancy of every
   new building, and to additions and alterations to nonresidential buildings.
   CALGreen includes mandatory provisions to reduce water use by 20%,
   improve indoor air quality, divert 50% of construction waste from landfills,
   and inspect energy systems for nonresidential building.
  Neighborhood design. Neighborhood design and site planning can
   reduce energy consumption. Sizing and configuring lots to maximize a
   building’s solar orientation facilitates optimal use of passive heating and
   cooling techniques. Placing housing near jobs, services, and other
   amenities reduces energy consumption for transportation. Other design
   strategies with beneficial energy implications include installing broad-
   canopied trees for shade and clustering development to reduce auto use.
   The Zoning Code and Historic Downtown Specific Plan both promote
   sustainable development patterns to promote energy conservation.
  Green standards. The building industry offers programs to improve the
   energy efficiency and sustainability of housing. The BIA sponsors a
   voluntary program called Green Builder. The U.S. Green Building Council
   (USGBC) sponsors a building certification program called Leadership in
   Energy and Environmental Design (LEED). The USGBC reviews projects for
   conformance based on efficiency, sustainability, materials quality, and
   design factors, and issues certifications based on the points achieved for
   sustainable practices. The Kohl’s at the Colonies and the Wells Fargo
   building are recent projects that received LEED Silver certification.
  Retrofits of residential buildings. Older residential buildings built before
   energy conservation standards provide the greatest opportunity to make a
   measurable difference in energy usage. To that end, the City’s Housing
   Improvement Program provides residential rehabilitation loans that can
   be used to purchase more energy-efficient upgrades to windows,
   insulation, and other home items. Moreover, local utility companies also
   offer a wide range of incentive programs to trade in energy-inefficient
   appliances and receive a rebate to purchase energy-efficient models.
                                                                         CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT      51

Constraint Analysis
                                  D.        PERMITTING PROCESS
                                  The City of Upland has the responsibility to ensure that residential
                                  developments are of lasting quality, that housing opportunities are available,
                                  and that the public health and welfare are maintained. To that end, the
                                  Upland Municipal Code establishes standard procedures for processing
                                  applications for the development, maintenance, and improvement of
                                  housing. These processes are described in the following section.
                                  NEW PROJECTS
                                  The City of Upland has recently adopted a timely and efficient development
                                  review process that balances the need for efficient and timely processing,
                                  while also recognizing that the final product should reflect quality
                                  workmanship and design. The steps involved in the process are briefly
                                  described below and in Table 3-8.
                                    Single-family residential. Single-family dwellings are reviewed through
                                     plan check by the Development Services Director or designee. Total time
                                     to process permits for new single-family dwellings is typically 30 to 60
                                     days. This assumes that the project is proposed in a zone that allows the
                                     use by right and that the project meets the minimum development and
                                     site standards in the municipal code. No public hearing is required.
                                    Multiple-family residential. Multifamily projects have three levels of
                                     review, depending on the zone in which the project is located and the
                                     associated permit required (i.e., P, AUP, CUP). Projects permitted by right
                                     or an administrative use permit are reviewed by the Development Services
                                     Director or designee. For AUPs, the director may solicit technical expertise
                                     and/or convene staff from affected departments in the review of projects.
                                     Total time to process permits is typically 30 to 90 days.
                                    Conditional uses. For multifamily projects and other residential projects
                                     (larger residential care facilities) permitted through a CUP, the
                                     Development Services Director performs the initial screening and makes a
                                     recommendation to the Planning Commission for final action on the
                                     application. This is not a constraint to addressing the RHNA since the sites
                                     credited toward the RHNA are not required to obtain a CUP. Total time to
                                     process a CUP for a new project is typically 4 to 6 months.
                                  Project Review
                                  Once a development application is deemed complete, the case planner
                                  reviews the project for conformance with applicable development codes,
                                  land use regulations, architectural drawings, site design, landscaping plan,
                                  design standards, and other requirements. The City provides an application
                                  and checklist that can be used to ensure that all relevant requirements and
                                  materials are submitted to the City. This ensures a timely submittal so that the
                                  project can proceed to the next step. Project review generally requires
                                  approximately one month to complete, assuming a well prepared application.
52     CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                         Constraint Analysis
Environmental Review
Environmental clearance is required by the California Environmental Quality
Act (CEQA). CEQA is quite prescriptive regarding the most appropriate form of
clearance and the timelines for noticing, circulation, and public review. The
vast majority of projects will qualify as infill and are exempt from CEQA, or the
projects can be cleared through a Negative Declaration or Mitigated Negative
Declaration. The time frames for this step vary widely and can take about 90
days. This step is often taken concurrent with permit processing. However, if
an EIR is required, it may add six to nine months to the project.
Public Review
Projects that are permitted by right or through an AUP are not required to be
noticed to the public or subject to a public hearing. Projects that require a
CUP due to the possibility for unintended impacts on surrounding homes and
neighborhoods require a public hearing before a decision can made. Hearings
must be scheduled within 45 days of the filing of the application. Notices are
mailed to affected local agencies and land owners within 300 feet of the
proposed project so that the public can attend or submit comments on the
proposed project. The entire process takes approximately three months
unless an appeal is filed, which would add another 3.5 months.
Once prior stages are complete, the application for residential development
moves forward to the building permit stage. The process is relatively
straightforward and requires filing an application, paying required fees, and
commencing work. Overall, the time frame for obtaining permission to build
residential projects in Upland is relatively short and therefore not considered
an undue constraint for the vast majority of developers proposing projects in
Upland. Table 3-10 summarizes time frames for project review in Upland.
 Table 3-10: Permit Process and Time Frame for Housing Projects
                                                Application Review
         Criteria          Single-family        Multifamily (AUP)     Multifamily (CUP)
 Application                  1 month                1 month                1 month
 Completeness
 Project Review          1 month to review      1 month to review      1 month to review
 Committee                 project design         project design         project design
 Decision-maker             Development           Development               Planning
 Regarding Project        Services Director      Services Director        Commission
 Planning Commission     N/A unless project     N/A unless project
                                                                            1 month
 Public Hearing               appealed              appealed
 City Council Public                            None unless project       None unless
                                 N/A
 Hearing                                            appealed                Appealed
 Environmental Review
                                       In accordance with CEQA requirements
 and Clearance
 Plan Check                    60 days               60 days                 60 days
 Total Time from Start                                                     4-6 months
                             30–60 Days            4–6 months
 to Building Permit                                                     (up to 9 with EIR)
 Source: Upland Zoning Ordinance, 2013.
                                                                                   CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT      53

Constraint Analysis
                                  RESIDENTIAL DESIGN STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES
                                  Upland has recently amended its Zoning Ordinance to incorporate residential
                                  design standards and guidelines for single- and multifamily developments.
                                  The design standards and guidelines provide an added level of definition for
                                  the intended character within single and multifamily developments and
                                  establish minimum criteria for achieving a high quality design expression in
                                  site and building design while allowing reasonable flexibility in the
                                  implementation of developments in the residential zones.
                                  Some of the more pertinent requirements are:
                                     Neighborhood context. Single- and multifamily developments shall be
                                      compatible and coordinated with adjacent properties in terms of height,
                                      massing, setback, and design character.           New development shall
                                      contribute to the visual quality and cohesiveness of its setting.
                                     Site design. Single-family developments shall vary the front yard setbacks
                                      from unit to unit to avoid long repetitious development patterns. Garages
                                      shall also be set back to not dominate the front façade of the residence.
                                      For multifamily developments, buildings shall be located as close as
                                      possible to the front setback line. Where buildings are set back, enhanced
                                      landscaping shall be provided within the setback.
                                     Building design. Single-family homes shall avoid large, box-like structures
                                      by employing techniques such as recessed porches, bay windows,
                                      dormers, varying planes or setbacks, and varying roof forms. The design
                                      should minimize views of garages. For multifamily projects, building
                                      massing shall be varied through techniques such as recessed porches, bay
                                      windows, dormers, varying planes or setbacks, and varying roof forms.
                                      Large masses shall be broken down to give individuality to units to be
                                      legible as individual residences or small groups of units.
                                     Outdoor living space. In multifamily projects, private open space shall be
                                      at the same level as and immediately accessible from within the unit.
                                      Outdoor living space for the shared use of residents should include lawns,
                                      courtyards, community gardens, roof gardens, pools, and play areas.
                                      Shared spaces should be accessible to all residents, provide seating areas,
                                      be lighted, relatively flat and usable, and designed to encourage social
                                      activity. When included, such public space should be provided where high
                                      levels of pedestrian and/or community activity can be expected.
                                  Upon adoption in 2014, the City will have streamlined its design review
                                  process by repealing provisions requiring Design Review Board. The director
                                  or designee will review the project as part of the overall development review
                                  process and solicits technical advice from other departments as appropriate
                                  before making recommendations to the Planning Commission. No separate
                                  fees are charged for design review as well. Coupled with user-friendly design
                                  guidelines, projects can be approved in a timely manner. Therefore, design
                                  review is not considered a potential constraint to residential development.
54     CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                Constraint Analysis
ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMIT
Historically, the Upland Development Code required developers of multiple
family projects to secure a conditional use permit prior to project approval.
The City’s Development Code has been reconfigured to provide more clear
guidance for developers, City staff, policy makers, and residents. The Code
now only requires an administrative use permit. The purpose is to provide an
appropriate review of land uses and their associated operational
characteristics in a particular zoning district, whose effects on a site and
surroundings cannot be determined before being proposed for a specific site.
An application for an administrative use permit shall be filed and reviewed in
compliance with Chapter 17.42 of the Code. The application shall include the
information and materials specified in the Development Services Department
handout for an administrative use permit application, together with all
required application fees. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide
evidence in support of the required findings.
The Development Services Director or designee shall approve, conditionally
approve, or deny administrative use permit applications upon the
recommendations of technical staff. However, in certain cases, the
Development Services Director or designee may choose to refer any
administrative use permit application to the Planning Commission for review
and final decision. Unlike most discretionary approvals, no public notice and
hearing is for an administrative use permit application.
The decision-making authority may approve an application for an
administrative use permit only if the proposed project complies with
applicable standards in the zoning code, other City ordinances, the General
Plan, and any other applicable community or specific plans, and as supported
by all of the following findings:
  The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the proposed
   use will be compatible with the existing and future land uses in the vicinity
   of the subject property.
  The site is physically suitable in terms of design, location, shape, size,
   operating characteristics, and the provision of public and emergency
   vehicle (e.g., fire and medical) access and public services and utilities.
  The proposed use will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, and
   welfare of the persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the
   proposed use.
The new administrative use permit is not intended to be a constraint. Indeed,
prior to the update, the City conditionally permitted six apartment and
condominium projects, providing nearly a thousand affordable housing units.
The AUP will only serve to streamline the development review process and
avoid unnecessary and additional reviews of projects that meet all the
applicable standards in the City’s general plan and municipal codes.
                                                                          CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT      55

Constraint Analysis
                                  HOUSING FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
                                  The federal Fair Housing Amendment Act and the California Fair Employment
                                  and Housing Act direct local governments to make reasonable
                                  accommodations (e.g., modifications or exceptions) in zoning laws and other
                                  land use regulations when such accommodations may be necessary to afford
                                  disabled persons an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. City
                                  policies and regulations for housing people with disabilities are noted below.
                                  Zoning Code Definitions
                                  The general plan and municipal code definitions can create fair housing
                                  concerns if the definitions could be used to limit housing opportunities or fair
                                  housing choice by individuals or families. Although cities rarely discriminate
                                  in this manner, the code definition in itself could discourage a developer from
                                  proposing a use that would otherwise be deemed allowed. By example, fair
                                  housing law prohibits defining a family (and by extension living quarters) in
                                  terms of the relationship of members (e.g., marital status), number of
                                  occupants (e.g., family size), or other characteristics beyond a housekeeping
                                  unit. Other definitions should also be consistent with fair housing law.
                                  The Upland Zoning Code (Part 7) currently defines a family and makes
                                  distinctions with respect to a natural family, unrelated family, and foster
                                  family. The present definitions need to be updated to reflect current fair
                                  housing laws. To address the fair housing issue, the City is in the process of
                                  developing a new definition that is consistent with fair housing law. Although
                                  the final language is still under review, the proposed definition will be:
                                       Family: Two or more persons living together as a single
                                       housekeeping unit in a single residential dwelling unit. This term
                                       does not include a boarding house, lodging house, club, dormitory,
                                       fraternity, sorority, hotel, motel, rest home, or other similar type of
                                       group quarters. Residents of residential care facilities, as defined in
                                       this chapter and under state law, serving six or fewer persons shall
                                       constitute a "family" for purposes of the city's zoning code.
                                  Permitted Land Use
                                  Upland permits residential care facilities for six or fewer persons as a by-right
                                  use in all residential zones. Occupancy of these structures is limited only by
                                  building code requirements. Licensed facilities serving seven or more persons
                                  are permitted in the RM zones through a conditional use permit. However,
                                  this also does not constitute a constraint to providing housing for persons
                                  with disabilities. Instead, the conditional use permit process is necessary to
                                  ensure quality of design and compatibility with neighboring properties and
                                  uses, based on the reasonable regulation of such factors as noise, traffic, and
                                  other health and safety considerations. These are the same type of
                                  considerations applicable to other projects requiring conditional use permit
                                  approval and do not constitute an undue restraint on such housing.
56     CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                Constraint Analysis
Building Codes, Development Standards and Permitting Processes
The City's zoning code does not impose a constraint on development for
persons with disabilities. As specified above, residential care facilities serving
six or fewer persons are permitted by right in all residential zones and subject
to the same development standards, construction standards, business taxes,
local registration fees, use permits, and other requirements to which other
family dwellings of the same type in the same zone are likewise subject.
Housing is treated in a similar manner regardless of the occupancy. Specific
conditions may be placed on residential care facilities serving seven or more
persons to reduce impacts related to noise, traffic, and other considerations.
State and federal fair housing law require cities to make reasonable
accommodations to address the special needs of persons with disabilities
when applying standards of the Municipal Code and other land use
regulations to ensure equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. State
and federal guidelines recommend establishing a process of reasonable
accommodation to grant changes in land use, building practices, or
permitting processes to allow a disabled person equal access to housing. The
process should not be discretionary or achieved through a variance.
The City of Upland has adopted the latest edition of the California Building
Code, including all provisions related to facilitating disabled access. These
provisions are strictly enforced by the City Building Official. Some cities
process reasonable accommodation through a conditional use permit or
variance, and these actions do not necessarily violate fair housing laws.
However, since the former condition is related to a site characteristics and the
latter related to the use of the property, neither process is designed to
adequately address accommodating the needs of people with disabilities.
The City has established several ways to more clearly make reasonable
accommodations for people with disabilities. The zoning code allows ramps
and platforms necessary to accommodate disabled access into a home to
intrude into required yard or building setbacks. For other types of reasonable
accommodations, the process is to submit a request to the City. The request is
handled as a ministerial action of the Development Services Director and is
not subject to public hearing and property notification processes. The cost is
the fee for the building permit plan check and review. One of the objectives
of Program 21 of the Housing Plan is to draft a clear, reasonable
accommodation process as part of the zoning code update.
Although the City has not adopted a formal reasonable accommodation
ordinance, its current administrative practices achieve the same objectives.
Upland’s Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing Choice for 2013–2018
analyzed the current reasonable accommodation process and did not
recommend that a new ordinance or code section was necessary to achieve
the goals and objectives envisioned under state and federal fair housing law.
                                                                          CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT      57

Constraint Analysis
                                  This page intentionally left blank
58     CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT
4. Housing Resources
This chapter describes the land, financial, and administrative resources
available to Upland to address its existing and future housing needs,
including its share of the regional housing needs allocation (RHNA).
A.          REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS
California law requires all local governments to plan to facilitate and
encourage the production of housing to accommodate population and
employment growth. To assist in that effort, the Southern California
Association of Governments prepares housing planning goals for each city as
part of the RHNA as authorized by the California Government Code.
The Southern California Association of Governments projects the share of the
region’s future housing need for each city as part of the RHNA process. The
determination is based on four primary planning factors:
1.    The number of housing units needed to accommodate future population
      and employment growth.
2.    The number of units needed to allow for a desired level of vacancies and
      the replacement of housing units normally demolished.
3.    The number of very low, low, moderate, and above moderate income
      households needed in the community.
4.    Other factors related to a subregional jobs-to-housing balance, tenure,
      and other factors unique to each community.
Table 4-1 summarizes the City of Upland’s 2013–2021 RHNA. The City is
required to make available a sufficient number of sites general planned and
zoned for housing to accommodate its need.
  Table 4-1: Upland Regional Housing Needs Allocation, 2013–2021
                                                                      RHNA Allocation
   Income Category                 Definition                Number of Units            Percentage
  Extremely Low*               30% or less of MFI                  191                     12%
  Very Low*                     31–50% of MFI                      191                     12%
  Low                            51–80% of MFI                     260                     16%
  Moderate                      81–120% of MFI                     294                     19%
  Above Moderate           above 120% of MFI                       653                     41%
                                                Total             1,589                   100%
  Source: Southern California Association of Governments.
  Note: Extremely low income units are estimated at half of SCAG’s 382-unit very low income need.
                                                                                            CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT 59

Housing Resources
                                 OPTIONS FOR ADDRESSING THE RHNA
                                 California law does not require cities to build housing, but it does require
                                 communities to facilitate new housing production. State housing element law
                                 allows local governments to obtain credits toward meeting its RHNA goal in
                                 three primary ways: 1) preserve publicly assisted housing that is at risk of
                                 converting to non–low income or market rates; 2) construct housing during
                                 the planning period; and 3) set aside land at appropriate densities.
                                 Each of these credits is briefly described below:
                                         Housing Production. Local governments are allowed to take credit
                                          toward the regional housing needs allocation for units built during
                                          the planning period. In past years, local governments could count
                                          units built between when the RHNA planning period started till the
                                          housing element period began in 2008. Due to SB375, local
                                          governments will not benefit from this provision. Only projects built
                                          and occupied after January 1, 2014, will count toward the RHNA.
                                          These projects are reported as part of the annual progress reports.
                                         Alternative Sites Credits. Local governments are allowed to take
                                          credit toward the regional housing needs allocation if they preserve
                                          publicly assisted affordable multiple family housing projects that are
                                          at risk of converting to non–low income rents by 2014. Several
                                          specific criteria apply in order to be eligible for this option. Local
                                          governments have the option of purchasing affordability covenants,
                                          substantially rehabilitating and deed restricting the units, and/or
                                          facilitating the acquisition and rehabilitation of the projects.
                                          In recent years, state law provisions have been changed to allow for
                                          the crediting of foreclosed properties to the RHNA, provided certain
                                          criteria are satisfied. Moreover, at-risk projects no longer need to be
                                          at least 4 units in size to qualify for the alternative sites credit.
                                          However, these provisions are insufficient in scope to make it
                                          financially or practically feasible for local governments to use
                                          foreclosed properties as alternative sites credits.
                                         Housing Sites. Because it is developers who build housing, cities
                                          have limited ability to change underlying market conditions.
                                          However, cities can make available enough sites for future housing
                                          opportunities. This is done through zoning and development
                                          standards. Therefore, HCD allows cities to count available sites
                                          toward meeting the RHNA goals. The sites must be adequately zoned
                                          for housing, sufficient in size, and realistically be able to be built on.
                                          These criteria are described and addressed later in this chapter.
                                 The following describes Upland’s approach to addressing its 2013–2021
                                 RHNA as determined by the Southern California Association of Governments.
60    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                Housing Resources
ZONING AND HOUSING INCENTIVES
The analysis must demonstrate that the identified zones are adequate to
facilitate development of housing affordable to different income levels. The
following demonstrates how densities and housing prices are linked.
Single-Family Housing
As mentioned earlier, new single-family homes are selling for over $500,000.
The 17-unit Bella Tierra project and the detached small lot College Park
project are priced in the $500,000s and $600,000. In the vast majority of cases,
these products are built on standard small lots with a density of 7–10 units
per acre. Therefore, where sites identified in the land inventory are zoned at
lower densities, the sites are assumed to be capable of only accommodating
single-family homes affordable to above moderate income households.
Townhomes                                                                                         Foothill Walk
Upland has seen a resurgence in attached and detached townhomes. Foothill
Walk offers seventy-six, 1,500-square-foot and 3-bedroom attached units at a
density of 17 units per acre. The homes are priced at $250,000 to $450,000,
with 80% of the units below $360,000, which is the maximum price affordable
to moderate income households. Foothill Promenade, a 46-unit attached
project built at 15 units per acre, sold for $280,000 to $310,000 per unit. This
demonstrates that attached townhome developments built at a density of 15
to 20 units per acre are affordable to moderate income households.
Apartments
State law considers a density of 30 units per acre for urban jurisdictions as
sufficient to facilitate the production of housing affordable to low income
households. To provide an accurate assessment of density and its relationship
to affordability, the adjacent high income city of Rancho Cucamonga had two
affordable projects (Villagio and San Sevainne) recently built in the prior
planning period at 15 to 17 units per acre. Although these projects were RDA
subsidized, it would be reasonable to expect that such projects would be
feasible at 25 to 30 units per acre without substantial financial assistance.
Density and Affordability Assumptions
Based on this information, density thresholds can be correlated with housing
affordability. In determining the type and price of housing anticipated to be
built on the sites identified for the RHNA, the following assumptions apply:
         A density of 0 to 15 units per acre is assumed to facilitate housing in
          the above moderate income category;
         A density of up to 20 units per acre range is assumed to facilitate
          housing in the moderate income category;
         A density of up to 30 or more units per acre is assumed to facilitate
          housing in the very low and low income category.
                                                                          CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT      61

Housing Resources
                                 B.        SITE IDENTIFICATION
                                 Housing sites proposed for the 2013–2021 Housing Element include the
                                 majority of sites identified in the prior 2008–2014 Housing Element. In
                                 addition, the City identified additional sites during the recent update to the
                                 City’s General Plan and Zoning Code that are suitable for residential
                                 development. All of the proposed housing sites to be credited toward the
                                 RHNA are vacant or substantially underutilized, are zoned for multifamily
                                 residential development or mixed-use with a residential component, and do
                                 not have active development proposals in place. Moreover, none of the sites
                                 chosen have environmental constraints that would preclude development.
                                 To meet the RHNA through the setting aside of land at appropriate densities,
                                 the City has identified housing sites in several primary areas.
                                 Specific Plans
                                 The General Plan includes several specific plans with residential development.
                                 This includes the Park View, Upland Crossing, and College Park specific plan
                                 areas. These areas allow for a combination of single-family and townhome
                                 units. Although several are near buildout, residential development capacity
                                 remains on vacant sites that can accommodate housing affordable to
                                 moderate and above moderate income households.
                                 Focus Areas
                                 The General Plan directs future residential development into three focus areas
                                 in an effort to encourage the recycling and revitalization of these areas. These
                                 areas include: 1) Foothill Boulevard, which is the primary east–west spine of
                                 the community; 2) the southeast quadrant, which is the eastern gateway to
                                 Upland; and 3) the College Heights area, which is near the Claremont
                                 Colleges. The majority of these proposed residential sites are underutilized.
                                 Historic Downtown
                                 The Historic Downtown contains the majority of high density residential and
                                 mixed-use sites. These sites are largely the same sites in the 2009 Housing
                                 Element and are carried over to the present planning period. Unlike past
                                 years, however, these sites now fall within a specific plan and no longer
                                 require a conditional use permit to develop into multiple-family housing.
                                 Multiple-residential and mixed-use residential projects are allowed by-right.
                                 The land inventory that follows discusses each general area proposed for
                                 residential development. Contained are: 1) a listing and map of parcels
                                 proposed to accommodate the RHNA; 2) calculation of development capacity
                                 based on realistic densities; and 3) demonstration that sites (where used) are
                                 likely to redevelop into housing during the planning period. Following the
                                 sites discussion is an analysis of the adequacy of the zones.
62    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                               Housing Resources
SPECIFIC PLANS
Much of Upland’s vacant and underutilized land is within specific plan areas.
These specific plans are largely located along, near, or bounded by Foothill
Boulevard. All of the sites proposed for housing in specific plan areas are
vacant and ready to build as the housing market continues to recover. Based
on prevailing housing prices, these specific plan areas will provide housing
affordable for moderate and above moderate income households.
The three specific plan areas are described below and shown in Figure 4-1.
   Park View Specific Plan. The Park View Specific Plan is envisioned as a
    mixed-use village. The plan calls for the development of up to 100,000
    square feet of commercial/retail space, 32 acres of residential land, and 57
    acres of open space for a city park, flood control facilities, and spreading
    grounds. When built to capacity, the specific plan will add 400 housing
    units to the City of Upland, most of which will be single-family housing.
    There are no environmental constraints to development of this site.
    The Park View project has three planning areas. Planning Areas 1 and 2 will
    contain 143 detached, small lot single-family homes. Based on housing
    market prices, these units are anticipated to range in price from $400,000
    to $500,000, affordable to above moderate income households. An
    additional 16 acres are reserved for 257 units of smaller attached products
    that are affordable to moderate income households.
    Upland Crossing Specific Plan. This Specific Plan is composed of a
    residential development and a small commercial-retail component. The
    site is undeveloped and previously consisted of two filled retention basins.
    There are no longer any constraints that would preclude its development.
    The specific plan will contain a high-quality development of detached
    single-family units, condominiums, and mixed-use multiple-family units.
    The Upland Crossing Specific Plan has three planning areas. Planning Area
    1 and 2 designate 12 acres for 145 detached small lot homes. Based on
    recent projects in the community, detached products will likely sell for
    prices only affordable to above moderate income households. An
    additional 10 acres are proposed for 210 attached small lot housing
    products anticipated to be affordable to moderate income households.
   College Park Specific Plan. In 2004, the City adopted the College Park
    Specific Plan to encourage mixed-use development in southwest Upland
    and provide housing opportunities for the Claremont Colleges. The
    planning area includes 25 acres of residential land that can accommodate
    almost 500 or more housing units. A total of 450 apartment units have
    been built. An additional 90 small lot detached single-family units are
    planned at a density of 10 units per acre. These units are priced in the
    $500,000s and are affordable to above moderate income households.
                                                                         CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     63

Housing Resources
                                 Figure 4-1: Specific Plan Map
64    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                             Housing Resources
HISTORIC DOWNTOWN
Much of Upland’s vacant and underutilized land is in the Downtown, which is
where the City plans to accommodate its lower income RHNA. Adoption of
the Historic Downtown Upland Specific Plan (DTSP) now allows much higher
densities that facilitate higher density housing. The sites identified to meet
the RHNA are in five of the nine districts, which have allowable residential
densities ranging from 15 to 55 units per acre. There are 57 vacant or
underutilized parcels in the DTSP, shown in Figure 4-2. A comprehensive
inventory of parcels is provided in Appendix C.
The City selected these vacant or underutilized properties as part of the
residential sites inventory because they represent 24 groups of City-owned
vacant parking lots or are contiguous parcels under common ownership that
present the greatest potential for lot consolidation and future development.
These sites were identified based on staff knowledge, the City’s vision for the
area, site visits, and development applications prior to the downturn of the
real estate market. For underutilized sites, contiguous properties are
developed with antiquated commercial/industrial uses that are inconsistent
with the City’s objective of revitalizing the Downtown with sustainable
development patterns that contribute to the jobs/housing balance.
Among the identified properties are three packing houses in the Citrus
Transportation District. These packing houses are used for marginal uses,
including junk storage, sporadic light manufacturing, a rock climbing gym,
and a temporary trucking school. The owners of all three sites have expressed
interest in redeveloping their properties. One of these three properties
(Schwartz Building) has been proposed for adaptive reuse as a high-density
mixed-use residential development. Due to the current market conditions,
the Schwartz Building has been on hold. However, based on the proposal, the
City has determined that the other two packing houses are feasible and ideal
for adaptive reuse into high-density mixed-use developments.
The City is also looking to develop high-density mixed-use projects on its
surface parking lots. The DTSP contains a three-tiered parking strategy to
ensure sufficient parking as development intensifies and to make more
efficient use of the available parking in Downtown, thus freeing up some of
the City’s surface parking lots for development. Residential development is
expected to provide its own on-site private parking, so the parking strategy
only pertains to the increase in demand generated by new commercial
development. Since the City’s vision is for high-density multifamily mixed-use
development in Downtown, new residential development on the surface
parking lots will maximize permitted densities in each district.
The specific plan contains maximum densities of 15 to 55 units per acre.
Because the explicit intent of the specific plan is to promote higher density
development, the buildout was determined based on a site design analysis
that determined realistic densities achievable based on required
development standards and a series of realistic assumptions for each site. The
analysis resulted in a total of 1,158 affordable housing units in Downtown,
including 874 low-income units and 284 moderate-income units.
                                                                       CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     65

Housing Resources
                                 Figure 4-2: Downtown Specific Plan Map
66    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                             Housing Resources
OTHER HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
The City of Upland also has several other housing opportunities to credit
toward the RHNA. One is secondary dwelling units and guest quarters. The
other is an application for senior housing that recently obtained bridge
funding to move forward during the 2014/2015 timeframe.
Second Units and Guest Quarters
The Census Bureau defines a housing unit as a house, apartment, mobile
home, group of rooms, or single room occupied as separate living quarters.
This definition includes second units and guest quarters in homes. The
Zoning Code allows second units and guest quarters in many residential
zones. However, for guest quarters, the owner must file a residential covenant
with the Clerk prohibiting such units from being rented—that is, someone
can live there, but the owner cannot collect rent. These options offer
affordable housing for seniors, domestic employees, students, and others.
Guest quarters are assumed affordable to very low income households
because rent cannot be collected on them. In contrast, a second unit is
treated like an apartment project and assumed affordable to moderate
income households. From 2006–2013, the City approved 6 to 8 units annually,
of which 60% were guest quarters and 40% were second units. Assuming 50
units built from 2014 to 2021, 30 units are assumed affordable to very low
income households and 20 units affordable to moderate income households.
The Housing Element estimates 50 units for the 2014–2021 planning period.
Coy D. Estes Project
The City of Upland has been working with Upland Community Housing to
fund the 72-unit expansion to the existing Coy D. Estes senior rental project.
The City petitioned the Department of Finance to keep $1.26 million dollars
that was an enforceable obligation for funding the senior project. Coy D. Estes
also owns the land on the proposed expansion. Upland Community Housing
had successfully secured 9% low income housing tax credits but was unable
to secure additional bridge funds needed to close the project.
As of 2013, Upland Community Housing intends to propose floating a bond
and apply for a 4% low income housing tax credit to fund the project. The City
of Upland expects that the project will secure financing in the next year or so
and proceed with expansion of the senior project. In November 2013, a loan
agreement was subsequently approved by the California Department of
Finance in the amount of $1,250,000. Funds came from the Redevelopment
Property Tax Fund that pays enforceable obligations pursuant to AB 1484.
                                                                       CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     67

Housing Resources
                                 GENERAL PLAN FOCUS AREAS
                                 Finally, in addition to the specific plan areas, the City focused on three areas
                                 of Upland as part of the General Plan Update process that have additional
                                 potential for multifamily residential development. Focus Areas include
                                 Foothill Boulevard, College Heights, and the Southeast Quadrant. Each is
                                 described below. A comprehensive inventory of parcels is in Appendix C.
                                    Foothill Boulevard. Foothill Boulevard, part of Historic Route 66, is the
                                     most important east–west corridor, playing a key role in establishing the
                                     identity and the economic vitality of Upland. Zoning along Foothill
                                     Boulevard supports a mix of uses through the C/R, C/O. and C/I MU zones.
                                     Vacant and/or underutilized parcels along Foothill are potential sites for
                                     multifamily residential uses. A total of 35 sites have been identified along
                                     Foothill, totaling approximately 30.5 acres. These parcels are zoned C/R
                                     MU and require a minimum density of 15 units per acre. The realistic
                                     capacity of remaining sites on Foothill Boulevard totals 370 units.
                                    Southeast Quadrant. The Southeast is Upland’s eastern gateway.
                                     Although the quadrant is primarily residential, the hospital, commercial
                                     uses, and industrial parks in this area make it a major employment base.
                                     The medical industry has great potential to expand and continue to
                                     provide quality jobs and services to Upland’s residents and the region.
                                     Therefore, the City’s focus for this area is on expanding the employment
                                     base and creating new multifamily residential opportunities for employees
                                     and families. A total of 25 sites on 12.2 acres have been identified in this
                                     focus area. These parcels are zoned B/R MU, C/R MU, RM-2, and RM-3,
                                     which require minimum densities of 10 to 15 du/ac. The realistic capacity
                                     remaining on these opportunity sites totals 170 new units.
                                    College Heights. Much of the City’s remaining vacant and underutilized
                                     land outside of Downtown is in the College Heights focus area. As the
                                     location of Upland’s major industrial employers and with its proximity to
                                     the Montclair Transportation Center and the Claremont Colleges, College
                                     Heights is an important employment center in the City and a prime
                                     location for new transit-oriented development. Several specific plan areas
                                     in College Heights are developed with multifamily residential projects.
                                     Many other vacant and/or underutilized parcels are also potential sites. A
                                     total of 52 sites have been identified, totaling approximately 20.9 acres.
                                     These parcels are zoned B/R MU, C/R MU, and RM-3 and require a
                                     minimum density of 10 to 15 du/ac. Outside the specific plan, the realistic
                                     capacity remaining in College Heights is approximately 241 units.
                                 Taken together, the City of Upland has considerable development capacity
                                 remaining on underutilized sites in the community. Because of the
                                 underutilized status, these sites will develop slower than vacant sites. The
                                 sites will likely add to the inventory of moderate and above moderate income
                                 housing potential and therefore are necessary to map at this time.
68    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                 Housing Resources
ENVIRONMENTAL AND INFRASTRUCTURE CONCERNS
Prior to selection, the City screened potential sites identified to accommodate
the RHNA to ensure that adequate infrastructure was in place and that the
sites were not adversely affected by any known environmental constraints. All
sites chosen for potential residential development that could accommodate
the RHNA were in adopted specific plan areas. Each specific plan area had an
environmental impact report that documented potential environmental
concerns and included mitigation necessary to address them.
Environmental Hazards
None of the potential housing sites identified for the Regional Housing Needs
Allocation are known to have environmental constraints that would preclude
the development of housing. As reflected in each of the individual specific
plan EIRs, none of the sites is on a fault, in an Alquist-Priolo zone, or in a 100-
year flood plain. None of the sites is located on prime farmland or currently
used for agricultural purposes. Several sites may be located on ground
suitable for mining, but the sites are no longer used for active mining.
Water Availability
The Historic Downtown Specific Plan (DTSP) EIR projects water needs for the
whole City (including development in the four specific plan areas with the
housing inventory sites). In 2030, the City will need 24,162 acre-feet per year
of water. According to the 2010 Upland Urban Water Management Plan, the
dry-year scenario projects a supply of 27,318 AFY in the first year and 26,662
AFY in years 2025, 2030, and 2035. Based on that analysis, the City would have
enough water to serve affordable housing in the downtown and other areas.
Sites outside of the downtown would also have adequate water supply and
conveyance to support approved residential development.
Sewer Availability
The DTSP EIR analyzed the capacity of sewer lines and treatment facilities and
determined that the wastewater treatment facilities that serve downtown
together have 10 to 12 million gallons per day in excess capacity, which is
sufficient to accommodate the projected increase of 357,000 to 392,500
gallons per day. Moreover, the EIRs for the other specific plans did not
indicate a shortage in treatment capacity. The EIRs did indicate a need to
upgrade certain lateral sewer lines, but costly force mains, main trunk lines, or
similar infrastructure. Upgrades to laterals are financed through the payment
of sewer impact fees, which is common for any new apartment project.
Therefore, the sites identified for the 2014–2021 RHNA have no
environmental constraints that would preclude or unduly delay the
construction of housing. Moreover, water and sewer infrastructure capacity is
sufficient to accommodate the construction of new housing commensurate
with the City’s assigned 2014–2021 RHNA within the actual planning period.
                                                                           CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     69

Housing Resources
                                 DEVELOPMENT CAPACITY
                                 Given the difference in the configuration, shape, and size of individual lots,
                                 the City performed a Site Design study for each parcel. The site design was
                                 intended to determine the potential density and number of units that could
                                 be accommodated on individual sites based on actual development
                                 standards. Development assumptions used for this analysis include:
                                 Housing Type and Unit Characteristics
                                   Old Town District: Mixed-Use
                                   All other districts were multiple-family residential
                                   50% one-bedroom and 50% two-bedroom for each site
                                   750 sq. ft. for one-bedroom units; 950 sq. ft. for two-bedroom units
                                 Development Intensity
                                   Arrow Highway District: 15 du/ac
                                   Old Town (Historic Core) and Euclid District (west side): 25 du/ac
                                   Old Town District: 35 du/ac
                                   Euclid District (east side): 40 du/ac
                                   Old Town (1st St., Citrus Transportation, and Residential Transit: 55 du/ac
                                 Height and Setbacks
                                   Old Town (Historic Core): 2 stories
                                   Arrow Highway, Old Town and Euclid (west side) Districts: 3 stories
                                   Euclid (east side) District: 2.5 stories
                                   Old Town (1st St. Overlay), Citrus Transp., Residential Transit: 4 stories
                                   Setbacks: 0 feet per specific plan
                                 Parking and Open Space
                                   One bedroom: 1 resident space per unit
                                   Two bedroom: 2 resident spaces per unit
                                   60 square feet of private outdoor living space per unit
                                   100 square feet of common outdoor living space was assumed per unit
                                 The residential development capacity scenarios explicitly take into account
                                 mixed use. For sites in the Old Town District, groundfloor retail is required for
                                 every project. Therefore, the design model included groundfloor retail with
                                 tuck under, alley-loaded parking for each site. These include included one-
                                 quarter (25%) of all the sites in the Downtown Specific Plan area (specifically
                                 sites 2, 3, 4, 11, 12, 13, and 14). Larger sites south of the railroad were left as
                                 residential only consistent with the City’s policy of introducing housing into
                                 the downtown to stimulate further economic development.
70    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                           Housing Resources
SUMMARY OF CREDITS
Based on the above assumptions, Table A-1 in Appendix C, Upland Sites
Inventory, identifies the realistic capacity for each site. As shown in Table A-1,
the majority of sites can be built well in excess of the default density of 30
du/ac, without a density bonus and without any variation in standards,
thereby meeting the definition for zoning and development standards
capable of accommodating and facilitating affordable low-income housing.
The City credited toward the lower income RHNA only those sites that have a
realistic development capacity of 30 units per acre and are capable of
producing at least 20 units pew site. Sites that yielded fewer than 20 units
were counted as moderate-income housing. Further, Site 6 was counted
towards moderate income housing based on the proposed density of a recent
development proposal. As a result, the City’s DTSP sites could accommodate
the development of 874 low-income units and 284 moderate income units.
Table 4-2 shows how the City’s land inventory satisfies the 2013–2021 RHNA.
Housing sites are credited toward different affordability levels based upon
density levels and corresponding sales prices. Taken together, the City of
Upland can accommodate the entire 2014–2021 RHNA.
Table 4-2: Development Capacity of Housing Sites
 Development         Specific Plan                     Assumed     Residential   Affordability
     Areas           Designations           Acres       Density     Capacity         Level
                                   Specific Plans (Vacant Sites)
Upland             Detached Units             12           12          145          Above
Crossing           Attached Units            10.5          20           210        Moderate
                   Detached Units             16            9          143          Above
Park View
                   Attached Units             16           16           257        Moderate
                   Detached Units            2.75          12           92          Above
College Park
                   Attached Units              0            0            0            N/A
                   Multiple family           23.5        25-55          874         Lower
Downtown
                   Attached Units             9.3          20           284        Moderate
                                             Affordability Ranges Corresponding to Density
                                                                       Above
 RHNA Credits                              Lower      Moderate       Moderate         Total
 Vacant Sites
 1. Specific Plans                             0          467           380               847
 2. Downtown                                 874          284            0              1,158
 3. Second Units                              30           20            0                  50
 4. Coy D. Estes Expansion                    72            0            0                  72
                             Subtotal        976          771          380              2,133
                 RHNA Requirement            642          294           653             1,589
                      Surplus/Deficit       +334         +477          -273               544
Source: The Planning Center|DC&E, 2013.
                                                                                     CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     71

Housing Resources
                                 HOUSING AFFORDABILITY INCENTIVES
                                 A key goal of the 2013–2021 housing element is to assist in the development
                                 of affordable housing for persons of all income levels. Given the California
                                 court’s ruling that redevelopment authority is abolished, cities are left with
                                 few financial tools to assist in meeting this goal. In lieu of financial means, the
                                 City of Upland implements several key housing programs:
                                   Flexible Development Standards. The Historic Downtown Specific Plan
                                    is the primary opportunity to facilitate higher density residential projects
                                    that are near the transit center. As such, the specific plan includes
                                    significant incentives to facilitate higher density residential and mixed-use
                                    developments. These include “by-right” densities of up to 55 units per acre
                                    in certain downtown districts, no requirement for guest parking in mixed-
                                    use developments, and opportunities for further reductions in parking
                                    when two uses share parking. These provisions help to incentivize and
                                    encourage developers to include higher density projects in the downtown
                                    and further the goals of the Specific Plan and General Plan. The Specific
                                    Plan also contains an implementation program to develop additional tools
                                    to incentivize higher density residential and mixed-use projects.
                                   Density Bonus. As part of the City’s comprehensive update to the Zoning
                                    Code to be adopted in 2014, the City will create a local density bonus
                                    ordinance that offers the same types of development incentives as
                                    required under state law, only the provisions apply to all zones where
                                    residential developments of three or more dwelling units are proposed,
                                    compared to the five or more dwelling units under state law. A
                                    development may qualify for up to a maximum 35% density bonus by
                                    providing 11% very low income units, 20% low income units, or 40%
                                    moderate income units, or up to a 20% density bonus for the
                                    development of senior housing. Other concessions or incentives may be
                                    awarded on a sliding scale depending on the percentage of affordable
                                    housing provided, in order to make the housing economically feasible.
                                   Variances/Adjustments. The City has successfully used the variance and
                                    minor adjustment process to allow flexibility in development standards
                                    and code requirements to facilitate the construction of new housing. A
                                    variance or minor adjustment may be granted to allow for deviation from
                                    any physical development standard that applies to the subject property.
                                    Examples of development standards include height, setbacks, open space,
                                    floor-area ratio, and off-street parking requirements. A variance is required
                                    to approve a deviation from a standard by more than 10% and a minor
                                    adjustment is required to approve a deviation from a standard by 10% or
                                    less. A variance or minor adjustment shall not be granted to authorize a
                                    land use that is prohibited in the applicable zone or to allow deviation
                                    from a requirement of the General Plan. The City has used variances on
                                    multiple occasions to make a residential project feasible.
72    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                             Housing Resources
C.       IMPLEMENTATION RESOURCES
Upland has access to local, state, and federal financial administrative
resources to fund the construction, improvement, and maintenance of
housing or the administration of programs. Some of the primary funding
sources and organizations are described below.
FINANCIAL RESOURCES
Historically, Upland has set aside 20% of the tax increment revenues to build,
rehabilitate, and/or preserve affordable housing. Pursuant to Governor
Brown’s actions, all redevelopment agencies across California were abolished
and more than $16 million in Upland’s annual revenue was permanently
diverted to temporarily alleviate California’s budget deficit.
Some of the more common revenues now available to assist the City are:
  Community development block grants. CDBG is the largest federal
   housing-related program for affordable housing. Cities with populations
   of over 50,000 receive CDBG funds directly from HUD, while smaller cities
   usually use county-administered CDBG funds. HUD makes allocations
   based on a formula that takes population, poverty, and housing distress
   into account. CDBG funds are used for eligible activities aimed at reducing
   costs for private development (helping fund site acquisition,
   improvement, and other soft costs); housing acquisition and rehabilitation
   through short and long-term loans, grants or loan guarantees; direct
   payment of rent or mortgage and housing counseling services; and fair
   housing activities. Upland receives $530,000 annually in CDBG funds.
  State and federal HOME. HOME is a formula-based grant that must be
   spent for the acquisition, construction, and rehabilitation of affordable
   rental and home ownership. HOME requires local governments to provide
   matching funds, though the matching ratio depends on the specific uses
   to which HOME funds are to be put. Upland does not qualify for
   entitlement HOME funds but rather applies to the State HCD for them. In
   addition, the City also periodically applies to the state for CalHome funds
   to support its affordable housing programs. The City uses State HOME and
   CalHome funds to support its First Time Homebuyers and HOME
   Improvement Programs. Upland has received $700,000 in competitive
   HOME funds every other year. In 2012, Upland received $1 million in
   CalHome funds. However, funds may not be available in the future.
  Rental housing choice vouchers (formerly Section 8). The federal
   housing choice voucher program is rental assistance provided to lower
   income households that allows a household to afford to rent a unit. The
   voucher amount equals the difference between what a household can
   afford to pay (up to 30% of monthly income) and the fair market rent. The
   vouchers are typically granted to individuals who can use the voucher at
   any apartment project where the property owner accepts the voucher.
   Although this long-standing federal assistance program is not expected to
                                                                       CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     73

Housing Resources
                                   increase in size, it remains an important affordable housing program. The
                                   housing choice voucher program in Upland is administered by the Upland
                                   Housing Authority, which receives approximately $6.8 million annually to
                                   administer this program, of which $5.1 million is for housing vouchers.
                                  Tax exempt multifamily revenue bonds. The construction, acquisition,
                                   and rehabilitation of multifamily rental housing developments can be
                                   funded by tax exempt bonds which provide a lower interest rate than is
                                   available through conventional financing. Projects financed through these
                                   bonds are required to set aside 20% of the units for occupancy by very low
                                   income households or 40% of the units to be set aside for households at
                                   60% of the area median income. Tax exempt bonds for multifamily
                                   housing may also be issued to refinance existing tax exempt debts, which
                                   are referred to as a refunding bond issue. The City has several bond-
                                   funded affordable housing projects in the community.
                                  Housing fund. Upland owns three multiple-family housing projects
                                   funded through mortgage revenue bonds and former redevelopment
                                   funds. Due to the low cost of bond refinancing completed in 2007, these
                                   apartment projects provide net positive revenues after all operating and
                                   long-term expenses on the apartment projects are paid. These projects
                                   include Sunset Ridge, Village Apartments, and Magnolia Colony, which
                                   provide approximately $600,000 to $700,000 annually. The funding is used
                                   to support a quarter of the City’s current housing programs. Although
                                   these projects provide a sizable amount for operating the City’s housing
                                   programs, the long-term viability of this source is uncertain.
                                  Enforceable obligations. The City of Upland historically set aside $1.26
                                   million in redevelopment tax increment financing to provide funding for
                                   the Coy D. Estes senior project. Upon dissolution of the Redevelopment
                                   Agency, the City petitioned that these funds should be deemed to be an
                                   enforceable obligation. The Department of Finance concurred and the
                                   RDA tax increment funds were granted for this specific project. It is
                                   important to note that these are one-time funds and cannot be used for
                                   purposes other than the Coy D. Estes project. Upon the use of funds, the
                                   City will not have additional redevelopment tax increment funds that can
                                   be used to fund the development of new affordable housing.
74    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                              Housing Resources
ADMINISTRATIVE RESOURCES
With state funding cutbacks, Upland must rely on an increasingly wider group
of nonprofit organizations to help administer and implement programs. The
following agencies and organizations can assist the City of Upland in
implementing the housing programs and activities in this housing element.
   Upland Development Services. The Development Services Department
    facilitates the orderly physical and economic development of the City.
    Following closure of RDA, the department assumed their responsibilities.
    The Development Services Department administers advance planning,
    current planning, building permitting, and building inspection programs
    in compliance with local, state, and federal requirements. The Building
    Division provides reasonable controls for construction, occupancy, and
    maintenance of buildings and structures throughout the community. The
    department also implements programs that promote economic and
    housing development projects, emphasizing those that produce jobs,
    build infrastructure, expand the City's tax base, and/or provide housing.
   Nonprofit Housing Developers. The City of Upland works with nonprofit
    partners to assist in administering programs or furthering housing goals.
    The City has partnered with Upland Community Housing to develop 72
    affordable assisted living units for the elderly in Downtown and to develop
    the 131-unit Coy D. Estes Senior Apartments project. The City works with
    the Foothill Family Shelter to provide emergency shelter, transitional
    housing, and services to homeless residents. The City also assisted the
    shelter with the acquisition and rehabilitation of 44 units of permanent
    affordable housing in the Magnolia Colony project. Nonprofit affordable
    housing developers are a key asset for any community.
   Upland Housing Authority. The Upland Housing Authority (UHA) is
    responsible for management of a public housing development of 97 units
    and administration of the City's rental assistance program (Section 8
    Housing Choice Vouchers). This program encompasses more than 800
    housing choice vouchers at an annual value of $5.1 million. The housing
    authority also manages the Public Housing Modernization Program.
    Coupled with the City’s publicly assisted multiple-family projects, these
    two efforts are the largest providers of affordable housing for residents.
    Given the demise of redevelopment, many cities are considering options
    for enhancing cooperation with housing authorities for implementing or
    managing affordable housing programs for residents.
                                                                        CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     75

Housing Resources
                                 This page intentionally left blank
76    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT
5. Program Evaluation
Section 65588(a) of the Government Code requires that jurisdictions evaluate
the effectiveness of the existing housing element; the appropriateness of
goals, objectives, and policies; and the progress in implementing programs
for the previous planning period. This chapter addresses each component.
The 2008–2014 Housing Element goals were drafted to implement the
required statutes in California Housing Element law and follow priorities
expressed by the Upland community, including input received from the City
Council, Planning Commission, and City staff. To that end, the housing
element contained five primary housing goals, with 20 supporting policies
and 27 implementation programs.
The five housing goals were:
   Goal 1. Conservation of the Existing Supply of Housing. Conserve and
    improve the condition of the existing housing stock, especially affordable
    housing.
   Goal 2. Assist in the Development of Affordable Housing. Assist in the
    provision of housing that meet the needs of all economic segments of the
    community.
   Goal 3. Provide Adequate Housing Sites. Provide suitable sites for
    housing development which can accommodate a range of housing by
    type, size, location, price, and tenure.
   Goal 4. Remove Governmental Constraints. Mitigate any potential
    government constraints to housing production and affordability.
   Goal 5. Provide Equal Housing Opportunities. Continue to promote
    equal housing opportunity in the City’s housing market regardless of age,
    race, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, disability, marital status, familial
    status, source of income, sexual orientation, and other arbitrary factors.
Because of the commitments made in that housing element, the California
Department of Housing and Community Development determined that the
housing element was in full compliance with state law. Following adoption in
2009, the City of Upland was tasked with following through on the
commitments made in the more than two dozen housing programs.
The following section is a summary of progress in meeting the quantified
objectives established in the 2008–2014 Upland Housing Element.
                                                                            CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT 77

Program Evaluation
                                 A.        ACCOMPLISHMENTS
                                 Housing Construction
                                 The 2008–2014 Housing Element’s RHNA planning goal was 1,995 new units.
                                 The City of Upland fulfilled its obligation by ensuring that enough sites were
                                 adequately rezoned to accommodate the RHNA, working with developers to
                                 target properties for redevelopment, and incentivizing affordable housing
                                 through the density bonus program and other supporting programs. Existing
                                 census records do not provide an accurate count of units built or permitted.
                                 The following describe highlights in Upland since January 2006.
                                   Apartments. Three apartment projects were built after January 2006: the
                                    448-unit College Park Apartments, the 240-unit Monte Vista/Central Park
                                    Apartments, and the 128-unit Broadstone Apartments. These projects
                                    offer rents from $1,200 to $1,400 for one-bedroom units, $1400 to $1,700
                                    for two-bedroom units, and $2,300 for three-bedroom units. All the units
                                    are affordable to moderate income households.
                                   Condominiums. New townhomes were built in Foothill Walk and Foothill
                                    Promenade. These projects offer 122 townhomes ranging from 1,500 to
                                    1,700 square feet, with up to 4 bedrooms. Both were built by Beazer
                                    Homes. Based on actual sales prices recorded by Redfin, these projects
                                    offered homes for sales in the $300,000s, which is clearly affordable to the
                                    middle range of moderate income households.
                                   Single-family. A significant number of single-family homes were built
                                    during the prior planning cycle. These include the 1,000-unit Colonies
                                    project, Wyeth, College Park, and other infill projects. Smaller
                                    developments are also being built. For instance, the 17-unit Bella Tierra
                                    project will offer homes from 2,601 to 3,627 square feet in size. The vast
                                    majority of homes are affordable to above moderate income households.
                                   Accessory/second units. During the prior planning period, the City of
                                    Upland approved approximately five to seven second units and/or
                                    accessory units per year. Accessory dwelling units are like guest quarters
                                    and typically are affordable to very low income households since they
                                    cannot be rented. In contrast, second units are typically rented at rates
                                    that would be affordable to either low or moderate income households.
                                   Additional planning efforts. The City of Upland has approved a number
                                    of significant specific plans, such as Foothill Walk, College Park, Benson
                                    Terrace, and other plans. These sites (including the Downtown) provide
                                    adequate housing opportunities to accommodate the City’s RHNA.
                                 Taken together, the City produced a significant number of new housing units
                                 despite the worst recession in generations, the Governor’s take of
                                 redevelopment funds, the foreclosure crisis that dampened demand, and
                                 drastic reductions in virtually every funding source for affordable housing.
78    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                              Program Evaluation
Housing Rehabilitation and Preservation
The 2008–2014 Housing Element goal was for the rehabilitation of 376 units.
This was to be achieved via the HOME Improvement Program, Historic Home
Rehabilitation Program, Emergency Repairs Program, Rental Acquisition and
Rehabilitation Program, Upland Pride Paint Program, Reviving and Enhancing
Neighborhood Program, and Five Star Rental Recognition Program.
Highlights of program successes are below.
   Major rehabilitation. The City of Upland funded 46 rehabilitation loans
    to rehabilitate housing through the HOME Improvement Program (HIP).
    The HIP is available to low and moderate income households to correct
    code deficiencies and improve the sustainability of residential units. The
    loans, up to $90,000 each, are offered at 0% to 3% interest and are due
    upon the sale or transfer of the property, 30 years, or are no longer
    occupied as a primary residence, whichever is sooner. Types of
    rehabilitation include electrical, heating, plumbing, roofing, windows,
    kitchen and bathroom repairs, energy conservation, etc.
   Minor rehabilitation. Another 456 households were assisted in
    completing minor rehabilitation with redevelopment set aside funding.
    The Emergency Repairs Program and Upland Pride Paint Program served
    265 homeowners. The Rental Acquisition and Rehabilitation Program
    assisted 36 lower income renters by providing low interest loans to
    landlords for multifamily property rehabilitation. The Reviving and
    Enhancing Neighborhoods in Upland Program provided grants for
    exterior improvements to 155 residential buildings in target areas. All of
    these programs were funded by redevelopment set-aside funds.
   Housing preservation. The Housing Element goal was to conserve 196
    at-risk units. As shown earlier, the City has a large number of affordable
    deed-restricted projects, many of which have current deed restrictions.
    No units were preserved by the City during this cycle: however, 100 units
    were preserved by private interests. The City also contributed RDA funds
    to acquire and rehabilitate 14 fourplexes and 56 units, known as the
    Diamond Court Apartments. The City is continuing to monitor the status
    of at-risk units. The City’s Historic Home Rehabilitation Program also
    provided rehabilitation loans for 11 historically significant properties.
   Code enforcement. The City’s 2008–2014 Housing Element also set forth
    a program for code enforcement efforts through the Upland Police
    Department Impact Team. More than 15,000 locations were addressed
    through code enforcement. Most of these homes were in CDBG-eligible
    and Blighted Areas affordable to lower or moderate income households.
    The Impact Team implements related beautification and preservation
    efforts through its Graffiti Removal Program. These efforts are in addition
    to the normal inspections on new and rehabilitated residential structures.
    As of 2011, the Code Enforcement Department was relocated to City Hall
    and is now a division of the Development Services Department.
                                                                         CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     79

Program Evaluation
                                 Housing Assistance
                                 The City of Upland’s 2008–2014 Housing Element contained programs to
                                 assist in the attainment of affordable housing for residents of all incomes.
                                 These included the First Time Homebuyer Program, Section 8 Rental
                                 Assistance (particularly lower income families and seniors), emergency shelter
                                 programs, and the Mobile Home Rent Control Program. Compared to its
                                 quantified objectives in the housing element, the City has made substantial
                                 progress in addressing housing assistance goals, fulfilling many objectives.
                                 Highlights of program successes are described below.
                                     Homeownership. The City’s First Time Homebuyer Program (FTHB)
                                      provides low interest loans to moderate income first-time buyers. The
                                      FTHB provides a 0% to 3% interest loan with deferred payment until the
                                      sale of the home, refinancing, or 30 years, whichever is sooner. The City
                                      assisted 23 households in purchasing a home through this program in
                                      the previous cycle, which is half of the original goal of 55 units. The
                                      shortfall was due to the elimination of redevelopment agency and
                                      gradual reductions in HOME funds from the federal government.
                                     Rental Assistance. The Upland Housing Authority continued to provide
                                      Section 8 Rental Housing Assistance to approximately 700 Upland
                                      households annually. Recipients included seniors, people with a
                                      disability, families, and others. The county also operates a Family Self-
                                      Sufficiently Program that actively assists Section 8 voucher recipients
                                      jettison their need for the assistance. Upland’s Mobile Home Rent Control
                                      Program also protects renters in an estimated 860 mobile homes that are
                                      affordable to lower and moderate income residents.
                                     Fair Housing. The City of Upland works with the Inland Fair Housing and
                                      Mediation Board to provide educational workshops and materials and
                                      mediate fair housing complaints for low income individuals and families.
                                      Between 2008 and 2014 the City referred over 5,000 cases for mediation
                                      and conducted approximately 500 educational activities. The City also
                                      recently completed its Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing and
                                      identified potential impediments that will be addressed through the
                                      implementation of the 2013–2021 Housing Element.
                                     Special Needs. Lastly, the City amended the Upland Zoning Code to
                                      allow emergency shelters in the M (manufacturing) zone, to allow
                                      secondary dwelling units in all residential zones, and to streamline
                                      affordable housing development through the adoption of the Historic
                                      Downtown Upland Specific Plan with density incentives. A
                                      comprehensive update of the Zoning Code is also underway. Finally, the
                                      City continues to provide financial support to a wide variety of providers
                                      who serve the needs of people seeking shelter in the community.
80    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                                         Program Evaluation
B.          EVALUATION
Table 5-1: Program Evaluation, 2008–2014 Housing Element
                                                                     Implementation Actions and Progress
rograms                                             Action                                          Progress and Evaluation
                              Continue outreach on program availability;         The City provided 46 rehabilitation loans during the housing
Program 1: Housing            Objective: Issue ten loans per year to low and     element cycle, exceeding the objective of 37 home loans. As
Improvement Program (HIP)     moderate income homeowners to fix structural       a successful program, this program will continue to the
                              code deficiencies.                                 extent feasible for the 2013–2021 Housing Element.
Program 2:                    Continue outreach on program availability;         The City provided 11 loans, almost achieving its objective of
Historic Home                 Objective: Issue loans to rehabilitate two         14 loans. Although this program will be phased out due to
Rehabilitation Program        Upland homes listed on Upland‘s Local              the lack of funding, property owners still have incentives
(HHRP)                        Register of Historic Places per year.              available through the Zoning Code.
Program 3:                    Issue grants up to $4,000 for emergency            The City provided 137 grants, accomplishing the majority of
Emergency Repairs Program     repairs for low income families (up to 50% AMI)    the goal for the previous cycle. This program will continue to
(ERP)                         Objective: Issue 25 grants annually.               be extended for the 2013–2021 Housing Element.
Program 4:                    Continue to provide no-interest loans of up to     The City acquired 52 housing units for this period, 9 per year.
Rental Acquisition and        $30,000 to acquire and rehabilitate multifamily    This program should continue to the extent feasible for the
Rehabilitation Program        units for affordable housing. Objective:           2013–2021 Housing Element, but new funding sources likely
(RARP)                        Acquire or rehabilitate 8 units per year.          need to be identified due to the termination of RDA funds.
                              Continue issuing grants of up to $4,000 for        The City accomplished its objective and issued 128 grants for
Program 5:
                              exterior painting of single-family or mobile       this period, or approximately 21 per year. This program will
Upland Pride Paint Program
                              homes owned by low income families.                be discontinued for the 2013–2021 Housing Element due to
(UPP)
                              Objective: Issue 20 grants per year.               the lack of funding resources.
Program 6:                    Continue issuing grants ranging between            The City funded 155 grants, or approximately 26 per year,
Reviving and Enhancing        $3,000 and $10,000 each for exterior               which fell short of the objective. This program will be
Neighborhoods in Upland       improvements of buildings within a “Target”        discontinued for the duration of the 2013–2021 Housing
Program (RENU)                Area.” Objective: Issue 40 grants per year.        Element due to the lack of availability of funding resources.
                              Continue to formally recognize rental              The City formally recognized 27 properties during this period.
Program 7: Five Star Rental
                              properties for improvements that increase          This should continue to the extent feasible for the 2013–2021
Acquisition Program
                              value and eliminate blight.                        Housing Element.
                              Continue to work with landowners to preserve       No project have been preserved or converted to date. This
Program 8:                    affordable housing. Objective: preserve six        program will continue for the 2013–2021 Housing Element.
Preservation of At-Risk Units affordable projects at risk of converting to       Due to the dissolution of redevelopment, the City will need
                              market-rates during the planning period.           to review its three City-owned properties for preservation.
 Programs 9 and 10: Code                                                         These programs are ongoing and should continue for the
                              Continue to fund graffiti removal and the
 Enforcement and Graffiti                                                        2013–2021 Housing Element. However, the graffiti removal
                              Upland Police Department Impact Team.
 Removal                                                                         program may be transferred to the police department.
 Program 11:                  Provide low interest loans for first time buyers.  The City funded 23 grants, or 4 per year, which fell short of
 First Time Homebuyer         Objective: Provide eight loans to low and          the objective. This program will continue to the extent
 Program (FTHB)               moderate income households annually.               feasible for the 2013–2021 Housing Element.
                              Continue to work with the IFHMB to sponsor         This program is ongoing and should continue for the 2013–
 Program 12:
                              educational workshops and refer cases for          2021 Housing Element. However, the City will have limited
 Foreclosure Prevention
                              mediation. Objective: Annually sponsor             involvement due to lack of funding. This program is the
 Program
                              workshops and coordinate mediation.                jurisdiction of the Inland Fair Housing and Mediation Board.
                              Continue to partner with San Bernardino            This program was not deemed successful since the majority
 Program 13:
                              County to secure grants to purchase and            of funding was spent by the county in other jurisdictions. Due
 Neighborhood Stabilization
                              rehabilitate foreclosed homes. Objective: Assist   to the sunset of federal funding, this program will be deleted
 Program (NSP)
                              10-12 households.                                  from Upland’s housing programs.
                              Continue to monitor the County of San              No tax-defaulted properties were suitable for acquisition
                              Bernardino Treasurer-Tax Collector annual          through this program. The City gives the current owners
 Program 14:
                              public auctions to sell tax-defaulted properties.  ample opportunity to resolve unpaid property taxes. The City
 Tax Defaulted Program
                              Objective; Pursue acquisition of tax-defaulted     will continue to monitor and obtain tax-defaulted properties
                              properties in Upland for public purposes.          as they become available.
                                                                                       CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT                          81

Program Evaluation
   Table 5-1: Program Accomplishments, 2008–2014 Housing Element
                                                                        Implementation Actions and Progress
   Programs                                        Action                                           Progress and Evaluation
                                  Participate in the voucher program.        The City accomplished its objective and funded 4,305 grants, or
   Program 15:                    Objective: Provide Section 8               approximately 718 per year, The Family Self-Sufficiency Program
   Section 8 Rental Assistance    Vouchers to 580 households                 also assisted a number of households. This program should
                                  annually.                                  continue for the 2013–2021 Housing Element.
                                                                             The City accomplished its objective and enforced the Mobile Home
                                  Continue to enforce the Mobile
   Program 16:                                                               Rent Ordinance for 860 mobile homes. This program should
                                  Home Rent Ordinance.
   Mobile Home Rent Control                                                  continue for the 2013–2021 Housing Element, but the long-term
                                  Objective: Protect 860 mobile homes
   Program                                                                   status of this program will depend on the court ruling on legal
                                  from unreasonable rent increases.
                                                                             challenges to rent stabilization for mobile home parks.
                                  Continue to work with Foothill
   Program 17:                                                               The City completed a 2012 Homeless Count and developed a
                                  Family Shelter to provide for the
   Homeless Transitional                                                     strategy for the provision of services. This program is ongoing and
                                  transitional housing needs of
   Shelter/Preventative Services                                             should continue for the 2013–2021 Housing Element.
                                  residents.
                                                                             The City installed solar panels to the public works building and
                                  Develop policies and programs for          participates with the GRID Alternative program by referring clients.
   Program 18:
                                  sustainable economic development,          Both the HIP and FTHB program participants are strongly
   Green Valley Initiative
                                  education, and growth.                     encouraged to install green technology within their homes. This
                                                                             program will continue for the 2013–2021 Housing Element.
                                                                             The updated the General Plan and Historic Upland Downtown
                                  Maintain an inventory of vacant and
   Program 19:                                                               Specific Plan include an adequate inventory of vacant and
                                  underutilized sites to accommodate
   Inventory of Residential Sites                                            underutilized sites for residential development. This program
                                  the City’s existing and future RHNA.
                                                                             should continue for the 2013–2021 Housing Element.
                                  Establish incentives for developers to
                                  consolidate lots in the downtown           The Historic Upland Downtown Specific Plan was adopted in 2012
   Program 20:
                                  and create a downtown land-                to provide incentives for consolidating lots in the downtown. This
   Lot Consolidation Program
                                  banking program to encourage               program will continue for the 2013–2021 Housing Element.
                                  mixed-use and residential projects.
                                                                             Though the City fell short of accomplishing its goal of 115 units, the
                                  Acquire suitable infill sites to partner
   Program 21:                                                               City is developing a 7- to 9-unit project on land acquired during the
                                  with nonprofit developers to build
   Infill Housing Program                                                    2008–2014 cycle. This program depends largely on future funding
                                  affordable housing.
                                                                             or regulatory concessions.
                                  Amend zoning code to permit
                                                                             Upon completion of the zoning code update in March 2014,
   Program 22:                    transitional and supportive housing,
                                                                             amendments to the zoning code will allow transitional and
   Extremely Low Income and       residential care facilities, emergency
                                                                             supportive, residential care facilities, emergency shelters, and single
   Special Needs Housing          shelters, and single room occupancy
                                                                             room occupancy units in the community.
                                  units in residential zones.
                                  Amend zoning ordinance to reflect          Upon completion of the zoning code update in March 2014,
   Program 23:
                                  current State density bonus law            amendments to the zoning code will allow density bonuses
   Density Bonus
                                  provisions                                 pursuant to state law.
   Program 24:                    Adopt the Downtown Specific Plan           The Downtown Specific Plan was adopted in 2012 and includes land
   Historic Upland Downtown       while eliminating CUP requirements         zoned for high density multifamily residential development. This
   Specific Plan                  for multifamily development                program will continue for the 2013–2021 Housing Element.
                                                                             Upon completion of the zoning code update in March 2014,
   Program 25: Definition of      Amend the Upland zoning code to
                                                                             amendments to the zoning code will remove the restrictive
   “Family”                       remove the definition of a family.
                                                                             definition of “Family.”
                                                                             Upon completion of the zoning code update in March 2014, the City
   Program 26: Reasonable         Create a process for making requests
                                                                             will continue to work on the process for integrating reasonable
   Accommodation                  for reasonable accommodation.
                                                                             accommodations into land use and zoning decisions.
                                  Continue to promote fair housing
                                                                             The City exceeded its goal of annually assisting 732 low income
                                  practices and contract with the
   Program 27: Fair Housing                                                  individuals and families. This program should continue for the
                                  Inland Fair Housing and Mediation
                                                                             2013–2021 Housing Element.
                                  Board to provide services.
82        CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

6. Housing Plan
This chapter describes the goals, policies, and implementation programs the
City will implement to address its housing needs, including its share of the
regional housing needs allocation (RHNA). The housing plan is the guide for
all housing planning activities for the 2013–2021 planning period.
A.        BACKGROUND
The City of Upland recognizes that meeting housing needs in the community
requires a comprehensive strategy. Housing needs differ for families, young
and working-age individuals, college students, seniors, and homeless people,
among others. Unlike its neighbors, Upland has a multilayered urban form,
distinguished by historic neighborhoods, Downtown, employment centers,
mixed-use corridors, Cable Airport, large swaths of mining land, and specific
plan areas. Within that context, accommodating Upland’s present and future
residents requires a thoughtful and carefully devised housing strategy that
balances multiple challenges and City goals.
Upland’s housing plan is a statement of the community’s goals, objectives,
and policies relative to housing production, rehabilitation, conservation, and
assistance for residents in Upland. The housing plan outlines the City’s
approach to pursuing four objectives that are consistent with the direction
established in the City’s land use element of the general plan.
The three goals around which this plan is organized are:
   Goal 1: Upland’s Neighborhoods. Strong and healthy neighborhoods
    with well-maintained housing, ample public services, open space, and
    infrastructure that provide a quality place to live.
   Goal 2: Upland’s Housing Supply. A diverse supply of housing that is
    designed, built, and located in a manner that is consistent with land use,
    zoning, circulation, and open space goals of the City.
   Goal 3: Housing Assistance. Opportunities for moderate and lower
    income residents and households with special needs to rent, purchase, or
    maintain adequate housing in the community.
As described here, Upland’s housing plan sets forth a comprehensive menu of
housing programs to implement the above overarching goals. The programs
consist of existing programs, programs that have been modified based on
what has been learned over the past few years, and new programs designed
to address new priorities or needs of the community. Quantified and
qualitative targets are indicated for each program.
                                                                      CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT 83

Housing Plan
                                 B.        GOALS AND POLICIES
                                 Goals and programs are presented according to their corresponding issue. A
                                 summary description of each program, its funding sources, and timing and
                                 responsibility for implementation is provided below.
                                 ISSUE #1: HOUSING AND NEIGHBORHOOD QUALITY
                                 Upland residents are drawn to the community for its quality housing and the
                                 unique character of neighborhoods. Upland offers a blend of neighborhoods,
                                 ranging from traditional to more urban living experiences. Whether it is the
                                 hillside ambience of northern Upland, traditional neighborhoods of central
                                 Upland, or a more historic neighborhood setting in the Historic Downtown
                                 area, each neighborhood offers a unique lifestyle for residents. Strengthening
                                 and creating quality neighborhoods while preserving and promoting
                                 community character are essential priorities for the community. The following
                                 goal and policies further the livability of Upland’s neighborhoods.
                                 Goal HE-1          Strong and healthy neighborhoods with well-
                                                    maintained housing, ample public services, open space,
                                                    and infrastructure that provide a quality place to live.
                                 Policy HE-1.1      Housing Quality. Promote the repair, improvement, and
                                                    rehabilitation of single-family housing, multiple-family
                                                    housing, and mobile homes to enhance the quality of life
                                                    and improve and maintain property values.
                                 Policy HE-1.2      Historic Character. Support the maintenance and
                                                    preservation of the City’s historic districts, historic homes,
                                                    buffers, and other neighborhood features of local
                                                    significance that lend identity to the community.
                                 Policy HE-1.3      Neighborhood Improvement. Encourage maintenance,
                                                    and upgrading of neighborhoods through property
                                                    maintenance codes, graffiti abatement, high quality infill
                                                    housing, and replacement of deteriorated infrastructure.
                                 Policy HE-1.4      Neighborhood Amenities. Maintain a variety of distinctive
                                                    amenities in Upland (landscape, trees, urban design, parks,
                                                    etc.) that provide and enhance the beauty, identity, and
                                                    form of the City’s districts and residential neighborhoods.
                                 Policy HE-1.5      Neighborhood Preservation. Maintain lower density
                                                    residential designations in established low-density
                                                    residential areas, unless conversion to another use is
                                                    encouraged by the General Plan land use plan and policies.
84    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                    Housing Plan
ISSUE #2: HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
Upland is committed to addressing the housing needs of its residents and
meeting its state-mandated responsibilities. Addressing these needs requires
a multifaceted strategy. Housing needs and preferences differ for families,
young and working-age adults, college students, seniors, and other groups.
Therefore, the City’s housing strategy includes facilitating a wide range of
quality housing products—including single-family homes, townhomes,
apartments, and mixed-use residential developments where appropriate.
The City is strategically accommodating growth to address several objectives.
These include preserving residential neighborhoods, supporting economic
development, and managing traffic and safety concerns. Adopted specific
plans propose residential and mixed-use developments while incentives are
in place to revitalize corridors and other neighborhood areas of Upland. The
following goal and policies further these objectives.
Goal HE-2          A diverse supply of housing that is designed, built, and
                   located in a manner that is consistent with land use,
                   zoning, circulation, and open space goals of the City.
Policy HE-2.1      Housing Growth. Direct new housing growth into strategic
                   locations that strengthen the City’s economy, maximize
                   existing and planned infrastructure, and foster the use and
                   development of transit and multimodal transportation.
                   These areas include Historic Downtown, Foothill Boulevard,
                   Southeast Quadrant, and College Heights.
Policy HE-2.2      Housing Diversity: Provide high-quality housing in a range
                   of types, densities, and unit sizes that meet the housing
                   needs of residents of all income levels and household types.
                   This includes single- and multiple-family housing, senior
                   developments, mixed-use projects, and transit-oriented
                   developments.
Policy HE-2.3      Housing Design. Require adherence to design standards
                   with respect to site planning, materials and colors, building
                   treatments, landscaping, open space, parking, and
                   environmentally sustainable design practices that adhere to
                   standards set in general plan and design guidelines.
Policy HE-2.4:     Housing Incentives. Facilitate the development of a mix of
                   prices, types, and affordability of housing products through
                   the implementation of flexible standards, efficient
                   permitting process, and other assistance.
Policy HE-2.5:     Natural Environment. In meeting housing needs, preserve
                   important natural features of Upland’s environment,
                   including hillsides and viewsheds, historic resources, habitat,
                   landscaped amenities, and other distinctive features.
                                                                         CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     85

Housing Plan
                                 ISSUE #3: HOUSING ASSISTANCE
                                 Upland residents exhibit a diversity of housing needs. Some Upland residents
                                 wish to purchase a new home, while others wish to avoid foreclosure. Others
                                 may wish to downsize to housing that is age appropriate, such as senior
                                 housing. Still other residents are seeking to move into their first independent
                                 rental apartment. Within its resource limitations, Upland seeks to improve the
                                 ability of residents to secure and maintain adequate housing. The following
                                 goal and policies serve as a guide in providing housing assistance.
                                 Goal HE-3         Opportunities for moderate and lower income residents
                                                   and households with special needs to rent, purchase, or
                                                   maintain adequate housing in the community.
                                 Policy HE-3.1     Rental Assistance. Continue to support the Upland
                                                   Housing Authority’s efforts to provide rental assistance for
                                                   individuals and families earning lower incomes and the
                                                   modernization and maintenance of existing affordable
                                                   housing.
                                 Policy HE-3.2     Homebuyer         Assistance.       Support    and    increase
                                                   opportunities for residents and Upland employees to
                                                   achieve homeownership through the provision of financial
                                                   or regulatory assistance where feasible.
                                 Policy HE-3.3     Special Needs. Address the special housing needs of
                                                   seniors, families with children, disabled people, homeless
                                                   people, and others with special needs through proactive
                                                   strategies aimed at housing production and assistance.
                                 Policy HE-3.4     Collaborative Partners. Work collaboratively with
                                                   nonprofit, for-profit, and faith-based organizations in the
                                                   community to address the housing and supportive services
                                                   of residents and those with special housing needs.
                                 Policy HE-3.5     Affordable Housing Preservation. Support the
                                                   maintenance, rehabilitation, and continued long-term
                                                   preservation of publicly subsidized rental housing
                                                   affordable to lower income and special need households.
                                 Policy HE-3.6     Mobile Homes. Preserve the long-term affordability,
                                                   condition, quality, and viability of mobile home parks in the
                                                   community through rent stabilization and proactive
                                                   maintenance and repair of units.
                                 Policy HE-3.7     Fair Housing. Promote equal and fair housing opportunities
                                                   for residents from all walks of life to allow for adequate
                                                   choice to purchase or rent a home or live in a neighborhood
                                                   that is best suited to their individual needs.
86    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                  Housing Plan
C.         HOUSING PROGRAMS
PROGRAMS FOR HOUSINGAND NEIGHBORHOOD QUALITY
Program 1: Code Enforcement
The Code Enforcement program is intended to ensure compliance with
municipal codes to maintain the value and safety of property and structures.
The program addresses hazardous vegetation, substandard buildings,
accumulation of debris and vehicles, yard sales, graffiti, stormwater drainage,
green pools, construction without a permit, land use violations, and various
other health and safety codes. The City’s code enforcement officers work with
residents and the business community to remedy code violations in a timely
manner. The code enforcement program also includes graffiti removal. This
program is essential to maintaining and improving the safety, livability, and
value of properties in the City of Upland.
Objective(s):
   Continue to implement code enforcement activities to ensure full
    compliance with City ordinances. Inspect up to 4,000 units annually.
   Develop abatement process for buildings where the property owner does
    not remedy substandard housing conditions; utilize the Administrative
    Citations Ordinance to obtain code compliance.
Responsible Agency:         City Housing Division
Funding Source(s):          CDBG Funds; General Funds
Timeframe:                  Ongoing
Program 2: HOME Improvement
The HOME Improvement Program provides loans of up to $90,000 to lower
income households for repair work to single-family owner-occupied homes.
Funds must be used to correct code deficiencies in the structure. Eligible
improvements include electrical, plumbing, kitchen and bathroom
improvements, furnace and hot water heater replacement, home painting,
structural upgrading, roofing, foundation and drainage improvements,
disabled access, windows, doors and frames, rodent and pest extermination
and repairs, fence improvements, and energy conservation. Loans are
deferred at 0% or 3% interest and are due upon sale or transfer of property,
30 years or no longer occupied as a primary residence, whichever is less.
Objective(s):
    Provide up to 7 HIP loans annually to qualified low and moderate income
     (3 VL; 5 Low) homeowners earning less than 80% of CMFI.
Responsible Agency:         City Housing Division
Funding Source(s):          CalHome; HOME; Housing Rent Revenues
Timeframe:                  Ongoing
                                                                       CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     87

Housing Plan
                                 Program 3: Emergency Repairs for Homeowners
                                 The Emergency Repairs Program for Upland Homeowners Program provides a
                                 grant of up to $4,000 for emergency repairs. The grant is eligible for very low
                                 income homeowners of single-family homes, condominiums, and mobile
                                 homes. The grant can be increased to $5,000 for homeowners wishing to
                                 provide a dollar-for-dollar match above the $4,000 emergency grant limit.
                                 Qualifying home repairs include structural, mechanical, plumbing, electrical,
                                 and code violations, as well as weather-proofing, installation of low-flow
                                 toilets and smoke detectors, HVAC repairs, and accessibility improvements.
                                 This program works in tandem with the code enforcement program where
                                 income qualified homeowners who have housing units with code violations
                                 can be referred to seek grants to make necessary repairs.
                                 Objective(s):
                                  Provide grants to up to 25 (VL) qualified homeowners annually to address
                                   emergency repairs; disseminate information to property owners; and seek
                                   additional funding for the program to ensure its long-term viability.
                                 Responsible Agency:       City Housing Division
                                 Funding Source(s):        CDBG Funds; Housing Rent Revenues
                                 Timeframe:                Ongoing and Annual Basis
                                 Program 4. Rental Acquisition and Rehabilitation
                                 The Rental Acquisition and Rehabilitation Program (RARP) is designed to
                                 assist lower income tenants (whose combined family income does not exceed
                                 80% of the County median income) by providing Upland landlords with loans
                                 to acquire multifamily units and rehabilitate their multifamily properties. The
                                 program offers zero interest deferred loans of up to $30,000 per dwelling unit
                                 for rehabilitation expenses. Eligible improvements include structural, roofing,
                                 insulation, plumbing, electrical, lead paint abatement, accessibility
                                 improvements, foundation work, habitability, health and safety, etc. Code
                                 violations take precedent. The minimum affordability covenant may be 5, 10,
                                 15 and up to 55 years depending on the project, the loan amount, and the
                                 funding source used for the rehabilitation loan.
                                 Objective(s):
                                  Continue to provide ERP grants to up to 4 units annually to address
                                   properties with substantial rehabilitation or maintenance needs.
                                  Work to pursue and purchase properties defaulting on local taxes to
                                   remove substandard housing.
                                 Responsible Agency:       City Housing Division
                                 Funding Source(s):        Home Funds; Housing Rent Revenues
                                 Timeframe:                Ongoing and Annual Basis
88    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                    Housing Plan
Program 5. Historic Preservation
Upland has a rich historic and cultural heritage dating back to the 1800s. The
City has nine official historic districts with hundreds of historic homes. As part
of the Zoning Code update, the City supports the continued preservation of
these important resources. The City promotes the use of appropriate
preservation incentives to encourage owners to designate and maintain their
cultural resources. Incentives may include Mills Act contracts, preservation
easements for the facades of designated structures, use of the California State
Historical Building Code, assistance in processing applications for
nominations to the National Register of Historic Places, special recognitions,
grants and loans for rehabilitation (as funded is available), planning grants,
variances and modifications, and reduction of planning and processing fees.
Objective(s):
 Continue to support the preservation of historic properties through a
  variety of planning, zoning, rehabilitation, and other incentives.
 Seek other funding sources as available to support and augment the
  historic preservation program for historic neighborhoods and homes.
Responsible Agency:          City Planning Division
Funding Source(s):           General funds
Timeframe:                   Ongoing and Annual Basis
Program 6. Five Star Rental Recognition
The Five Star Rental Recognition Program provides recognition to single- and
multifamily rental properties within the City. The program is intended to: to
decrease and/or eliminate blight, substandard structures, crime, and general
code violations; to increase property values; to create a wider selection of
prospective tenants; and to improve the rental areas in Upland. Property
owners can voluntarily allow the inspection of rental property for compliance
with program standards in exchange for becoming Five Star rated. Incentives
include: free newspaper and City website advertisement; installation of a
property sign and listing at City Hall identifying the rental property as Five
Star Standard; eligibility for receiving the “Rental Property of the Year” award;
and a plaque with certificate of Five-Star rating to be displayed to the public.
Objective(s):
 Continue to operate the Five Star Rental Recognition program and
  encourage owners to take Crime-Free Multi-Housing Program training.
 Disseminate information to property owners regarding program and
  publicize quality projects in various public venues.
Responsible Agency:          City Housing Division
Funding Source(s):           Program revenues
Timeframe:                   Ongoing and Annual Basis
                                                                         CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     89

Housing Plan
                                 PROGRAMS TO IMPROVE HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
                                 Program 7: Specific Plans
                                 Upland has developed specific plans to guide development of key areas in
                                 the community according to smart growth principles. These include the
                                 creation and restoration of diverse, walkable, compact, vibrant, mixed-use
                                 communities composed of the same program components as conventional
                                 development, but assembled in a more integrated fashion. These contain
                                 housing, work places, shops, entertainment, schools, parks, and civic facilities
                                 essential to the daily lives of the residents, all within easy walking distance.
                                 The intent is to design complete neighborhoods that are coherent, visually
                                 attractive, and integrated. Specific plans with remaining development
                                 capacity include College Park, Park View, and Upland Crossing.
                                 Objective(s):
                                   Continue to implement remaining specific plans to facilitate the
                                    development of high quality infill residential development in Upland.
                                   Process amendments needed to encourage the production of housing for
                                    all income levels, in particular for moderate income households.
                                 Responsible Agency:          City Planning Division
                                 Funding Source(s):           General Funds
                                 Timeframe(s):                Ongoing
                                 Program 8: Historic Downtown Specific Plan
                                 Upland adopted the Historic Downtown Specific Plan in 2012. This specific
                                 plan covers the City’s historic core and contains a transit station, civic center,
                                 parks, schools, housing, and commercial uses. The specific plan denotes nine
                                 districts, each with a defined purpose and mix of land uses. To facilitate the
                                 production of multiple-family housing that will meet the RHNA and
                                 affordability requirements, the area allows for more than 1,000 new housing
                                 units, with multiple-family and mixed uses allowed by right at densities of up
                                 to 55 units per acre. The City is working with developers to build affordable
                                 senior housing, townhomes, and mixed use. The City will continue to manage
                                 the implementation of this plan, which includes strategies priorities to
                                 increase housing opportunities within the district.
                                 Objective(s):
                                   Continue to implement the Historic Downtown Specific Plan to facilitate
                                    high quality infill residential development in Upland.
                                   Annually review Specific Plan progress and priority implementation
                                    programs and make revisions as needed to facilitate new development.
                                 Responsible Agency:          City Planning Division
                                 Funding Source(s):           General Funds
                                 Timeframe(s):                Ongoing and Annual Basis
90    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                    Housing Plan
Program 9: Second Units
The Upland Municipal Code allows secondary and accessory units in
residential zones. Originally, these units were only permitted in the RS zones;
however, the new Zoning Code allows such uses in all residential zones. These
housing units provide additional income for the homeowner, while also
providing affordable housing opportunities for family members, students,
caretakers, seniors, and other individuals seeking housing in Upland. City staff
report that 6 to 8 units are approved each year. The units are not required to
be deed restricted, but are typically affordable to moderate income
households. The City will continue to support the production of second units
and guest quarters that meet the requirements in the municipal code.
Objective(s):
   Continue to process second and accessory dwelling units as permitted by
    the municipal code.
   Track the number of units produced by type and residential covenants
    issued during the planning period.
Responsible Agency:         City Planning Division
Funding Source(s):          General Funds
Timeframe:                  Ongoing and Annual basis
Program 10. Green Valley Initiative
The Green Valley Initiative is a collaborative effort to bring jobs, commerce,
and a better quality of life to the people of the Inland Empire communities. As
a member of this unique bi-county collaborative, Upland works to develop
model policies and programs for sustainable economic development,
education, and growth. In addition, the City illustrates its commitment to
promoting environmental awareness and sustainability by encouraging the
adaptive reuse of historic structures, implementing gray water and recycled
water use, and through integrated waste management programs. Finally, the
City implements the CalGreen Building Code, ensuring the latest practices in
sustainable development and building design in housing. The general plan
contains additional programs on sustainable development.
Objective(s):
    Participate in the Green Valley Initiative’s regional meetings and outreach
     efforts to promote a healthy economic and environmental future.
    Continue implementation of the City’s other green initiatives, including
     waste management, water conservation and use, and CalGreen programs.
  Responsible Agency:       City Housing Division, other City departments
  Funding Source(s):        General Funds
  Timeframe:                Ongoing
                                                                         CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     91

Housing Plan
                                 Program 11. Water Priority System
                                 The City Public Works Department, San Antonio Water Company, West End
                                 Consolidated Water Company, and MWD provide water to Upland residents.
                                 The Inland Empire Utilities Agency (IEUA) provides sewer services. Senate Bill
                                 1087 (2005) requires all local governments to transmit a copy of the housing
                                 element to water and sewer service providers that serve their community. It
                                 also requires water and sewer providers to have a policy that gives priority for
                                 service allocations to proposed projects with housing units affordable to
                                 lower income households if a shortfall in supply occurs. Because the City is a
                                 majority owner in two water utilities (except for MWD), the City will actively
                                 encourage these entities to draft and adopt a water priority system. The City
                                 will also notify IEUA of their responsibility under state law.
                                 Objective(s):
                                     Encourage water and sewer providers to have a water and sewer priority
                                      system in place in compliance with state housing element law.
                                 Responsible Agency:         Public Works Department
                                 Funding Source(s):          General Funds
                                 Timeframe:                  2014
                                 Program 12. Neighborhood Improvements
                                 Having adequate public facilities is essential for a complete community. These
                                 services provide a high quality of life for residents and workforce, improve
                                 property values, and increase City revenues that are available to fund and
                                 expand City services. This includes the improvement and maintenance of
                                 libraries, sewer system, school services, drainage and water system, police
                                 and fire, parks and recreational facilities, private recreation facilities required
                                 for new residential development, and other services. The City prepares a
                                 capital improvement program on an annual basis to identify and prioritize the
                                 improvements needed. Certain services are tied more directly to specific plan
                                 areas, others to private developments, and others to the entire community.
                                 The City of Upland will continue to make such infrastructure and service
                                 improvements that further the vision of the City Council.
                                 Objective(s):
                                    Continue monitoring, planning, and              programming        for   public
                                     improvements that serve the community.
                                 Responsible Agency:         City Planning Division, Public Works
                                 Funding Source(s):          General Funds, Measure I, CDBG
                                 Timeframe:                  Ongoing
92    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                   Housing Plan
PROGRAMS FOR HOUSING ASSISTANCE
Program 13. Homeownership Assistance
The Housing Division provides low interest FTHB loans, as funds are available,
to help individuals and families who wish to purchase a home, but are unable
to qualify and/or come up with the necessary down payment. This program is
designed to help persons who would not otherwise achieve the American
dream of owning their own home. A program loan is a silent second
mortgage; a 0% to 3% simple interest bearing loan (interest free after 20
years) with all payments deferred until the first occurrence of sale,
refinancing, full payment of the first mortgage, or 30 years. As of 2013, the
maximum assistance is 30% of the purchase price or $108,000 (whichever is
less,) and the home price cannot exceed $362,790. Because the program is
dependent on State HOME funding, and due to loss of RDA funds, it is
necessary to seek additional grants to continue and expand the program.
Objective(s):
        Continue to provide up to 2 FTHB loans annually to qualified low
         income homebuyers and advertise program availability.
        Annually evaluate the City's funding capacity and as needed, pursue
         additional HOME/CalHOME funds from HCD.
Responsible Agency:         City Housing Division
Funding Source(s):          HOME, CalHOME, and Housing rental revenues
Timeframe:                  Ongoing and Annual Basis
Program 14: Rental Housing Assistance
The Upland Housing Authority is responsible for implementing the Section 8
rental assistance. Under this program, the Housing Authority extends rental
subsidies to very low income households who spend more than 30% of their
gross income on housing. Rental assistance not only addresses housing
affordability but also overcrowding, by allowing families that “double up” to
afford their housing. According to the Upland Housing Authority, about 600
residents receive monthly rental assistance under this program, including 210
senior households and 400 large and small families as of January 2013. The
Upland Housing Authority is also responsible for managing public housing in
Upland, the public housing modernization program, and partnering with the
City on various affordable housing programs and outreach.
Objective(s):
   Continue to participate in the federal housing choice voucher program
    and family self-sufficiency program allocating a total of 600 vouchers.
Responsible Agency:         Upland Housing Authority
Funding Source(s):          FHA housing choice vouchers
Timeframe:                  Ongoing and Annual Basis
                                                                        CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     93

Housing Plan
                                 Program 15. Housing Incentives
                                 Upland implements a toolkit of incentives to facilitate the construction of
                                 affordable and market rate housing. These include a density bonus ordinance,
                                 a minor modification and variance process, lot consolidation efforts, etc. The
                                 density bonus allows the development of additional units and the provision
                                 of regulatory/financial incentives for projects providing affordable units. Both
                                 the minor modification and variance processes facilitate infill development.
                                 Financial assistance may also be provided subject to availability. Although
                                 apartments are feasible and built at current parking and garage requirement
                                 standards, there are situations where flexibility is beneficial, particularly
                                 outside the downtown and mixed use corridors.
                                 Objective(s):
                                    Continue to permit and encourage density bonuses, lot consolidations,
                                     and other means to build market rate and affordable housing. Amend the
                                     Zoning Code to allow half covered/ uncovered spaces for studio and 1-
                                     bedroom units in projects outside the downtown and mixed use corridors
                                     provided the project qualifies for a density bonus or is deed restricted as
                                     affordable. Advertise the availability of incentives at the planning public
                                     counter and through the development review process.
                                 Responsible Agency:          City Planning Division
                                 Funding Source(s):           General Funds
                                 Timeframe:                   Ongoing
                                 Program 16: Mobile Home Rent Stabilization
                                 The City’s Mobile Home Rent Ordinance is intended to protect occupants of
                                 from unreasonable rent increases while still recognizing the need for park
                                 owners to receive a just and reasonable return on their property and increase
                                 rents at a rate sufficient for covering the costs of repairs, maintenance,
                                 insurance, upkeep, and amenities. Under the Mobile Home Rent Ordinance,
                                 the annual rent increase is indexed to the consumer price index. The
                                 Ordinance covers six mobile home parks: Mountain View Estates, Oasis Mobile
                                 Estates, Upland Cascade, Upland Eldorado, Upland Meadows Mobile Estates,
                                 and Upland View Terrace. The City had been updating the Rent Review
                                 ordinance in response to community concerns, but the process is on hold
                                 while the courts decide the legality of rent stabilization laws.
                                 Objective(s):
                                    Continue to enforce the Mobile Home Rent Ordinance; complete review
                                     and revisions to the Rent Ordinance after the courts complete proceedings
                                     on the legality of rent stabilization.
                                 Responsible Agency:          City Housing Division
                                 Funding Sources:             General funds
                                 Timeframe:                   Ongoing
94    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                   Housing Plan
Program 17: Housing at Risk of Conversion
Upland has 17 assisted multiple family projects containing units affordable to
lower income seniors, families, and individuals. The City periodically monitors
its affordable housing projects to determine properties at risk of conversion.
Eight projects totaling 268 affordable units are at risk of conversion before
2024, though none have indicated a desire to convert to non-low-income use.
Three City-owned projects are not technically at risk of conversion, as these
projects will also need to be reviewed for options to refinance the mortgage
revenue bonds in light of changes in redevelopment law. The City will also
notify qualified entities if a project is proposed for conversion.
Objective(s):
  Monitor publicly assisted multiple units at risk of conversion; support
   efforts to preserve the units through grants, tax credits, bonds, and transfer
   of ownership to entities willing to keep the units affordable.
  Inform tenants and property owners of their rights and responsibilities to
   provide adequate notice and other procedures if an affordable project is
   proposed for conversion to market rate housing.
Responsible Agency:           City Housing Division
Funding Source(s):            General Fund, Housing Rent Revenue Fund
Timeframe:                    Ongoing
Program 18: Low Income Housing Assistance
The City offers many programs to encourage the production, provision, and
preservation of affordable housing, including housing affordable to very low,
low, and extremely low income households. These include Program 17,
Housing Incentives; Program 15, Preservation of Affordable Housing; Program
2, Housing Improvement; Program 3, Emergency Repairs; Program 4, Rental
Acquisition & Rehabilitation; and Program 14, Rental Housing Assistance. The
City will continue to offer these programs and offer additional incentives or
support as described below in the objectives.
Objective(s):
  Offer expedited permit processing, contact developers annually about
   potential sites, and support applications of developers to build affordable
   housing that targets extremely low income households in Upland.
  Assist in the development of housing for lower-income households by
   outreaching to affordable housing developers, exploring available funding
   options, and supporting grant applications for housing.
Responsible Agency:           City Housing Division
Funding Source(s):            General Fund, Housing Rent Revenue Fund
Timeframe:                    Ongoing and Annual
                                                                        CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     95

Housing Plan
                                 Program 19: Homeless Services
                                 Housing element law requires cities to proactively address the needs of the
                                 homeless population, including emergency shelters, transitional housing,
                                 supportive housing, and single-room-occupancy units. The City recently
                                 conducted a special census to determine the needs of homeless people.
                                 Currently the Zoning Code lacks a definition of homeless shelters, transitional
                                 housing, and permanent supportive housing consistent with the Health and
                                 Safety Code. In addition, the Zoning Code does not permit such facilities
                                 consistent with state law. The City will be updating its Zoning Code to achieve
                                 consistency with state law with respect to housing for homeless people.
                                 Objective(s):
                                    Define shelters, transitional housing, and permanent supportive housing
                                     consistent with state law, permit shelters with a ministerial permit in the
                                     Industrial zone; and establish objective standards as allowed by state law.
                                    In all zones allowing residential uses, permit transitional and supportive
                                     housing as a residential use and only subject to those restrictions that
                                     apply to other residential uses of the same type in the same zone.
                                  Responsible Agency:        Development Services Department,
                                  Funding Sources:           General Fund, Housing Rent Revenue Fund
                                  Timeframe:                 Within one year of adoption of the housing element
                                 Program 20: Administrative Capacity
                                 The dissolution of redevelopment agencies and loss of funding has required
                                 many cities to look for ways to activate the nonprofit sector and seek to
                                 collaborate and leverage resources to address community needs. The City has
                                 many active nonprofit organizations and recently commissioned a Service
                                 Council to address local needs. As the City continues to realign resources,
                                 augmenting its administrative capacity is a key concern.
                                 Objective(s):
                                 Utilize the Service Council to coordinate the City, faith-based organizations,
                                 other non-profits, Upland Housing Authority, County, and other stakeholders
                                 and create a network of community and mainstream resources. The Service
                                 Council will develop and implement a Homeless Services Plan that addresses:
                                     -Community Outreach, Engagement, and Education Initiatives
                                     -Treatment and Permanent Supportive Housing Initiatives
                                     -Housing First/Rapid Re-housing Initiatives
                                     -Chronic Homelessness
                                     -Enforcement
                                 Responsible Agency:         Community Services Department
                                 Funding Sources:            General Fund
                                 Timeframe:                  Ongoing and 2015/2016
96    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                                                                                                     Housing Plan
Program 21: Housing for People with Disabilities
The City of Upland allows residential care facilities, senior housing, and other
similar facilities, that serve the needs of people with disabilities in the
community. California law requires that residential care facilities that serve six
or fewer persons be allowed by right in all residential zones and treated the
same as any other similar residential use. Presently, the Municipal Code needs
to be updated to reflect changes to state fair housing law. For individuals who
are disabled, the City is updating its Zoning Code and will provide a
reasonable accommodation process. The City of Upland also has many
organizations that serve disabled people, including those with
developmental disabilities. This includes OPARC Center, Easter Seals
Development Center, Salem Christian Homes, and other organizations.
Objective(s):
   Amend the Zoning Code to define and allow residential care facilities
    serving six or fewer residents as a by-right use in all residential zones;
    remove or amend the definition of a family in the Zoning Code. Permit
    larger facilities with a CUP in two additional mixed-use zones.
   Support agencies in seeking funding, as available, for the provision of
    housing and services for people with disabilities, including developmental
    disabilities. Reach out to potential developers or service agencies as part
    of the annual Action Plan solicitation for CDBG.
   Create reasonable accommodation process and procedure as part of the
    Zoning Code update to allow flexibility in land use, building, and
    development standards to accommodate people with disabilities.
Responsible Agency:           City Housing Division
Funding Sources:              General funds
Timeframe:                    2014
Program 22: Fair Housing
Upland implements programs to promote housing opportunities for all
persons, regardless of protected status. As an entitlement jurisdiction, Upland
prepares an Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing Choice (AI) to
periodically identify constraints or obstacles to fair housing opportunity. The
City also contracts with the Inland Fair Housing and Mediation Board (IHFMB)
to provide fair housing services that affirmatively further fair housing. Services
include landlord and tenant education, community outreach and advocacy,
and enforcement of fair housing laws. IFHMB also implements the policies
and recommendations, where applicable, articulated in Upland’s AI.
Objective(s):
   Promote fair housing practices through contract with IFHMB. Comply with
    all state and federal fair housing requirements when implementing
    housing programs or delivering housing-related services.
                                                                          CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT     97

Housing Plan
                                    Continue to prepare the Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing Choice
                                     as required under federal law; implement the recommendations to
                                     improve fair housing as contained therein.
                                    Disseminate fair housing outreach materials at the library, website, and
                                     counter so that residents and landlords are aware of their rights,
                                     responsibilities, and opportunities for resolving fair housing concerns.
                                 Responsible Agency:                 City and Inland Fair Housing and Mediation Board
                                 Funding Sources:                    CDBG Funds
                                 Timeframe:                          Ongoing and Annual Basis
                                 QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
                                 Through the housing programs outlined above, the City of Upland aims to
                                 obtain the minimum quantified objectives pursuant to state law and subject
                                 to availability of private funds, grants, and local, state, and federal funds.
                                 Table 6-1 summarizes the specific number of housing units/households
                                 anticipated to be served between 2014 and 2021.
                                 Table 6-1: Housing Element Quantified Objectives
                                                                                      Households Assisted by Income Level
                                                                              Ext.         Very                    Mod-          Above
                                                                                                       Low
                                 Housing Program Area                         Low          Low                     erate           Mod
                                 New Construction1                             191          191         260         294            653
                                 Housing Rehabilitation2                        -0-         216          72          -0-           N/A
                                 Housing Preservation3                                320               560          56            N/A
                                 Rental Assistance4                             416          165        25          N/A            N/A
                                 Homebuyer Assistance5                           -0-         -0-         16          -0-           N/A
                                 Mobile Home Rent Stabilization6                                   806                             N/A
                                 Code Enforcement Case Resolution7                                 800                             N/A
                                 Source: City of Upland, 2013.
                                 Note: Quantified objectives dependent on continued funding.
                                 Notes:
                                 1
                                   Housing construction goals refer to the provision of sites to address the 2014–2021 regional
                                   housing needs assessment.
                                 2
                                   Housing rehabilitation goals include the Housing Improvement, Emergency Repairs for
                                   Homeowners, and Rental Acquisition and Rehabilitation programs.
                                 3
                                   Housing preservation goals refer to the preservation of the City’s entire inventory of publicly
                                   subsidized multiple-family housing.
                                 4
                                   Rental assistance goals refers to the annual number of housing choice vouchers issued by the
                                   Upland Housing Authority.
                                 5
                                   Homeownership goals refer to the City’s homeownership assistance program.
                                 6
                                   Mobile home rent stabilization goals refer to all units under the program, regardless of income level.
                                 7
                                   Code enforcement refers to units inspected citywide and in focus areas.
98    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                       Appendix A
Appendix A: Resolution
Appendix A
           This page intentionally left blank
                             Appendix A
CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT    A-1
Appendix A
                                       
A-2  CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                       Appendix B
Appendix B: HCD Letter
Appendix B
           This page intentionally left blank
                             Appendix B
CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT    B-1
Appendix B
                                 
B-2  CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT

                           Appendix C
Appendix C: Site Inventory
Appendix C
           This page intentionally left blank
                                                                                                   Appendix C
Table C-1: Upland Sites Inventory
                            General                                                   Density   Realistic
ite   Map ID      APN       Plan    Zoning District Existing Use               Acres  (DU/AC)   Capacity
Downtown Sites Inventory
              1   104638309 SP                      public parking lot           0.13
                                    Arrow Hwy
              2   104638310 SP                      public parking lot           0.21
    1 Subtotal                                                                  0.34         15          4
              3   104639203 SP                      public parking lot           0.19
              4   104639202 SP      Old Town        public parking lot           0.16
              5   104639201 SP                      public parking lot           0.18
    2 Subtotal                                                                  0.53         35        10
              6   104640208 SP                      public parking lot           0.14
              7   104640207 SP                      public parking lot           0.16
              8   104640206 SP      Old Town/       public parking lot           0.00
              9   104640205 SP      1st St. Overlay public parking lot           0.13
             10   104640204 SP                      public parking lot           0.13
             11   104640203 SP                      public parking lot           0.14
             12   104640202 SP                      public parking lot           0.14
    3 Subtotal                                                                  0.84         55        45
             13   104640312 SP                      public parking lot           0.05
             14   104640313 SP                      public parking lot           0.17
             15   104640314 SP                      public parking lot           0.03
             16   104640315 SP      Old Town        public parking lot           0.12
             17   104640316 SP                      public parking lot           0.12
             18   104640317 SP                      public parking lot           0.12
             19   104640318 SP                      public parking lot           0.14
    4 Subtotal                                                                  0.75         35        25
             20   104656201 SP                      Industrial                   0.23
             21   104656203 SP      Citrus          Industrial                   0.23
                                    Transportation
             22   104656202 SP                      Industrial                   0.23
             23   104656201 SP                      Industrial                   0.28
    5  Subtotal                                                                 0.97         55        36
             59   104657117 SP                                                   3.98
                                    Residential     Vacant site proposed for
             60   104657119 SP      Transit                                      1.11
                                                    attached condominiums or
             61   104657118 SP                      townhomes                    4.20
    6  Subtotal                                                                 9.29         55      203
             24   104657101 SP                      Structures on site are       0.71
                                    Residential     partially burned down;
             25   104657115 SP      Transit                                      3.75
                                                    currently being used for
             26   104657116 SP                      auto and RV storage          0.71
    7 Subtotal                                                                  5.18         55      206
                                                                    CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT       C-1
Appendix C
      Table C-1: Upland Sites Inventory
                                  General                                                    Density   Realistic
      Site  Map ID    APN         Plan    Zoning District  Existing Use               Acres  (DU/AC)   Capacity
                   27 104658212   SP                       Industrial                   0.20
                   28 104658213   SP                       Industrial                   0.20
                   29 104658214   SP      Citrus Transp.   Industrial                   0.20
                   30 104658215   SP                       Industrial                   0.20
                   31 104658216   SP                       Industrial                   0.24
          8  Subtotal                                                                  1.04         55         40
                                                           Schwartz bldg. with small
                                                           portion used for trucking
                                                           school. Owner desires to
                   32 104658201   SP      Citrus Transp.   reuse or sell for housing    2.38
          9 Subtotal                                                                   2.38         55         85
                                                           Being used for marginal
                                                           manufacturing and storage;
                                                           owner looking to sell or
                   33 104658101   SP      Citrus Transp.   reuse storage - industrial   1.81
         10 Subtotal                                                                   1.81         55         81
                   34 104659324   SP                       public parking lot           0.16
                   35 104659318   SP      Old Town         public parking lot           0.36
         11 Subtotal                                                                   0.52         35         18
                                          Old Town/
                   36 104659224   SP      Historic Core    public parking lot           0.17
         12 Subtotal                                                                   0.17         25           4
                   37 104659204   SP                       public parking lot           0.14
                                          Old Town/1st St.
                   38 104659205   SP      Overlay          public parking lot           0.21
                   39 104659206   SP                       public parking lot           0.21
         13 Subtotal                                                                   0.57         55         31
                   40 104659108   SP                       vacant                       0.21
                   41 104659109   SP      Old Town/1st St. vacant                       0.18
                                          Overlay
                   42 104659110   SP                       vacant                       0.20
                   43 104659111   SP                       vacant                       0.15
         14 Subtotal                                                                   0.74         55         34
                   44 104660109   SP      Euclid           commercial                   0.33
         15 Subtotal                                                                   0.33         40         12
                   45 104660105   SP      Euclid           private parking lot          0.17
         16 Subtotal                                                                   0.17         40           5
                   46 104660207   SP                                                    0.32
                                          Citrus Transp.   Vacant lumber yard and
                   47 104660208   SP                       parking with single owner    0.32
         17 Subtotal                                                                   0.64         55         34
C-2  CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                                                                          Appendix C
Table C-1: Upland Sites Inventory
                                General                                                     Density    Realistic
Site    Map ID        APN       Plan    Zoning District Existing Use                 Acres  (DU/AC)    Capacity
                 48   104660209 SP                      public parking lot              .11
                                        Citrus Transp.
                 49   104660210 SP                      public parking lot              .12
   18            50   104660211 SP                      public parking lot              .37
         Subtotal                                                                     0.60          55         34
                 51   104660308 SP      Citrus Transp.  single-family residential      0.12
   19    Subtotal                                                                     0.12  55                   2
                 52   104660310 SP      Citrus Transp.  storage - industrial           0.16
   20   Subtotal                                                                      0.16          55           7
                                                        Baker building; currently
                                                        rock climbing gym and
                                                        partially used as junk yard.
                                                        Property has been proposed
                 53   104660312 SP      Citrus Transp.  for redevelopment              1.56
   21   Subtotal                                                                      1.56          55         74
                 54   104660408 SP      Citrus Transp.  vacant industrial              1.29
   22   Subtotal                                                                      1.29          55         55
                 55   104660501 SP      Citrus Transp.  SANBAG - vacant                1.13
   23   Subtotal                                                                      1.13          55         46
                 56   104660503 SP      Citrus Transp.  SANBAG - vacant                1.14
   24   Subtotal                                                                      1.14          55         46
                                                        Chevron gas station; long
                 58   104661315 SP      Citrus Transp.  term future doubtful           0.41
   25   Subtotal                                                                      0.41          25         11
                                                        Drive-up restaurant adjacent
                 57   104661317 SP      Euclid          to ARCO viability uncertain    0.46
   26   Subtotal                                                                      0.46          25           8
Other Specific Plan Sites
                      100549104 SP      ParkView        Vacant                         23.2
                      100548101 SP      ParkView        Vacant                          9.0
                      100548102 SP      ParkView        Vacant                            1
27      Subtotal                                                                      32.2     9–16          400
                      100737106 SP      College Park    Vacant                         2.75
28      Subtotal                                                                       2.75     12             92
                      100702115 SP      Upland Crossing Vacant                         15.1
                      100702116 SP      Upland Crossing Vacant                         12.3
29      Subtotal                                                                      32.2    12–20          355
Source: City of Upland, 2013
                                                                        CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT           C-3

Appendix C
                                This page intentionally left blank.
C-4  CITY OF UPLAND | HOUSING ELEMENT
 
