City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Circulation Element 2011
                                      City of El Paso de Robles
                                             General Plan
                                         Circulation Element
                                                Prepared for:
                                         City of El Paso de Robles
                                   Community Development Department
                                                Prepared by:
                                                Fehr & Peers
                                Adopted: April 5, 2011 via Resolution 11-032
                           Amended: December 18, 2012 via Resolution 12-185
                                                     CE-i
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Circulation Element 2011
                                                            TABLE OF CONTENTS
Circulation Element ...................................................................................................................................... CE-1
     Goals, Policies, and Action Items ............................................................................................................. CE-1
     Circulation Issues ..................................................................................................................................... CE-5
     Circulation Standards and Development Policies .................................................................................... CE-13
                                                                    APPENDICES
Appendix A: Roadway Capacity Utilization Analysis
Appendix B: City of El Paso de Robles Travel Demand Forecasting Final model Development Report
                                                                LIST OF FIGURES
Figure CE-1 Circulation Element Master Plan .............................................................................................. CE-7
                                                                 LIST OF TABLES
Table CE-1 Existing and 2025 Roadway Segment Utilization ...................................................................... CE-8
                                                                           CE-ii
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Circulation Element 2011
This document has been developed to emphasize that the first priority of the circulation system is to
provide mobility to people. This emphasis, along with the high costs and quality of life impacts of roadway
widening, supports the development of an efficient system allowing travel by multiple modes. Efficiency in
this context is defined as using facilities to their maximum extent possible, e.g. the efficiency as viewed
from an economic perspective.
GOALS, POLICIES, AND ACTION ITEMS
GOAL CE-1: Establish a safe, balanced, efficient, and multimodal circulation system, focusing on
the mobility of people, and preserving the City’s small town character and quality of life.
POLICY CE-1A: Circulation Master Plan. Revise/update the City’s Circulation Master Plan to address the
mobility needs of all users of the streets, roads and highways including bicyclists, children, persons with
disabilities, motorists, movers of commercial goods, pedestrians, users of public transportation, and
seniors as follows:
          a. Improve the circulation network on a prioritized basis;
          b. Provide adequate access for emergency vehicles and evacuation;
          c. Improve mobility through and access to Downtown Paso Robles by implementing City
              Council adopted Town Center and Uptown Plans;
          d. Establish safe pedestrian and bicycle paths, for children and their parents to schools and
              other major destinations such as downtown, retail and job centers;
          e. Maintain mobility for all modes by encouraging; flexible and off-set working hours, transit
              improvements; pedestrian and bikeway improvements; and public outreach as to the
              availability and benefit of alternative modes of travel;
          f. Require new development to mitigate its impact on the transportation network.
          g. Utilize roadways to achieve multiple environmental benefits through integration of Low-Impact
              Development storm water management features in City streets.
          Action Item 1. Develop a multimodal transportation mitigation fee program so that new
          development contributes to improvements that offset cumulative impacts to mobility. The impact
          fee program will list needed improvements to automobile, pedestrian, bicycle, and transit facilities.
          To encourage the reduction of City-wide VMT (Vehicle Miles Traveled), the mitigation fee
          program will recognize and support Transportation Demand Management (TDM) strategies
          associated with new development. Fees shall be assessed in relation to cumulative impacts and
          shall be proportional to the number of auto trips generated by the development.
          Action Item 2. Set conditions of approval of development applications to provide access for all
          modes of travel and to make appropriate improvements to the transportation system serving
          subject sites including frontage improvements and all improvements needed to mitigate
          transportation impacts.
          Action Item 3. Preserve right-of-way in accordance with the Circulation Master Plan and all
          adopted Plan Lines.
          Action Item 4. Request the County to mitigate transportation impacts to City facilities by requiring
          participation by County development projects in the City’s transportation impact fee program as
          appropriate.
          Action Item 5. Update the Zoning, Subdivision, Streets and Sidewalk chapters of the Municipal
          Code, as well as the Standard Conditions of Approval and Standard Specifications and Details.
          These updates shall reflect a “complete streets” approach where all modes of travel are routinely
          accommodated, and environmental benefits would result from integration of LID storm water
          management facilities in streets and sidewalks.
                                                       CE-1

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Circulation Element 2011
          Action Item 6. Implement the City’s Traffic Calming Program as funding is available.
          Neighborhood preservation and context shall be a factor in the consideration of community
          mobility objectives.
          Action Item 7. Continue to actively seek federal, state, and regional grants and funding.
          Action Item 8. Construct roundabouts in lieu of traffic signals where appropriate conditions exist
          to maximize the efficiency of streets, maintain continuous but moderate traffic flow, reduce
          accident severity, and enhance pedestrian and cyclist activity.
          Action Item 9. Install all transportation improvements in accordance with current accessibility
          standards.
          Action Item 10. Establish limitations on truck traffic in residential areas and adopt designated
          truck routes.
          Action Item 11. Develop and adopt transportation impact study guidelines that specify the
          process by which new development impacts are identified. These guidelines shall include specific
          performance measures and thresholds for the identification of impacts and mitigation measures in
          accordance with the goals herein, including person mobility, the reduction in VMT and the
          development of a balanced transportation network for all modes. Street widths and consideration
          of additional traffic lanes shall be evaluated in the context of potential impacts to community
          character, convenience for non-auto modes, safety and cost/benefit.
          Action Item 12. The City will work in coordination with Caltrans on congestion management
          strategies on SR 46 and US 101. These strategies will include improved connectivity for all
          modes of transportation across these corridors and in areas on either side of these facilities. The
          City and Caltrans will work in concert with the most recent Regional Transportation Plan.
          Action Item 13. The City shall monitor the performance of the transportation network on a regular
          basis. The City will optimize traffic signals to maximize the efficiency of the existing network. The
          City shall explore the feasibility of coordinating all traffic signals with a centralized traffic signal
          control system.
          Action Item 14. Maintain and/or improve emergency vehicle access on all existing streets. New
          development shall provide emergency vehicle access as required by all applicable codes and the
          Emergency Services Department.
          Action Item 15. Integrate the City’s traffic model with City land use planning and the regional
          traffic model produced by the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments.
          Action Item 16. View all transportation improvements, new or retrofit, as opportunities to
          improve safety, access, and mobility for all travelers and recognize bicycle, pedestrian, and
          transit modes as integral elements of the transportation system.
          Action Item 17.       Transportation polices should link transportation planning and land use
          planning.
          Action Item 18. Transportation systems and facilities should be planned, designed and
          constructed so as not to serve as barriers to community resources.
          Action Item 19. Transportation improvements shall improve accessibility and promote physical
          activity.
                                                       CE-2

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Circulation Element 2011
POLICY CE-1B: Reduce Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT). The City shall strive to reduce VMT generated
per household per weekday by making efficient use of existing transportation facilities and by providing
direct routes for pedestrians and bicyclists through the implementation of sustainable planning principles.
          Action Item 1. New developments shall conform to the following guidelines to the maximum
          extent possible:
           •   New streets and intersections shall be designed for continuous flow at moderate speeds.
               Low volume residential streets should be designed for speeds of 25 miles per hour or less.
               Higher order roadways shall be designed for 35 mph or less with stable flows. Roundabouts
               shall be considered in lieu of traffic signals for intersection control as needed.
           •   To the extent practical, new residential streets shall provide a grid roadway system with
               block lengths of 300 feet or more and not longer than 600 feet. Cul-de-sac streets shall be
               discouraged. Street widths shall be no greater than as needed to accommodate emergency
               service vehicles. Design standards compatible with traditional neighborhood shall be
               developed.
           •   Lane configurations for new intersections shall be limited to provide for moderate speeds
               and pedestrian and cyclist safety. Congestion during certain time periods shall be accepted
               in exchange for shorter pedestrian and cyclist crossing distances, less overall paved area,
               reduced costs and preservation of small town character.
           •   Circulation systems shall provide for all modes of travel and shall typically include sidewalks,
               bicycle lanes, and transit stop amenities. Continuous paths of travel shall be established
               and connected for walking and bicycling from and throughout new developments to
               downtown and other key destinations. As appropriate and practical, all development shall
               conform to the most current Bike Master Plan adopted by the City Council and the most
               current trail system plan. Impact fees shall be assessed to mitigate impacts and to
               contribute to the development of the bike and pedestrian master plans.
           •   New specific plans shall include a mix of uses that are well connected for all modes and built
               at higher densities to help minimize the number of single occupant vehicle trips and reduce
               vehicle miles traveled.
           Action Item 2. Develop well connected routes for bicycles throughout the City in accordance
           with the most current council adopted Bike Master Plan.
           Action Item 3. The City shall make the travel demand model available to consultants of land
           development applications to verify traffic generation assumptions in accordance with the General
           Plan. The model will be used to estimate the change in VMT resulting from proposed
           development.
           Action Item 4. To the extent feasible, maintain a general plan that provides for a reasonable,
           ongoing balance between jobs and housing units of various types to maximize the potential for
           residents to live in the community in which they work. This approach reduces the potential for
           longer vehicle commutes and reduces City-generated and Countywide VMT.
POLICY CE-1C: Airport. Improve/expand transportation to and from the Paso Robles Municipal Airport as
set forth in the Airport Master Plan.
          Action Item 1. Establish policy and actions items as part of the Airport Master Plan and Airport
          Land Use Plan Updates.
          Action Item 2. Pursue federal and state grants for airport improvement projects.
          Action Item 3. Enhance bicycle, pedestrian and transit access to allow employees and
          passengers to use non-automobile modes of travel to and from the Airport.
POLICY CE-1 D: Transit. Improve and expand transit services.
                                                        CE-3

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Circulation Element 2011
          Action Item 1. Continue operation of local bus service including inter-connectivity with regional
          transit.
          Action Item 2. Coordinate with the San Luis Obispo Regional Transit Authority to improve
          information available on transit options and support advertising/outreach programs for transit.
          Action Item 3. Develop Park and Ride Lots at convenient locations.
          Action Item 4. Establish a Master Plan of transit routes within the City coordinated with regional
          routes. Require new development to include design elements that promote transit use in
          accordance with the Master Plan such as locating sheltered bus stops near neighborhood focal
          points, shopping and service destinations.
          Action Item 5. Locate transit routes on streets serving medium and high density development
          where feasible.
          Action Item 6. Link neighborhoods to transit stops and park-and-ride lots by providing direct
          bicycle and pedestrian access.
          Action Item 7. Support the development of a transit/trolley loop serving the Downtown area to
          encourage a park-once strategy.
          Action Item 8. Support and improve the multi-modal facility on Pine Street.            Consider the
          establishment of a similar facility on the east side of the City.
          Action Item 9. Support convenient transit service to employment centers and government
          centers as funding allows. Work with San Luis Obispo Regional Transit Authority (SLORTA) to
          provide fixed route and/or commuter bus service as appropriate.
          Action Item 10. Develop a plan to monitor transit system performance and evaluate expansions
          to transit service.
POLICY CE-1E: Rail. Promote regional, interstate and intra-state rail service.
          Action Item 1. Maintain adequate freight rail service (to the extent freight service does not
          conflict with the Town Centre Plan).
          Action Item 2. In conjunction with the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments, support
          expanding Amtrak rail service.
          Action Item 3. Promote the Amtrak bus feeder link, which provides connections to trains in the
          Central Valley.
POLICY CE-1F: Pedestrian and Bicycle Access. Provide safe and convenient pedestrian and bicycle
access to all areas of the city.
          Action Item 1. Develop a Pedestrian Master Plan (PMP) identifying and prioritizing
          improvements to the pedestrian network to support walking as a viable primary mode of travel
          within Paso Robles. At a minimum, the PMP should include the following components:
               •   A crosswalk policy to address warrants for installation and enhancements to crosswalks.
               •   A sidewalk and trail master plan with an inventory of existing and missing sidewalks and
                   a list of projects to ensure pedestrian connections to downtown, employment centers,
                   shopping and services.
               •   An on-going program to identify and eliminate hazardous conditions to pedestrians and to
                   provide a sidewalk or formal path on every City-controlled street.
                                                       CE-4

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Circulation Element 2011
          Action Item 2. Maintain and update as needed the Bicycle Master Plan (BMP) identifying and
          prioritizing improvements to the bicycle network to support biking as a viable primary mode of
          travel within Paso Robles. The BMP shall provide bike facilities on or parallel to all major arterials
          (including bridges) and a network of off-street paths to facilitate commute and recreational bicycle
          travel. The BMP should identify bicycle priority streets, bicycle boulevards, and bicycle routes that
          create a fully connected network throughout the City.
          Action Item 3. Provide safe and convenient pedestrian, bicycle and vehicle access to the Cuesta
          College North County Campus, through the following means:
                    •   Incorporate access to and from the campus in City circulation, pedestrian, bicycle,
                        and transit planning.
                    •   Implement appropriate signage and vehicle speed controls to ensure safety to
                        pedestrians in the vicinity of the campus.
                    •   Encourage distribution of trip reduction information, including transit and ridesharing
                        information, to Cuesta College students, faculty, and staff.
                    •   Work with Caltrans and SLOCOG to construct bicycle-pedestrian under-crossings of
                        State Route 46E per the adopted BMP and the Caltrans Corridor Study.
          Action Item 4. Establish a formal Safe Routes to School Program and pursue grant funding to
          encourage children to safely walk and bike to school.
          Action Item 5. Collect pedestrian and bicycle volumes with intersection counts to ensure
          adequate data is available for prioritizing improvements to the transportation network.
          Action Item 6. Improve streetscapes and install curb extensions at intersections where
          appropriate to reduce driving speeds and shorten pedestrian crossing distances.
          Action Item 7. Support lighted LED cross-walks where pedestrian traffic volumes are high or
          safety considerations warrant implementation.
          Action Item 8. Update and expand the American Disabiliites Act (ADA) City Transition Plan to
          include public street right-of-way improvements.
CIRCULATION ISSUES
Circulation Master Plan (CMP)
To provide safe and efficient mobility, both within the City and between the City and surrounding areas, a
master system of transportation facilities is needed to serve residential, commercial, industrial, and tourist
needs.
The system of key arterial routes is mapped on the 2011 Circulation Master Plan Map (Figure CE-1). The
character of these routes is established in terms of numbers of lanes required. The locations of planned
intersection and/or interchange improvements are also identified. Figure CE-1 is designed to respond to
the Land Use Element of the General Plan. If land is not developed, or uses change, the entire network of
planned facilities may not be needed or it may change to suit future land use modifications.
Assignment of main streets, boulevards, parkways, rural, and hillside streets, as well as bicycle and
pedestrian paths, is determined at the time of approval of Specific Plans, subdivision maps (including
parcel maps) and development plans. The Circulation Element anticipates that as the City develops,
selected transportation facilities will need to be improved. Continued growth and development of the
community will be supported by holistic improvements that will increase the efficiency of the vehicle
network as well as bicycle, pedestrian, and transit systems.
                                                         CE-5

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Circulation Element 2011
The purpose of the circulation system is to maintain and enhance safe and efficient person mobility in the
City (per Goal CE-1). To support this goal, the 2011 Circulation Element Update changes how the
performance of the transportation network is measured de-emphasizing an auto-centric measure (level of
service or LOS) in favor of measures that represent a more efficient use of resources, support the mobility
of people, quality of life and small town feel desired by residents. In addition, measures supporting person
mobility will offer more travel choices, support public health goals by encouraging more walking and
biking, and reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
The 2003 Circulation Element included a citywide target of LOS D for all roadways during the peak hours
of travel. Level of service measures driver comfort and convenience, and LOS D reflects a utilization
substantially below the roadway’s capacity during the majority of the day. This is an inefficient usage of
infrastructure, one which results in costly roadway widening to accommodate only brief periods of higher
traffic levels (i.e., the worst minutes or hours of the day). These widening projects have secondary
impacts of encouraging higher rates of vehicular speed, degrading mobility for pedestrians and cyclists
and affecting the overall quality of life in surrounding areas. With this in mind, future traffic projections are
presented in terms of capacity utilization, or the extent to which the roadway’s capacity is being used on a
daily basis.
The 2011 Circulation Element Update Map is generally consistent with the 2003 Circulation Element Map,
but it removes a number of infrastructure recommendations due to revised traffic projections and changes
to the City’s Circulation Element Goals, Policies, and Action Items. Figure CE-1 illustrates both the
existing and future City street system. Compared to the 2003 Circulation Element, this Circulation
Element update identifies 34.5 fewer lane miles by Year 2025. This is the equivalent to removing a two-
lane roadway from downtown Paso Robles to more than halfway to downtown San Luis Obispo. The
pattern and location of future facilities are not precise and will warrant periodic study updates to confirm
their appropriateness and feasibility. The map presents the network needed to serve key circulation
demands to the Year 2025 planning horizon, while accommodating the City’s multi-modal and community
goals for the transportation network.
Fehr & Peers developed a Citywide Traffic Model to assist in the Circulation Element update process. The
traffic model is an important transportation planning tool that is used to forecast travel in the City based
on expected land use and/or roadway network changes. The traffic model can be used to test the effects
of alternative land use scenarios and potential roadway network improvements, and to estimate the
resultant traffic levels.
Circulation Element Update Analysis
This 2011 Circulation Element Update applied the land use projections in the currently adopted Land Use
Element of the General Plan to determine future mobility needs. The model development process, as well
as the initial data collection and assumptions that are a part of this Circulation Element update process,
are fully documented in a separate Technical Appendix report. This appendix includes the following:
     •    Initial data collection, including traffic counts and land use data files,
     •    Baseline assumptions, including trip generation, distribution, land use, growth,
     •    Model development process, including calibration and validation process
     •    2025 travel forecasts
Future Corridor Operations
Using the 2025 travel forecasts, the capacity utilization for major arterials and collectors within Paso
Robles is summarized in Table CE-1, which includes the proposed improvements presented in Figure
CE-1. The capacity utilization represents the projected volume divided by the roadway’s calculated
capacity. These are “planning level” capacities and forecasts, intended to predict the need for
improvements.
                                                         CE-6

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Circulation Element 2011
                                       CE-7
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Circulation Element 2011
                                                             Table CE-1
                                  EXISTING AND 2025 ROADWAY SEGMENT UTILIZATION
                                                                                            Existing                 Year 2025
                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                         Conditions                 Conditions
                                                                                                 Capacity                  Capacity
                               Roadway Segment                                        ADT       Utilization      ADT       Utilization
City Segments
   th
24 Street                     Spring Street to US 101                               15,700          89%         14,100        80%
Airport Road                  SR 46 to Dry Creek Road                                5,400          30%          4,000        23%
Charolais Road                S. River Road to Rambouillet Road                      7,100          33%         11,500        53%
                              Rambouillet Road to Creston Road                       4,700          22%          9,000        41%
   th
13 Street                     Spring Street to Riverside Avenue                      8,600          49%         11,200        63%
                              Riverside Avenue to S. River Road                     25,400          68%         32,200        86%
Creston Road                  S. River Road to Golden Hill Road                     15,800          73%         19,800        91%
                              Golden Hill Road to Niblick Road                      17,700          47%         25,200        67%
                              Niblick Road to Charolais Road                         5,500          15%          8,000        37%
                              Charolais Road to East City Limit                      4,200          19%          7,400        34%
Dallons Drive                 Buena Vista Drive to Golden Hill Road                  1,300           8%          2,600        15%
Golden Hill Road              Dallons Drive to SR 46 East                            2,200          13%         12,800        34%
                              Creston Road to Rolling Hills Road                     9,300          43%         13,800        64%
                              Rolling Hills Road to Union Road                      11,200          51%         17,100        46%
                              Union Road to SR 46 East                               7,100          40%         11,100        30%
Linne Road                    Fontana Road to East City Limit                        4,100          23%         10,700        60%
Nacimiento Lake Dr.           West City Limit                                        7,300          41%          9,700        55%
Niblick Road                  Spring Street to S. River Road                        30,100          80%         38,100       102%
                              S. River Road to Melody Drive                         19,400          52%         25,400        68%
                              Melody Drive to Creston Road                          14,100          38%         19,700        53%
N. River Road                 Union Road to SR 46 East                               2,700          20%          4,200        31%
                              SR 46 East to North City Limit                         1,200           9%          1,300        10%
Rolling Hills Road            Creston Road to Golden Hill Road                       2,800          16%          3,600        20%
Paso Robles Street            Freeway Off-Ramp to Creston Road                       5,800          61%          5,600        58%
Notes:
1.    Year 2025 with proposed improvements shown on Figure CE-1.
Reductions in utilization can occur with a reduction in volume due to changes in travel patterns or with an increase in capacity.
ADT = Average Daily Traffic during a typical weekday.
High utilization locations are indicated in bold.
Source: Fehr & Peers, January 2011.
                                                                CE-8
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Circulation Element 2011
                                                              Table CE-1
                                    EXISTING AND 2025 ROADWAY SEGMENT UTILIZATION
                                                                                            Existing                 Year 2025
                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                         Conditions                 Conditions
                                                                                                 Capacity                  Capacity
                               Roadway Segment                                        ADT       Utilization      ADT       Utilization
City Segments
River Oaks Drive              N. River Road to Buena Vista Drive                     1,900          11%          2,600        15%
                                   th              th
Riverside Avenue              13 Street to 24 Street                                11,800          67%         13,700        63%
Sherwood Road                 Creston Road to Fontana Road                          10,000          56%         16,200        75%
S. River Road                 Charolais Road to Serenade Drive                       2,300          17%          2,600        19%
                              Serenade Drive to Niblick Road                        12,800          34%         17,400        47%
                              Niblick Road to Navajo Avenue                         13,400          36%         15,100        40%
                                   th              th
Spring Street                 10 Street to 11 Street                                13,900          64%         15,000        69%
                                   th              th
                              16 Street to 17 Street                                13,800          64%         17,900        82%
                                   th              th
                              28 Street to 30 Street                                 4,900          23%          6,900        32%
Union Road                    N. River Road to Walnut Drive                          5,500          26%          9,000        41%
                              Walnut Drive to Golden Hill Road                       5,300          30%          9,100        51%
                              Golden Hill Road to SR 46 East                         7,800          44%         14,100        65%
                              SR 46 East to East City Limit                          3,300          18%          4,600        21%
Buena Vista Drive             SR 46 East to Experimental Station Road                4,400          20%          6,800        31%
                              North of Cuesta College                                2,600          12%          3,500        16%
Dry Creek Road                Airport Road to SR 46 East                             1,300           7%          3,800        21%
Nickerson/Appaloosa           Niblick Road to Creston Road                           2,000          15%          2,400        18%
                                th              th
Pine Street                   6 Street to 13 Street                                  3,400          35%          3,000        31%
Ramada Drive                  SR 46 West to Calle Propano                            1,700          18%          4,700        49%
                              SR 46 West to South City Limit                         3,100          33%          6,100        64%
Rambouillet Road              Charolais Road to Niblick Road                         1,600          12%          1,500        11%
S. River Road                 Navajo Avenue to Creston Road                         11,200          63%         13,700        77%
Theatre Drive                 SR 46 West to South City Limit                         9,600          44%         12,300        57%
                                                    st
S. Vine Street                SR 46 West to 1 Street                                 4,800          27%         12,700        72%
                                rd            th
Vine Street                   3 Street to 4 Street                                   4,000          30%          5,500        41%
                                   th              nd
                              30 Street to 32          Street                         300            3%          1,200         9%
Notes:
1.   Year 2025 with proposed improvements shown on Figure CE-1.
Reductions in utilization can occur with a reduction in volume due to changes in travel patterns or with an increase in capacity.
ADT = Average Daily Traffic during a typical weekday.
High utilization locations are indicated in bold.
Source: Fehr & Peers, January 2011.
                                                                CE-9
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Circulation Element 2011
                                                             Table CE-1
                                   EXISTING AND 2025 ROADWAY SEGMENT UTILIZATION
                                                                                            Existing                 Year 2025
                                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                         Conditions                 Conditions
                                                                                                 Capacity                  Capacity
                               Roadway Segment                                        ADT       Utilization      ADT       Utilization
City Segments
                                rd            th
Spring Street                 3 Street to 4 Street                                  19,300          89%         22,700       105%
                                th            th
                              6 Street to 7 Street                                  15,600          72%         16,700        77%
Adjacent Jurisdictions
US 101                        Wellsona Road to Spring Street                        22,700          28%         50,400        63%
                              Spring Street to SR 46 East                           20,000          25%         47,800        60%
                                                  th
                              SR 46 East to 13 Street                               35,500          44%         67,000        84%
                              Spring Street to SR 46 West                           64,000          80%         93,300       117%
                              SR 46 West to Main Street                             53,000          66%         79,000        99%
SR 46 East                    US 101 to Union Road                                  26,000          59%         48,900       109%
                              Union Road to Airport Road                            24,000          34%         38,000        52%
                              Airport Road to Jardine Road                          19,700          54%         34,400        47%
Dry Creek Road                Aerotech Center Way to Prairie Road                    1,300           7%          1,600         9%
Union Road                    Airport Rd Ext. (future) to Penman Springs Rd          3,300          19%          4,600        26%
Linne Road                    Hanson Road to Penman Springs Road                     4,100          23%          7,000        40%
Creston Road                  Airport Rd Ext. (future) to Neals Spring Road          4,200          24%          8,500        48%
S. River Road                 Santa Ysabel Avenue to Pin Oak Lane                    2,300          17%          2,600        19%
Ramada Drive                  Volpi Ysabel Road to Easy Street                       3,100          32%          6,100        64%
Theatre Drive                 Nutwood Circle to Rancho Paso Road                     9,600          54%         13,600        77%
SR 46 West                    Gahan Place to Del Sol Place                           7,200          20%         19,400        53%
Nacimiento Lake Dr.           Mustang Springs Road to Adelaida Road                  7,300          41%          9,700        55%
Notes:
1.   Year 2025 with proposed improvements shown on Figure CE-1.
Reductions in utilization can occur with a reduction in volume due to changes in travel patterns or with an increase in capacity.
ADT = Average Daily Traffic during a typical weekday.
High utilization locations are indicated in bold.
Source: Fehr & Peers, January 2011.
                                                               CE-10
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Circulation Element 2011
     •     Over 100 percent utilization results in forced or breakdown conditions for motorists frequently
           throughout the day. This situation exists when the volume of traffic exceeds the capacity of the
           roadway and queues can form behind these bottleneck points with traffic traveling in a stop-and-
           go fashion. These conditions warrant more investment in roadway capacity improvements, or
           another strategy to reduce traffic and/or improve mobility through a particular road segment or
           intersection.
     •     90 to 100 percent utilization represents operating conditions at or near capacity for motorists.
           The transportation infrastructure is fully utilized. Speeds are reduced to a low but relatively
           uniform value. Freedom to maneuver for motorists may be difficult. Unstable operation can occur
           at certain times of day and minor disturbances in traffic flow can cause breakdown conditions.
           However, justification for additional lanes and/or road widening is not met, particularly in light of
           other community goals and environmental impacts.
     •     70 to 90 percent utilization represents high-density, but stable flow for motorists. While some
           temporary congestion can occur at selected times of day, operations are reasonable for most
           drivers throughout the day. Motorists experience some restriction in speed and maneuverability,
           with reduced levels of convenience during peak travel hours. The transportation infrastructure is
           well-utilized. Additional investment in road widening is not warranted.
     •     50 to 70 percent utilization provides stable operating conditions for motorists and limited delays
           throughout most of the day. The roadway is only partially utilized. No consideration should be
           made for road widening. The maneuverability of individual motorists is affected by the interaction
           with other motorists in the traffic stream. These conditions are less attractive for bicycles,
           pedestrians, and transit users because of typically higher auto vehicle speeds.
     •     30 to 50 percent utilization provides stable operating conditions for motorists throughout the
           day. The investment in transportation infrastructure is realized on a very limited basis. Road
           widening improvements are not warranted. The presence of other motorists causes a noticeable,
           though slight, reduction in maneuverability. These conditions are always conducive to speeding
           and typically very discouraging to travel by bicyclists and pedestrians.
     •     Less than 30 percent utilization represents free-flow travel with a high level of maneuverability
           for motorists at all times of day. The investment in transportation infrastructure is not efficiently
           utilized. Here vehicle operations are almost always counterproductive for bicycles, pedestrians,
           and transit users.
The information in Table CE-1 conveys that: 1) most of the City’s roadways operate well below their
capacity on a daily basis, with a couple of exceptions, and 2) in year 2025 only a handful of streets are
projected to have a demand that exceeds their capacity on either city or adjacent jurisdiction roadways.
Specifically, the volume on four study segments is projected to exceed the capacity and two of these are
on SR 46E and US 101. In addition, only three other segments are projected to have a utilization of
between 90 and 100 percent. This indicates that major new capacity enhancements across the City are
not justified given the City’s goals.
The operations in key corridors in the City are discussed below beginning with US 101 and followed by
the three primary east/west corridors. These east/west corridors must traverse the Salinas River, the
freeway and the railroad; natural and physical barriers that separate the east and west sides of the City.
These barriers are significant constraints on the transportation network. The Spring Street and Creston
Road corridors are also discussed. The City should monitor and manage traffic operations along these
corridors as development occurs to ensure that the system is optimized for steady, safe, and orderly
traffic flow.
US 101 from Wellsona Road to Main Street – Degradation of US 101 mainline operations by Year 2025
and beyond is anticipated due to future growth within and outside San Luis Obispo County, as well as the
addition of traffic from proposed land uses in Paso Robles’ General Plan. Already planned increases in
land use and changes to regional travel patterns will contribute to these unacceptable operations.
                                                      CE-11

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Circulation Element 2011
Traditionally, traffic-related impacts or substantial increases in automobile trips on roadway segments are
mitigated by increasing roadway capacity through construction or payment toward additional lanes or
other new facilities. US 101 would require widening to six lanes to improve traffic operations to acceptable
levels of service. The widening of US 101 is not included in the Regional Transportation Plan (RTP) or
2011 constrained regional transportation list prepared by SLOCOG. However, the Route 101 North
County Corridor Study identifies widening of US 101 as a beyond 2035 improvement. The study also
describes the need for auxiliary lanes and other capacity enhancements prior to Year 2035. These
enhancements would improve operations and reduce the capacity utilization but would not fully eliminate
the projected deficient roadway operations.
The Circulation Element contains several policies that seek to reduce automobile travel. Implementation
of these policies and associated actions would help reduce the magnitude of traffic impacts on US 101.
Ultimately, SLOCOG and Caltrans are the responsible agencies for planning for and implementing
improvements within the US 101 corridor. Payment of traffic impact fees or a fair share contribution would
fulfill the City’s obligations for mitigating regional traffic impacts; however, unless other funding sources
(e.g., State Transportation Improvement Program funds for projects identified in the RTP, San Luis
Obispo County fees, and/or a future regional impact fee) are made available, implementation of the
necessary improvements is not feasible and implementation of the proposed Circulation Element Update
would not improve US 101 operations. The City of Paso Robles would support and participate in
development of a regional fee should it be proposed by regional agencies, such as SLOCOG.
SR 46 East from US Highway 101 to Airport Road – Future traffic volumes along the SR 46 East
corridor are expected to exceed the capacity of this roadway during certain times of day, typically the
morning and afternoon two-hour commute periods. The 2008 Caltrans Comprehensive Corridor Study
(CCS) establishes that widening SR 46E to accommodate this forecasted demand would be ineffective
without substantial capacity and operational improvements to the US 101 mainline and the interchange
with SR 46E. SR 46E presents a barrier to connections between areas of the City north and south of the
highway. The CCS recognizes that capacity improvements to SR 46E such as six-lane widening conflicts
with the City’s goals of small town character and mobility associated with non-auto modes. To mitigate
impacts on the highway, the CCS endorses the development of a parallel route system of local roads
north and south of SR 46E between Jardine Road and River Road that will serve to reduce the demand
for travel on SR 46. These routes have been identified in the City’s Parallel Routes Study. The alignment
of parallel route(s) shall be studied by the City, and constructed with development of the land uses north
and south of SR 46. Specific recommendations of the Parallel Routes Study include:
      •    A connection between Airport Road and Golden Hill Road via the Wisteria Road corridor,
           including a bridge over Huerhuero Creek.
      •    A connection between the northern terminus of Golden Hill Road and the western terminus of Dry
           Creek Road, including a bridge over Huerhuero Creek.
      •    Improvements to the intersection of SR 46E and Union Road. The City shall monitor traffic levels
           and plan for a grade separated interchange and interim improvements as needed. The
           improvement of this intersection will require that the north leg be extended to connect to Airport
           Road, so that access to uses in the Airport area would be provided via the new intersection at SR
           46E-Union Road.
      •    Improvement to facilities serving non-auto modes of travel will also reduce the auto demand
           along this corridor.
   th
13 Street from Riverside Avenue to Union Road – As one of the three major crossings of the Salinas
River and the US 101 freeway, the demand for travel across this segment is forecasted to increase to a
daily capacity utilization of 95%. This corresponds to increased congestion during the typical commute
periods and likely other times of day, but does not justify the widening of this segment by 2025.
Improvements within this corridor should focus on operational efficiencies (i.e., signal coordination,
modified timings) and enhancements to improve bicycle and pedestrian travel as needed. The
                            th
construction of the 17 Street-Riverside Avenue on-ramp to southbound US 101, scheduled for
                                                      CE-12

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Circulation Element 2011
                                                                                          th
construction in 2012, will significantly improve operations at the intersection of 13 Street and Riverside
Avenue.
Niblick Road from Spring Street to South River Road – This segment serves as the third major
crossing of the Salinas River in the City, and is projected to have a daily capacity utilization of 104% in
Year 2025. This corresponds to increased congestion, particularly during commute periods, as well as
potential route changes to parallel routes and/or changes to the times people travel to avoid congestion.
The projected capacity utilization of slightly more than 100% does not justify the widening of this roadway
by 2025 but should be re-evaluated during the next Circulation Element update. If the bridge were
widened, congestion would continue to occur at the intersections on either side of the bridge during some
portion of the commute periods. Furthermore, widening the bridge to a 6-lane arterial would result in a
capacity utilization of 71%, which would reduce vehicle delays, but would also support higher vehicle
speeds and would conflict with the City’s multi-modal goals and desire to maintain its small town
character.
                                           th
Spring Street from Niblick Road to 24 Street – Spring Street is the most heavily utilized corridor in the
City to the west of Highway 101. This area is characterized by a well-developed grid network offering
numerous routes of travel to most destinations. Grid systems are effective at distributing traffic and
provide a more pedestrian- and bicycle-friendly environment. Given the grid system’s ability to distribute
traffic, and the desire to maintain mobility for all modes, no widenings in the Downtown area are
proposed. Potential operational improvements, such as signal timing and coordination and improved
ramp access to Highway 101, should be studied by the City, as should the need to signalize intersections
in the area.
Creston Road – In 2007 a draft Plan Line was developed for Creston Road from Riverside Avenue to
Niblick Road/Sherwood Road. The study proposed a two-lane divided arterial section from River Road to
Rolling Hills Road with use of roundabouts to improve pedestrian safety, bike safety and school access.
The City should strive to adopt a Plan Line and incorporate recommended improvement projects into the
capital improvement and impact fee programs.
CIRCULATION STANDARDS AND DEVELOPMENT POLICIES
Standards and Specifications:
The City maintains standards and specifications for the dedication (right of way width) and improvement
of City streets. These standards are adopted by the City Council. The City’s set of adopted engineering
standards contains various street types and helps to define the City roadway system .
Plan Lines:
Plan lines should be established, where necessary, to protect and implement the Circulation Element of
the General Plan. Plan Lines provide:
     • For safe, efficient and effective multi-modal transportation within the City.
     • A source of information for residents, property owners and business owners.
     • A basis of planning for building setbacks and development of adjacent properties.
     • A basis for regulation and direction regarding the extension of existing and new arterial streets.
Private Streets:
Private streets are those which are not owned or maintained by the City. The City should discourage
private streets where future growth patterns could call for full City standard streets. Appropriate
applications for private streets include development in multifamily residential projects where traffic is
limited to internal circulation needs. Private streets should provide equivalent structural integrity of public
streets constructed from Standard Specifications.
Traffic Signals:
The City uses a warrant system to set priorities for installing traffic signals at intersections. The purpose of
the warrant analysis is to provide a rational basis for identifying and prioritizing intersections with the
greatest need for signal installation. At all intersections where warrants are met, an analysis shall be
conducted to determine if a roundabout is a feasible or preferred alternative.
                                                    CE-13

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Circulation Element 2011
Bridges:
The Circulation Master Plan Map identifies all proposed bridge crossings of the Salinas River and
Huerhuero Creek. The Parallel Routes Study focuses on Huerhuero crossings, and the City will determine
the priority of bridges as development occurs. The City is not planning to widen any existing bridges prior
to 2025. The City will update development fees so that new development will pay for its share of the
need for new bridges.
Sidewalks:
Sidewalks or paths are required to be constructed on all public streets. LED lighted crosswalks are
encouraged, particularly on routes to schools and/or public destinations where enhanced visibility is
needed.
Railroad Crossings:
The City should coordinate with the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments and railroad operators to
secure funding to improve all existing railroad crossings in the City for bicycle, pedestrian, and vehicular
safety.
Bike Lanes and Related Facilities:
To further encourage bicycle travel as a means of reducing Vehicle Miles Traveled (VMT,) the City has
established a system of bike lanes via adoption of a Bike Master Plan in 2009. The Bikeways Plan should
be updated periodically to: 1) review system performance, 2) ensure that that the City qualifies for all
potential grant opportunities, and 3) update implementation priorities.
Transportation Demand Management (TDM):
The City should encourage firms located within the City limits to use flexible work hours (flex-time) and
other traffic demand management strategies to reduce traffic congestion during typical commute periods.
To the extent possible, companies should also be encouraged to share parking facilities with other
adjacent uses through easement agreements. The City should also encourage residential developers to
design and build project elements that support TDM such as car-share and bike-share facilities,
neighborhood electric vehicle (NEV) operation, transit stop amenities, and neighborhood transportation
centers. TDM elements can be required through the development agreement process and as optional
mitigation to reduce anticipated traffic impacts.
Paso Robles Event Center:
The City should continue to coordinate with the Paso Robles Event Center, Highway Patrol, and private
property owners to provide safe, efficient, and effective traffic flow and parking during the Mid-State Fair
in July and August and during other major special events. The City should encourage regional bus
service from southern communities in the County to the Paso Robles Event Center.
Emergency Evacuation Routes:
The City should continue to coordinate with the County, Highway Patrol, and other agencies to provide
effective emergency evacuation routes for local, Countywide, and Statewide emergencies. The City
should address emergency evacuation routes as part of the development of a community-wide Disaster
Response Plan.
Development Policies:
As conditions of approval of Subdivision (Tract and Parcel Maps) and Development Plans (Planned
Developments, Conditional Use Permits, and as applicable, Building Permits,) developers should be
responsible for the following:
     1. Incorporating circulation design elements that keep traffic “calm”, encourage walking and
          bicycling, and enhance the overall livability of the community. Circulation design elements may
          include differing pavement types, night lighting and traffic calming measures such as, but not
          limited to, landscaped traffic circles, medians, and narrow streets.
                                                      CE-14

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Circulation Element 2011
     2. Dedication of a minimum of one half of the right of way of adjacent streets, as indicated by the
          Standard Details and Specifications adopted by the City Council. An adopted Plan Line will also
          provide direction for required dedications and building setbacks.
     3. Improvement of any and all streets and alleys that border development sites, to the centerline
          plus 12-feet or beyond if necessary, to provide safe access in the judgment of the City Engineer.
          Medians should also be installed in accordance with the direction of the City Engineer.
     4. Improvement of all interior and adjacent streets and alleys to City standards and specifications.
     5. Provision of adequate access to all parcels, whether existing, proposed, or potential (from future
          subdivision) this may entail planning street extensions beyond the boundaries of a project.
     6. Provision of adequate access for emergency vehicles and for emergency evacuation for each
          development phase.
     7. Design of local streets and access to parcels in such a manner as to minimize impacts to safe
          and efficient traffic flow.
     8. Design of streets to minimize grading.
     9. Provision of off-site improvements where necessary to mitigate traffic impacts that may be
          created by a development project.
     10. Construction of required street improvements prior to occupancy of new development.
     11. Provision of shared driveways and parking lots where necessary to reduce the number of
          driveways into a street in order to reduce potential traffic conflicts.
     12. Limited access on all arterials.
     13. Payment of traffic mitigation fees adopted by the City Council, or as required for mitigation
          identified through an environmental review process.
                                                     CE-15
City of El Paso de Robles
    General Plan 2003
  Conservation Element
                Prepared for:
         City of El Paso de Robles
 Department of Community Development
             1000 Spring Street
       Paso Robles, California 93446
                  Contact:
  Community Development Department
   (805) 237-3970; planning@prcity.com
                Prepared by:
         Rincon Consultants, Inc.
       1530 Monterey Street, Suite D
     San Luis Obispo, California 93401
       Adopted December 16, 2003;
 Amended as noted on the following pages.
This page left blank intentionally
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Conservation Element
                    Table of Adoption and Amendments to Conservation Element
                               City Council
           Date                                                     Action
                                Resolution
December 16, 2003                  03-232   Adoption of a comprehensive update of the General Plan
December 18, 2012                  12-185   General Plan Amendment 2012-003
November 19, 2014                  14-150   General Plan Amendment 2014-003
                                             CO-i
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Conservation Element
                    Table of Adoption and Amendments to Conservation Element
This page left blank intentionally.
                                             CO-ii
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                               Table of Contents for Conservation Element
1.0     Vision Statement ..................................................................................................................... CO-1
2.0     Goals, Policies and Action Items ............................................................................................. CO-1
3.0     Conservation Issues.................................................................................................................. CO-8
Figures
Figure C-1      Surface Water Features .............................................................................................. CO-11
Figure C-2      Habitat Map................................................................................................................. CO-12
Figure C-3      City Gateways, Visual Corridors, Natural Landmarks, and
                Open Space Viewsheds ............................................................................................... CO-13
Figure C-4      Prominent Ridgelines .................................................................................................. CO-14
Tables
Table C-1       Important Visual Resources ........................................................................................ CO-6
                                                                 CO-iii
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                             Table of Contents for Conservation Element
This page left blank intentionally.
                                                CO-iv
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Conservation Element
                             CONSERVATION ELEMENT
1.0 Vision Statement
Conservation of resources within and near Paso Robles contributes to the City’s quality of life
and community image. Residents and visitors alike share their excitement about the many
features that make Paso Robles a special place to live or visit. The “sense of place” in the
community is derived, in part, from its natural resources and history. The City will rehabilitate
and enhance the environmental quality of the planning area through long-term protection of the
environment, resource planning management, and minimizing the degradation of
nonrenewable resources. Special protection will be given to unique or endangered resources in
the Paso Robles planning area without undue burden on individual rights. Preservation of
public services, air quality, vegetation and wildlife, mineral resources, and visual resources,
historic and archeological resources, as well as energy will ensure that the city remain an
attraction for visitors, tourists, and new residents.
2.0 Goals, Policies, and Action Items
GOAL C-1: Utilities and Infrastructure. Ensure that public utilities, facilities, and services are
designed to meet existing and planned land uses, and ensure that provisions are made for
continued operation maintenance, and updates as necessary.
     POLICY C-1A: Water Source, Supply, and Distribution. Develop and implement various
     innovative water provision and conservation programs that help to ensure an adequate
     supply of water for the City.
          Action Item 1. Investigate and implement if feasible, development of supplementary
          water supplies to provide diversified resources and receive aquifer demand.
          Supplementary water supplies may include the following: State Water Project; dams and
          reservoirs on local creeks; Lake Nacimiento water; other water importation; regional
          conjunctive storage/use agreements; and/or developing water reuse.
          Action Item 2. Investigate and implement, if feasible, basin recharge programs through
          non-traditional methods. Such programs may include the following: storm drainage
          system design integrating Low-Impact Development (LID) features to reduce
          hydromodification from development and other improvements to recharge the ground
          water aquifer; developing/improving water recharge along historic drainage patterns
          along/adjacent to creeks and/or rivers; and/or developing recycled wastewater
          programs including basin recharge.
          Action Item 3. Maintain/update the Urban Water Management Plan and implement
          Best Management Practices as feasible.
          Action Item 4. Maintain an updated Water Master Plan and develop needed water
          production, treatment, storage and distribution facilities as part of the Capital
          Improvement Plan/Budget. As part of the Water Master Plan or Engineering Standards
                                                CO-1               Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Conservation Element
          and Specifications, establish water service standards for new development to include,
          but not be limited to: minimum pressure; provision of two sources of water to
          subdivisions and large development projects; use of looped systems.
          Action Item 5. Maintain potable water quality via the following measures:
              a. Continue to monitor City water supplies wells for water quality requirements of
                  the Department of Health Services and other regulatory agencies.
              b. Encourage minimization of applications of agricultural chemical fertilizers and
                  pesticides and enforce conservative application of agricultural waters.
              c. Provide treatment and distribution systems needed to assure conveyance of
                  potable water that meets all water regulations.
              d. Incorporate LID features with all development in compliance with the “Joint
                  Effort” permit requirements to filter and clean storm water through natural
                  systems before it enters surface and groundwater supplies.
          Action Item 6. New water service shall not be extended to areas outside the City
          boundaries prior to annexation. Existing commitments for water service outside the city
          limits shall continue to be honored.
          Action Item 7. Maintaining private water well use shall be allowed only for existing
          agriculture uses and then only when approved by City Council.
     POLICY C-1B: Sewer Service. Provide adequate wastewater conveyance and treatment
     facilities to serve all parcels in the City.
          Action Item 1. Maintain an updated Sewer Master Plan and develop needed sewer
          conveyance and treatment facilities as part of the Capital Improvement Plan/Budget.
          Action Item 2. Require sewer connection for all new buildings except where topography
          and/or other physical constraints would make sewer connection unreasonable and
          sufficient parcel sizes provide for adequate leach systems.
          Action Item 3. Require the abandonment of all septic systems at such time that a sewer
          becomes reasonably available to a parcel.
          Action Item 4. The City shall not provide nor permit delivery of City sewer services to
          areas outside the existing City limits until such areas are annexed.
          Action Item 5. Investigate and, if feasible, develop wastewater effluent discharge
          alternatives including land percolation/evaporation and/or recycling.
     POLICY C-1C: Storm Drainage. Provide storm drain systems that efficiently and safely
     mitigate flood risk, while effectively managing storm water through implementation of LID
                                                  CO-2                Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Conservation Element
     features, so that downstream run-off is limited to pre-development volumes and velocity
     before it is conveyed to the Salinas River, Huerhuero Creek, and their tributaries.
          Action Item 1. Maintain and update the Storm Water Master Plan. Implement, as
          feasible, recommended actions and Best Management Practices described in the Master
          Plan.
          Action Item 2. Establish revised development standards as may be appropriate, that
          include, but are not limited to the following:
              a. For large developments that feature substantial amounts of impervious surfaces,
                  detain water flows to prevent overflow of waterways and inundation of
                  developed areas.
              b. Direct surface water runoff from developed areas to LID storm water features on
                  the development site. The facilities should be designed to both mitigate flood
                  flows while providing safe and efficient low-flow conveyance.
              c. Maintain natural streams to provide, at minimum, flow capacity for 100-year
                  storm conditions.
              d. Conduct floodplain acquisition and promote groundwater recharge to preserve
                  the floodway, protect riparian habitats and to enhance water resource, flood
                  control projects and recharge programs to accommodate increased runoff from
                  new development. These programs should be funded by developers, at rates
                  proportional to the projected increase in runoff associated with their
                  developments.
     POLICY C-1D: Solid Waste. Ensure that the City’s landfill maintains sufficient capacity to
     serve the needs of the City through the year 2025.
          Action Item 1. Support and participate in an update to the County Solid Waste
          Management Plan (reviewed September 2002).
          Action Item 2. Reduce the amount of solid waste to be taken to the landfill by
          implementing the City’s Source Reduction and Recycling Element.
          Action Item 5. Develop a City-specific solid waste master plan.
GOAL C-2: Air Quality. Seek to maintain air quality by taking actions to reduce traffic
congestion, vehicle miles traveled, and air pollutant emissions.
     POLICY C-2A: Traffic Congestion Reduction. Implement circulation systems improvements
     to reduce congestion and associated air contaminant emissions.
                                                   CO-3            Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Conservation Element
     POLICY C-2B: VMT Reduction. Implement programs to reduce the number of vehicle miles
     traveled (VMT), especially by single occupant vehicles, including providing opportunities
     for mixed-use projects.
          Action Item 1. Provide bikeways, pedestrian paths, and transit turn-outs/stops as
          requirements of development applications.
          Action Item 2. Encourage the development of transit facilities.
          Action Item 3. Strive to recruit new industry as part of on-going efforts to create a
          balanced community where the majority of residents can live, work, shop and play,
          thereby reducing the commute lengths for some City residents.
          Action Item 4. Encourage infill development.
     POLICY C-2C: Emissions Reduction. Take steps to reduce creation of air contaminant
     emissions.
          Action Item 1. Continue to prohibit agricultural burning.
          Action Item 2. Encourage private sector efforts to provide composting and creation of
          mulch in locations that avoid incompatibility of land uses.
          Action Item 3. Require builders to use appropriate techniques to minimize pollution
          from construction activities.
GOAL C-3: Biological Resources. As feasible, preserve native vegetation and protected
wildlife, habitat areas, and vegetation, through avoidance, impact mitigation, and habitat
enhancement.
     POLICY C-3A: Oak Trees. Preserve existing oak trees and oak woodlands. Promote the
     planting of new oak trees.
          Action Item 1. Implement the Oak Tree Preservation Ordinance.
          Action Item 2. Plant oaks in parks and on other City-owned properties. Care shall be
          taken to plant new and replacement oak trees in locations and settings that will be
          appropriate to their species (e.g., avoiding mitigation that would not be suitable).
          Action Item 3. Encourage and/or require new development to include the planting of
          new oaks where feasible and appropriate.
     POLICY C-3B: Sensitive Habitat. Incorporate habitats into project design, as feasible,
     including: oak woodlands, native grasslands, wetlands, and riparian areas.
          Action Item 1. As part of the environmental review of new development projects:
                                                  CO-4               Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Conservation Element
              •   Biological studies/surveys will be prepared when appropriate to assess habitat
                  value.
              •   Alternatives to habitat removal will be explored; and
              •   Input will be sought from other public agencies with expertise in biological
                  resources.
          Action Item 2. As part of the environmental review of new development projects, the
          City will require that mitigation for potential impacts to the San Joaquin Kit Fox and its
          habitat be provided in consultation with the CA Department of Fish and Game and the
          U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
          Action Item 3. Encourage use of native plants.
GOAL C-4: Mineral Resources. Oversee/manage mineral resources.
     POLICY C-4A: Manage the extraction of mineral resources in order:
          a. To protect and conserve those Portland cement concrete aggregate mineral resources
              classified by the State Geologist as being important mineral deposits (i.e., designated
              “MRZ-2’);
          b. To protect other properties and natural resources from any adverse impacts
              associated with mining operations.
          Action Item 1. Continue to permit surface mining of sand and gravel as a conditional
          use within the Salinas River and Huerhuero Creek.
          Action Item 2. As part of the review of new development projects involving areas
          within or adjacent to areas designated as MRZ-2, ensure that measures are adopted to
          protect the capability for future extraction of sand and gravel if such extraction activities
          would not conflict with surrounding land uses and other applicable plans and policies.
GOAL C-5: Visual Resources. Enhance/upgrade the City’s appearance.
     POLICY C-5A: Visual Gateways and Landmarks. Identify important visual resources:
     gateways, corridors, major arterials, natural/open space areas, as shown on Table C-1 and
     Figure C-3.
          Action Item 1. Investigate and implement, as feasible, a variety of alternative funding
          sources to enhance important visual resources, including but not limited to:
              •   Mello-Roos and similar infrastructure financing for improvement and potential
                  maintenance of public landscaping, particularly along streets and other visible
                  public travel routes;
              •   Bond programs such as property acquisition, improvement, and maintenance for
                  corridor visual improvements; and/or
              •   Encourage Caltrans to preserve or enhance existing trees and landscaping along
                  the Highway 101 corridor.
                                                  CO-5              Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Conservation Element
                                          Table C-1. Important Visual Resources
Gateways to the City
           •    May be marked with entrance monument signs.
           •    Limit range of land uses to preclude those commercial and industrial uses with outside processes and storage.
           •    Development shall be designed to make a positive visual impression (in terms of design/architecture and
                landscaping) and incorporate/preserve natural features.
           • Billboards shall be limited in number, shall be located to preserve views of natural features.
Highway 46 East * (between Jardine and Airport Roads)
Highway 101 at North End * (between Mustard Creek and Spring Street)
Highway 101 at South End * (between Highway 46 West and Spring Street)
Highway 46 West * (between Arbor Road and Highway 101)
Creston Road (beginning east of Beechwood Drive to Charolais Road)
Spring Street (north of 36th Street and south of 1st Street)
Airport Road
Union Road
Airport
Multi-Modal Transportation Center
Visual Corridors
           •    Development shall be designed to make a positive visual impression and incorporate/preserve natural features
           •    Billboards shall be limited in number, shall be located to preserve views of natural features
           • • Architectural design of new development on Spring Street shall be compatible with, and incorporate features
                identified in adopted design guidelines.
Highway 46 East * (between Jardine and Airport Roads)
Highway 101 * (full length of the City)
Highway 46 West * (between Arbor Road and Highway 101)
Creston Road
Spring Street (full length of the City)
Airport Road
Union Road
Railroad corridor (full length of the City)
Natural Landmarks and Open Space Viewsheds
Salinas River
Huerhuero Creek
Field at north end of Ramada Drive (between the railroad and the Salinas River)
Oak-covered hillsides
East Side creeks/riparian corridors (unnamed creeks #1-5 plus Turtle/Oak Creek)
View from Barney Schwartz Park southwest toward and into the Chandler Ranch area
* indicates major gateway or visual corridor
            Action Item 2. Coordinated/Complementary Design Standards: Establish and
            implement site design, landscaping, architecture, and sign design standards in order to
            ensure that gateways, corridors, major arterials, and natural areas are identifiable.
                                                               CO-6                     Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Conservation Element
     POLICY C-5B: Hillsides: Protect hillsides as a visual amenity, by implementing design
     standards that call for:
          a. Decreasing density as slope increases;
          b. Limiting the amount of grading;
          c. Providing substantial amounts of landscaping;
          d. Incorporating architectural treatment that enhances the form of the hillside rather
              than conflicting with it;
          e. Limiting the number of building sites that may be placed on prominent ridgelines;
          f. Preventing development of new buildings that project above the ridgeline unless
              adequately mitigated with landscaping;
          g. Ensuring sensitive design of development on steep slopes, and on the crest of major
              ridgelines, shown on Figure C-4.
     Considerations for development on steep slopes shall include the following:
          • Avoid slope stability hazards by restricting development on slopes of 35 percent or
              greater.
          • Site-specific visual assessments (with and without the project) to thoroughly
              evaluate the visual effects of development proposals on slopes of 30 percent or
              greater.
          • For new development located on ridges and hills consider providing a substantial
              building setback from the edge of the downhill slope and/or screening landscaping,
              where the slope exceeds 15 percent.
GOAL C-6: Cultural Resources. Strive to preserve/protect important historic and
archeological resources.
     POLICY C-6A: Historic Resources: Encourage the preservation and restoration of historic
     buildings in the downtown and the Vine Street neighborhood.
          Action Item 1. Continue to implement the Council adopted Downtown Design
          Guidelines
          Action Item 2. Establish a Vine Street Historic and Architectural Preservation Overlay
          District for the historic neighborhood located between Chestnut Street, Oak Street, 8th
          Street and 21st Street, inclusive of both sides of these boundary streets. Prepare and
          implement design guidelines for future development and renovations within this
          District. The intent of these guidelines would be to maintain the historic character of the
          neighborhood.
     POLICY C-6B: Archaeological Resources: Strive to preserve/protect “unique archaeological
     resources” as defined by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).
          Action Item 1. Require the preparation of archaeological studies and/or preliminary
          evaluation reports for new developments that are subject to CEQA and the site could
          potentially contain a “unique archaeological resource.” Incorporate mitigation measures
          identified by such studies into the development.
                                                  CO-7             Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Conservation Element
GOAL C-7: Energy Conservation. Encourage the conservation of energy resources.
     POLICY C-7A: Conservation Measures. Investigate and implement as feasible, energy
     conservation measures.
3.0 Conservation Issues
The Conservation Element Appendix contains discussions of public utilities and services, air
quality, vegetation and wildlife, mineral resources, visual resources, and energy issues.
     3.1 Hydrology
     This section provides an overview of existing hydrology in Paso Robles, including ground
     water conditions. Consistent with State law Assembly Bill 162 (AB 162), this section
     identifies rivers, creeks, streams, flood corridors, riparian habitat, and other lands that may
     accommodate floodwater for the purposes of groundwater recharge and storm water
     management.
     Hydrological Features
     The Salinas River watershed covers approximately 4,600 square miles and crosses two
     counties. Also known as the “Upside Down River,” the Salinas River flows northward
     originating in San Luis Obispo County, through the Salinas Valley into Monterey County,
     and empties into Monterey Bay. The river’s flow is seasonal, dictated by local rainfall.
     Several significant tributaries flow into the Salinas River through or north of Paso Robles
     including, the Nacimiento River, Estrella River, and Huerhuero Creek (Upper Salinas River
     Watershed Action Plan, 2004). Several perennial creeks flow through parts of Paso Robles to
     converge with the Salinas River including Dry Creek, Mountain Spring Creek, Turtle Creek,
     Peachy Canyon Creek, and Unnamed Creek No.1 & No. 6.
     Water Resources
     The City of Paso Robles currently relies upon the Salinas River underflow and the Paso
     Robles Groundwater Basin water for much of its municipal water supply. Basin Wells tap
     groundwater in the Paso Robles Groundwater Basin while River Wells divert the
     subterranean flows of the Salinas River. The Paso Robles 2010 Urban Water Management
     Plan (UWMP) highlights two additional water sources that should be available to the City
     by 2015, these include; 1) 4,000 AFY of raw water from Lake Nacimiento, and 2) upgrading
     of the wastewater treatment plant to include recycled water irrigation, possible
     groundwater recharge, and discharge to the Salinas River (UWMP, 2010). The addition of
     these water sources will reduce the City’s dependence on ground water, protecting and
     stabilizing groundwater levels for future use.
     Floodwater Accommodation
     AB 162 requires the Conservation Element of the General Plan to identify rivers, creeks,
     streams, flood corridors, riparian habitat, and other land that may accommodate floodwater
                                                 CO-8               Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Conservation Element
     for purposes of groundwater recharge and storm water management. The purpose is to
     conserve areas used for groundwater recharge and storm water management and to
     minimize urban development in these areas.
     Figures C-1 and C-2 show the major rivers, creeks, streams, flood corridors, riparian habitat,
     and other land that may accommodate floodwater for purposes of groundwater recharge
     and storm water management.
     Groundwater Recharge
     There are a number of existing and proposed storm drain detention and retention basins
     located within the City. These basins are designed to reduce peak runoff from developments
     to pre-development rates for a 10-year storm event. Detention basins are areas where excess
     storm water is stored or held temporarily to slow water flow, decreasing flood damage.
     Retention basins store storm water on a more permanent basis, often indefinitely, with the
     exception of volume lost to evaporation or absorption into soils. Retention basins help to
     recharge underground water aquifers and reduce sedimentation. The location of existing
     basins can be seen in the Paso Robles Storm Drain Master Plan, Section 6, Figure 6-1. In
     addition, subsurface basins may be used for either retention or detention of site runoff.
     The Downtown Paso Robles Watershed Plan (DTWP), prepared in 2014 and awaiting formal
     approval from the Central Coast Water Board, identifies a variety of projects to increase
     bioretention and infiltration for purposes of groundwater recharge. The proposed “Green
     Street” solutions include; 1) bioretention swales within the parkways or medians; 2)
     bioretention bulb-outs; 3) and/or pervious pavement surfaces as the primary mechanism for
     treatment and retention of storm water. The locations of these projects can be seen in the
     DTWP, Appendix A, Exhibit 6.
                                                CO-9              Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Conservation Element
     This page left blank intentionally.
                                            CO-10 Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Conservation Element
                                            CO-11 Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Conservation Element
                                            CO-12 Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Conservation Element
                                            CO-13 Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Conservation Element
                                            CO-14 Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003
Oak Park Redevelopment, Phase On
                      CITY OF EL PASO DE ROBLES
                              HOUSING ELEMENT
                           OF THE GENERAL PLAN
                                          OCTOBER 2014
                                  Exhibit A of Resolution 14-136
CITY COUNCIL:
Duane Picanco, Mayor
Ed Steinbeck, Mayor Pro-Tem
John Hamon, Councilmember
Steve Martin, Councilmember
Fred Strong, Councilmember
PLANNING COMMISSION:
Doug Barth, Chair
Steve Gregory, Chair Pro Tem
Darrell Cooper, Commissioner
John Donaldson, Commissioner
Al Garcia, Commissioner
Bob Rollins, Commissioner
Vince Vanderlip, Commissioner
CITY STAFF:
James L. App, City Manager
Ed Gallagher, Community Development Director
Susan DeCarli, AICP, City Planner
Darren Nash, Associate Planner (Project Planner)
This page left blank intentionally
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
                                          HOUSING ELEMENT
                                                TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.0 Introduction......................................................................................................................................H-1
     1.1 Purpose....................................................................................................................................H-1
     1.2 Schedule for Adoption of Housing Element ......................................................................H-2
     1.3 Relation to and Consistency With Other General Plan Elements ...................................H-2
     1.4 Information Sources for the Housing Element Update ....................................................H-2
     1.5 Public Participation ...............................................................................................................H-2
     1.6 Local Setting ...........................................................................................................................H-4
     1.7 Housing Context ....................................................................................................................H-4
            a.    Economy ........................................................................................................................H-4
            b.    2006 Economic Strategy ..............................................................................................H-5
            c.    Areas for Housing Growth .........................................................................................H-6
            d.    Housing-Related Activities in Progress in 2014 ......................................................H-8
            e.    Expected Major Issues and Challenges 2014-2019 ..................................................H-8
2.0 Housing Goals, Policies and Action Items ................................................................................ H-11
     2.1 Qualitative Goals, Policies, and Objectives ......................................................................H-11
            a.    Goals ............................................................................................................................H-11
            b.    Policies and Actions ...................................................................................................H-11
     2.2 Quantitative Objectives .......................................................................................................H-17
            a.    New Construction ......................................................................................................H-17
            b.    Rehabilitation..............................................................................................................H-18
            c.    Conservation ...............................................................................................................H-18
3.0 Status and Evaluation of Existing 2011 Housing Element.......................................................H-19
     3.1 Completed New Housing Units: Regional Need and Quantified Objectives .............H-19
     3.2 New Housing Units: Under Construction and Approved ............................................H-21
     3.3 New Housing Units for Lower Income Households: Proposed ...................................H-21
     3.4 New Housing Units: Completed Since January 2011 .....................................................H-22
     3.5 Rehabilitated Units ..............................................................................................................H-22
     3.6 Conserved Units ..................................................................................................................H-22
     3.7 Removal of Constraints.......................................................................................................H-23
     3.8 Progress Toward Implementation of Action Items.........................................................H-23
4.0 Housing Needs Assessment.........................................................................................................H-29
     4.1 Population Characteristics..................................................................................................H-29
            a.    Population Trends .....................................................................................................H-29
            b.    Age Characteristics ....................................................................................................H-29
            c.    Race and Ethnicity .....................................................................................................H-30
            d.    Employment Market..................................................................................................H-30
     4.2 Household Characteristics..................................................................................................H-31
            a.    Number of Households .............................................................................................H-31
            b.    Household Type .........................................................................................................H-31
            c.    Household Size...........................................................................................................H-32
                                                              H-i
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
            d.    Household Income Targets.......................................................................................H-32
            e.    Household Income in Paso Robles ..........................................................................H-33
            f.    Tenure of Households ...............................................................................................H-34
            g.    Overpaying for Housing ...........................................................................................H-35
            h.    Overcrowded Housing..............................................................................................H-36
     4.3    Special Needs Groups .........................................................................................................H-36
            a.    Senior Households .....................................................................................................H-37
            b.    Disabled Persons ........................................................................................................H-38
            c.    Female-Headed Households ....................................................................................H-39
            d.    Large Households ......................................................................................................H-40
            e.    Farmworkers...............................................................................................................H-40
            f.    Homeless Persons ......................................................................................................H-42
     4.4    Housing Stock Characteristics ...........................................................................................H-47
            a.    Housing Growth ........................................................................................................H-47
            b.    Housing Type .............................................................................................................H-48
            c.    Vacancy Rate...............................................................................................................H-48
            d.    Housing Age and Condition ....................................................................................H-48
            e.    Replacement Need .....................................................................................................H-50
            f.    Housing Costs and Affordability.............................................................................H-50
            g.    Assisted Housing Projects ........................................................................................H-52
     4.5    Energy Conservation ...........................................................................................................H-52
     46.    Regional Housing Needs ....................................................................................................H-54
     4.7    Other Opportunities to Meet Housing Needs .................................................................H-55
     4.8    Equal Housing Opportunity ..............................................................................................H-56
5.0 Identification of Adequate Sites for Future Housing Needs ...................................................H-57
     5.1 Regional Housing Targets ..................................................................................................H-58
            a.    Inventory to Meet Above-Moderate Income Needs .............................................H-58
            b.    Inventory to Meet Moderate Income Needs ..........................................................H-60
            c.    Inventory to Meet Low and Very Low Income Needs .........................................H-61
            d.    Availability of Sewer and Water Service ................................................................H-61
            e.    Are Densities of 20 Units Per Acre Attainable? .....................................................H-62
            f.    Opportunities for Additional Inventory Affordable to Low
                  Income Households ...................................................................................................H-62
            g.    Conclusion ..................................................................................................................H-63
     5.2 Zoning for Variety of Housing Types ...............................................................................H-64
6.0 Housing Constraints and Incentives...........................................................................................H-65
     6.1 Governmental Constraints .................................................................................................H-65
            a.    Zoning Code ...............................................................................................................H-65
                  i.    Permitted and Conditional Uses ....................................................................H-65
                  ii.   Development Standards ..................................................................................H-65
                        (a) Parking Requirements ...........................................................................H-66
                        (b) Open Space Requirements for Multi-Family Development .............H-66
                        (c) Storage Space Requirements for Multi-Family Development .........H-66
                        (d) Grading Limitations ...............................................................................H-67
                        (e) Other Development Standards for Multi-Family Development .....H-67
                                                         H-ii
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
                         (f) Architectural/Design Guidelines for Multi-Family Housing ..........H-67
                         (g) Development Standards for Second Units ..........................................H-68
                         (h) Specific Plans ...........................................................................................H-68
                  iii. Permit Processing Procedures ........................................................................H-68
                         (a) Discretionary review by the Planning Commission at a
                              public hearing .........................................................................................H-68
                         (b) Semi-discretionary review by the Development Review
                              Committee (DRC) ...................................................................................H-69
                         (c) Ministerial review by City Staff............................................................H-69
            b.    Building Codes and Enforcement ............................................................................H-71
            c.    Fees and Exactions .....................................................................................................H-72
                  i. Planning Permit Processing Procedures ..........................................................H-72
                  ii. Building Permit and Plan Check Fees ..............................................................H-72
                  iii. Water and Sewer Connection Fees....................................................................H-72
                  iv. Development Impact Fees ..................................................................................H-73
                  v. School Fees ...........................................................................................................H-73
                  vi. Land Dedication for Streets ...............................................................................H-73
                  vii. Land Dedication and Development Standards for Water Quality and
                       Drainage Control .................................................................................................H-74
                  viii. Land Dedication for Open Space .....................................................................H-74
                  ix. Landscaping and Lighting District (LLD)........................................................H-74
                  x. Community Facilities Districts ..........................................................................H-74
            d.    On- and Off-Site Improvement Requirements ......................................................H-74
            e.    Constraints on Housing for Disabled Persons .......................................................H-75
            f.    Efforts to Remove Barriers ........................................................................................H-76
     6.2    Non-Governmental Constraints ........................................................................................H-77
            a.    Availability of Financing...........................................................................................H-77
            b.    Land Costs ..................................................................................................................H-77
            c.    Development Costs ....................................................................................................H-77
            d.    Prevailing Wages .......................................................................................................H-78
     6.3    Appropriateness of Goals, Objectives, and Policies........................................................H-78
7.0 Resources for Providing Affordable Housing .........................................................................H-79
     7.1 Redevelopment Low and Moderate Income Housing Funds .......................................H-79
     7.2 Deferral of City Fees ............................................................................................................H-80
     7.3 HOME and Emergency Shelter Grant Funds ..................................................................H-80
     7.4 Community Development Block Grant Funds ................................................................H-81
     7.5 CalHome Program ...............................................................................................................H-82
     7.6 Other Sources .......................................................................................................................H-82
            a.    Homeownership.........................................................................................................H-82
            b.    Rental Assistance .......................................................................................................H-84
            c.    Housing Development and Rehabilitation.............................................................H-84
                                                        H-iii
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
Appendices
          A       HCD’s Comments and City’s Responses
                  A-1     Letter from HCD dated August 22, 2014 commenting on the draft
                          Housing Element
                  A-2     Letter from HCD dated _______, 2014 with findings on adopted Housing
                          Element (to be added at the appropriate time)
          B       Public Participation Documents
                  B-1     May 14, 2014 Participation Invitations (Letter and email) to Organizations
                          and Individuals Known to Have an Interest in Housing Matters
                  B-2     June 6, 2014 Notifications (Letter and email) of July 8 Public Workshop to
                          Organizations and Individuals with an Interest in Housing Matters
                  B-3     June 9, 2014 Press Release (as published in the Paso Robles Press on June
                          13, 2014)
                  B-4     June 20, 2014 Newspaper Affidavit for Notice of Public Workshop on July
                          8, 2014
                  B-5     Draft Minutes of the July 8, 2014 Public Workshop
                  B-6     Comments received prior to or at July 8, 2014 Public Workshop and
                          responses thereto
                  B-7     Notifications of Planning Commission and City Council Public Hearings
                          to Organizations and Individuals Known to Have an Interest in Housing
                          Matters (Letter and email) (to be added at the appropriate time)
                  B-8     Newspaper Affidavits for Planning Commission and City Council Public
                          Hearings (to be added at the appropriate time)
          C       Number of Residential Building Permits Issued 2000 – 2013
          D       Changes in Housing Supply 2010-2013
                  D-1     Historical Residential Growth January 1, 2010 – December 31, 2013
                  D-2     Replacement Housing Need 2010 - 2013
          E       Demographics
                  E-1     Age of the Population
                  E-2     Race and Ethnicity of Population and Households
                  E-3     Household Income
                  E-4     Employment
          F       Rents and Income
                  F-1     Residential Rent and Vacancy Status (February 2014)
                  F-2     Market Rents (February 2014)
                  F-3     Income and Market Rent (February 2014)
          G       Paso Robles’ Subsidized Housing: Inventory and Preservation Analysis
          H       FAQs from City Web Site
          I       Ordinance 976 N.S. (Emergency Shelters)
          J       Inventory of Vacant and Under-Developed Residential Land
          K       Map of Low and Very Low Income Sites
          L       Housing Types Permitted by Zoning District
          M       Development Regulations’ Effect on Affordability
          N       Findings for Approval of Discretionary Development Applications
          O       Multi-Family Design Guidelines 2005
                                               H-iv

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
Tables
     Table H-1        Quantified Objectives for New Construction ..................................................H-17
     Table H-2        Quantified Objectives for Rehabilitation..........................................................H-18
     Table H-3        Quantified Objectives for Conservation ...........................................................H-18
     Table H-4        2008 Regional Housing Needs ...........................................................................H-19
     Table H-5        2011 Quantified Objectives ................................................................................H-20
     Table H-6        Dwelling Units Constructed 2008 - 2013 ..........................................................H-21
     Table H-7        Progress Made in Implementing 2011 Housing Element ..............................H-24
     Table H-8        Population Projection..........................................................................................H-29
     Table H-9        Paso Robles Household Characteristics by Type 2000-2010 .........................H-32
     Table H-10       San Luis Obispo County 2014 Income Limits .................................................H-33
     Table H-11       Projection of Households by Income Group Through 2019 ..........................H-33
     Table H-12       Tenure in 2010 by Income Group ......................................................................H-35
     Table H-13       Overpayment in 2012 by Income Group ..........................................................H-35
     Table H-14       Overcrowded Housing in Paso Robles.............................................................H-36
     Table H-15       Paso Robles Special Needs Groups ...................................................................H-37
     Table H-16       City and County Housing Growth Trends 2010-2014 ....................................H-48
     Table H-17       Changes in Housing Stock, City of Paso Robles 2000-2013 ...........................H-48
     Table H-18       Paso Robles Age of Housing Stock ...................................................................H-49
     Table H-19       Housing Conditions Survey (2009) ...................................................................H-49
     Table H-20       Median Home Prices in the City of Paso Robles (2007-2013) ........................H-50
     Table H-21       Ability to Purchase ..............................................................................................H-51
     Table H-22       Rental Affordability ............................................................................................H-51
     Table H-23       Target Housing Unit Distribution .....................................................................H-58
     Table H-24       Land Use Categories by Income Level .............................................................H-59
     Table H-25       Specific Plan Area Residential Capacities by Income Level ..........................H-59
     Table H-26       Inventory for Low and Very Low Income Households .................................H-61
     Table H-27       Planning Permit Process .....................................................................................H-70
     Table H-28       Planning Permit Processing Fees ......................................................................H-72
     Table H-29       Building Permit Fees ...........................................................................................H-72
     Table H-30       Water and Sewer Connection Fees....................................................................H-73
     Table H-31       Development Impact Fees ..................................................................................H-73
     Table H-32       Cost of Public Improvements ............................................................................H-75
                                                  H-v
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
This page left blank intentionally.
                                       H-vi
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
                                       HOUSING ELEMENT
1.0       Introduction
1.1       Purpose
This Housing Element is an update of the 2011 Paso Robles General Plan Housing Element. It
addresses the City’s housing needs for the five year planning period between June 30, 2014 and
June 30, 2019.
Article 10.6 (Housing Elements) of the Planning and Zoning Law of the State of California (State
Government Code Section 65580 et seq.) establishes the State’s housing policies and identifies
the responsibilities of a municipality to facilitate the improvement and development of housing
to make adequate provisions for the housing needs of all economic segments of the community.
State Housing Policy:
     a) The availability of housing is of vital statewide importance, and the early attainment of decent
          housing and a suitable living environment for every Californian, including farmworkers, is a
          priority of the highest order.
     b) The early attainment of this goal requires the cooperative participation of government and the
          private sector in an effort to expand housing opportunities and accommodate the housing needs of
          Californians of all economic levels.
     c) The provision of housing affordable to low- and moderate-income households requires the
          cooperation of all levels of government.
     d) Local and state governments have a responsibility to use their powers to facilitate the
          improvement and development of housing to meet the needs of residents at all economic levels.
     e) The Legislature recognizes that in carrying out this, each local government also has the
          responsibility to consider economic, environmental, and fiscal factors and community goals set
          forth in the general plan and cooperate with other local governments and the state in addressing
          regional housing needs.
According to State law, each city and county is to review and update its Housing Element once
every five years. The purpose of this periodic review is to prepare:
     a) An assessment of housing needs, including an inventory of resources and constraints to the
          meeting of these needs;
     b) A statement of community goals, quantified objectives and policies regarding the maintenance,
          preservation, improvement, and development of housing;
     c) A program setting forth a five year schedule of actions the local government is undertaking or
          intends to undertake to implement the policies and achieve the goals and objectives of the housing
          element.
                                                  H-1

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
1.2       Schedule for Adoption of Housing Element
As noted in Section 1.1, this Housing Element addresses the City’s housing needs for the five
year planning period between June 30, 2014 and June 30, 2019. The City completed a draft
Housing Element in May 2014 and submitted it to the State Department of Housing and
Community Development (HCD) for review.
NOTE: the City will submit a draft 2014 Housing Element to HCD for review in July 2014. This
section will be updated following receipt of HCD’s comments on that Draft.
1.3       Relation to, and Consistency with, Other General Plan Elements
The Housing Element is closely related to the Land Use, Circulation, Open Space, and Noise
Elements. For residential land use, the Land Use Element assigns several designations for single
family homes, multi-family housing (apartments and condominiums), and mobile homes. The
single and multi-family land use designations have several designations each for different
densities (intensities). Decisions on land use type and densities are based on such factors as
access to the transportation system, proximity to noise sources (primarily traffic and airport-
related), access and proximity to open space, commercial and industrial uses, and topography.
Residential land use designations are also assigned in a manner that best matches the City’s
housing needs, as identified in the Housing Element, with these factors.
In 2003, the General Plan was updated in its entirety, and the Housing Element was consistent
with the other General Plan elements. In 2004 and in 2011, the Housing Element was amended
in accordance with recommendations made by the State Department of Housing and
Community Development (HCD) to bring the element into full conformance with State Housing
Element Law. The 2004 and 2011 amendments did not, in turn, create any inconsistencies with
other elements of the General Plan.
The 2011 Housing Element Update works with the 2003 General Plan, as amended by several
individual Land Use Element Amendments between 2004 and 2014, but does not create any
inconsistencies with other elements of the General Plan. As will be shown in Chapter 5, the City
presently has more than sufficient designated land use capacity to meet its various housing
needs.
1.4       Information Sources for the Housing Element Update
US Census Data from the 2000 and 2010 Decennial Censuses and the 2010-2012 American
Community Survey was the primary source of information for this Housing Element update.
Additional information was obtained from the State of California Department of Finance, the
US Department of Agriculture, California Employment Development Department (EDD), the
San Luis Obispo Council of Governments (SLOCOG), and the 2009 Economic Outlook for Paso
Robles, and City land use inventory and building permit records through December 31, 2013.
1.5 Public Participation
The Housing Element expresses the community’s goals for meeting the housing needs of all
economic segments of the community. Under state law, local governments must be diligent in
                                           H-2

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
soliciting participation by all segments of the community in this effort. During preparation of
the Housing Element Update, citizen participation was actively encouraged in the following
ways:
     x    On May 14, 2014, a letter was mailed and emailed to organizations and individuals
          known to have an interest in housing matters in the City and in San Luis Obispo
          County. (A copy of this letter is attached as Appendix B-1.) This letter:
          ¾ Invited the addressees to participate in the Housing Element Update process by
              reviewing and commenting on the existing element, the Housing Element Status
              report in the City’s 2014 General Plan Status Report, and the public review draft
              element (to be released in early June 2014);
          ¾ Advised addressees that the Planning Commission and City Council would conduct
              a joint public workshop on the public review draft element on July 8, 2014, to which
              the addressees and the public will be invited to attend and be heard;
          ¾ Requested that addressees review the distribution list and advise the City if other
              organizations or individuals should be invited to participate.
     x    On June 6, 2014, the addressees for the May 14 Letter were sent a new letter and an email
          advising them of the availability of the Public Review Draft Housing Element on the
          City’s website and announced that hard copies and CDs of the Draft could be purchased
          from the City for the costs of reproduction. A copy of this letter and email is included in
          Appendix B-2.
     x    On June 9, 2014, the City issued a press release to announce the availability of the Draft
          2014 Housing Element Update for review and comment and to invite the public to
          attend a workshop on the Draft 2014 Housing Element Update on July 8. On June 13,
          2014, the Paso Robles Press ran a ¼ page version of the press release. A copy of this
          press release is included in Appendix B-3.
     x    On June 20, 2014, the City published a legal notice of the July 8 workshop in the San Luis
          Obispo Tribune. (A copy of this notice is included in Appendix B-4.)
     x    A public workshop before a joint session of the City’s Planning Commission and City
          Council was conducted on July 8, 2014. Prior to the meeting, the City had received
          written correspondence from three interested parties. Seven members of the public
          made oral comments on the draft plan. A copy of the draft minutes of that meeting are
          attached as Appendix B-5. The comments recorded in the minutes were considered in
          the preparation of the Revised Public Hearing Draft Housing Element. Appendix B-6.
          includes a table that contains responses to each of the comments made.
     x    On July 18, 2014, the City submitted a draft Housing Element Update to the State
          Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) for its review pursuant to
          Government Code Section 65585(b).
                                                H-3

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
     x    On August 22, 2014, HCD issued a letter stating that, subject to inclusion of revisions to
          the Draft Housing Element as proposed by City staff on August 21 and 22, 2014, in
          response to recommendations made by HCD, the Draft Housing Element will meet the
          requirements of State Housing Element Law. A copy of this letter is included in
          Appendix A-1.
     x    On August 29, 2014, the City posted a revised Public Hearing Draft Housing Element
          containing the revisions made by staff in response to HCD comments on its website and
          gave written notice (US Mail and email) to organizations and individuals known to have
          an interest in housing matters in the City and in San Luis Obispo County and placed
          copies of the revised element in the City Library. Additionally, the city issued a press
          release on this date. Copies of this letter and press release are attached in Appendix B-7.)
     x    On September 23, 2014, the Planning Commission conducted a public hearing on the
          revised Draft Housing Element and on a 5-1-1 vote, recommended that it be adopted by
          the City Council with the changes recommended by HCD. The dissenting vote
          expressed approval for the contents of the element, but opined that it did not adequately
          commit the City to allocating resources to address the actions.
     x    On October 7, 2014, the City Council a public hearing on the revised Draft Housing
          Element, and on a 4-0-1 vote adopted the revised Draft Housing Element, including the
          changes recommended by HCD.
     x    Newspaper notices of the Planning Commission and City Council hearings were
          published in the San Luis Obispo Tribune, a newspaper of general circulation. Copies of
          the affidavit of publication is attached in Appendix B-8.
1.6       Local Setting
During the decade between 2000 and 2010, the City’s population increased by 23%. Most of the
growth in the City over the past 20 years has occurred on the east side of the Salinas River. The
presence of steep hills has limited growth to the west of the City. Residential land uses made up
the single largest land use category in the City. Existing residential land use designations
comprise 4,352 net acres and approximately 39 percent of the total designated net City acreage.
1.7       Housing Context
     a. Economy
The 2014 Housing Element Update is being prepared as the Nation slowly recovers from a
substantial recession that began in 2007.
The pace of new home construction was robust between 2000 and 2006. During this time,
building permits issued for new residential units averaged 416 per year. However, between
2007 and 2013, the annual average number of building permits issued dropped to 56 (although
128 permits were issued in 2013. On April 1, 2014, the City amended the Land Use Element to
                                                H-4

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
adopt a new population projection that extended expected build-out from 2025 to 2045, based
on an expected slower rate of growth than experienced between 1980 and 2010 and the need to
prepare specific plans for most of the developable vacant land. This projection anticipates
adding 912 units by December 31, 2019, or an average of 156 units per year. Appendix C shows
the number of residential building permits issued between 1990 and 2013.
Between 2000 and 2007, rents and housing prices had risen substantially. According to the 2009
Economic Outlook, the median home price in the City had risen as high as $444,900 in 2007.
Beginning in 2007, home prices adjusted downward, and in 2010, they appear to be slowly
rebounding. DataQuick, a real estate information tracking firm, reported that the median price
for homes sold in 2010 was $301,600 and that, in 2013, the median price of a new home rose to
$358,000.
A major contributing factor to the recent recession was the practice of making subprime
adjustable rate loans, many of which resulted in foreclosures. Comparison of numbers of
foreclosures reported by RealtyTrac for January 2011, the foreclosure rate was 3.2 per 1,000
homes in San Luis Obispo County, which was relatively low, compared to rates of 8.6 per
thousand for San Bernardino County, 7.1 per thousand in Sacramento County, and 8.8 per
thousand for Riverside County in the same period. In March 2014, RealtyTrac reported
foreclosure rates of 0.5 per 1,000 homes in San Luis Obispo County, compared to rates of 1.9 per
thousand for San Bernardino County, 1.4 per thousand in Sacramento County, and 1.9 per
thousand for Riverside County.
On the positive side, the City has a diverse portfolio of businesses in different economic sectors:
agriculture, manufacturing, tourism, construction, retail, and services. With such a degree of
diversification, it is anticipated that the City will “weather” the economic storm and emerge in a
healthy state.
     b. 2006 Economic Strategy
In 2006, the City adopted an updated Economic Strategy. The City still finds this strategy to be
relevant in 2014. Key policies of this strategy that are related to housing include:
x    Maintain safe, healthy, and attractive physical environment.
x    Establish cohesive, compact, and livable community for individuals and families.
x    Encourage community development in live/work, mixed use, and compact, pedestrian-
     oriented forms to accommodate all income levels and lifestyles.
x    Increase labor force residents within City (limits).
x    Preserve energy and natural resources.
                                               H-5

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
Since adoption of the Economic Strategy, the City has:
x    Initiated preparation of the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan, which would create a new
     vision for continued development and redevelopment of the historic West Side of the City to
     include: mixed use; increased residential densities; redeveloping Oak Park Public Housing
     to replace deteriorating housing and add new housing units; increasing walkability and
     transit options;
x    Continued to pursue development of specific plans featuring compact urban design and a
     mix of residential densities and types for the Chandler Ranch, Olsen Ranch, and Beechwood
     areas;
x    Initiated efforts to protect and manage natural resources to provide a healthy environment
     and save energy (e.g. addressing greenhouse gases per AB 32, low impact design).
     c. Areas for Housing Growth
West Side: The area west of the Salinas River is the historic core of the City. This area is
essentially fully-urbanized and houses approximately one-third of the City’s population.
Opportunities for new housing include: (a) infill, primarily in developing additional units on
underdeveloped multi-family zoned properties as there are but a handful of vacant parcels, and
(b) mixed use: housing built in conjunction with commercial uses. The Uptown/Town Centre
Specific Plan covers most of the area that is developable, and it provides a vision for
accommodating additional housing in a manner that conforms to the historic character of the
West Side as well as facilitating affordability to lower income households.
As of December 31, 2013, the West Side has a capacity for 1,170 potential new units, divided as
follows:
x    941 potential new units in the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan Area (since December 31,
     2013). Most of these will be infill units on underdeveloped lots or on the same property as
     commercial buildings as mixed-use. There are only 23 vacant lots in this planning area.
     During the 20 year period between 1991 and 2010, an average of 9.4 units per year have been
     added to this area.
x    122 potential new units on vacant lots zoned for single family residential use located outside
     of the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan Area.
x    107 potential new units on underdeveloped lots zoned for multi-family residential use
     outside of the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan Area.
East Side: This area houses almost two-thirds of the City’s population. Its development began
in the late 1950s and, except for specific plan areas, is quickly approaching build-out. It is
dominated by single-family housing tracts, with pockets of multi-family located along Creston
Road and adjacent to community and regional scale commercial centers. The great bulk of
future residential development, both single family and multi-family, will occur with the
                                              H-6

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
Chandler Ranch, Olsen Ranch, and Beechwood Specific Plan areas, which are situated on the
eastern and southeastern edges of the City.
As of December 31, 2013, the East Side has a capacity for 3,828 potential new units, divided as
follows:
x    Chandler Ranch Area Specific Plan: 1,439 potential new units on 837 acres of undeveloped
     land on the east side of the City, generally north of Linne Road, south of Union Road, and
     east of Golden Hill Road. The plan will offer a variety of single and multi-family residential
     housing types and limited amounts of neighborhood commercial. Property owners have
     indicated a desire to incorporate compact urban design, interconnecting grid street patterns,
     pedestrian and bicycle trails, and integrated open space. A draft Specific Plan was published
     in 2005 and a Draft EIR published in 2006. The Draft EIR identified traffic impacts that were
     considered to be significant, based on standards set in the 2003 Circulation Element. The
     costs to mitigate the impacts to meet those standards were beyond the capacity of both the
     City and the property owners in the specific plan areas (CRASP, Olsen Ranch, and
     Beechwood Area). In 2009, the City initiated an update to the Circulation Element to
     address new State mandates for “complete streets” and seek alternative traffic mitigations
     that were not as financially burdensome. Work on the CRASP specific plan was idled while
     the Circulation Element was being updated. On August 31, 2010, the City Council re-
     authorized CRASP property owners to prepare a draft specific plan, and grading models,
     using their own funds. The slow recovery from the economic recession that began in 2007
     appears to be the biggest hurdle to resuming preparation of this plan.
x    Beechwood Area Specific Plan: 238 acres of agricultural land on the southeast side of the
     City, south of Meadowlark Road, north of Creston Road, and east of Beechwood Drive. The
     General Plan presently designates this area for 674 dwelling units. A draft specific plan had
     been prepared by the City’s consultants in 2007. However, progress on that plan had been
     hampered by the economic recession and environmental constraints related to the 2003
     Circulation Element. On October 29, 2013, the City Council conducted a public workshop to
     review a conceptual development plan proposed by owners of a majority of the properties
     in this area. The Council gave direction to guide the owners in the preparation of a specific
     plan that would offer a variety of single and multi-family residential housing types and
     limited amounts of neighborhood commercial. The plan will incorporate compact urban
     design, interconnecting grid street patterns, pedestrian and bicycle trails, and integrated
     open space.
x    Olsen Ranch Specific Plan: 254 acres of agricultural land on the southeast side of the City,
     south of Linne Road, north of Meadowlark Road, and west of Hansen Road. The General
     Plan presently designates this area for 673 dwelling units. A draft specific plan had been
     prepared by the City’s consultants in 2007. However, progress on that plan had been
     hampered by the economic recession and environmental constraints related to the 2003
     Circulation Element. The property owners have expressed their disapproval of the 2007
     draft plan, but have not yet indicated a desire to prepare a plan of their own.
                                             H-7

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
x    Borkey Area Specific Plan: 216 potential new units, of which 28 would be single family
     residential on vacant and underdeveloped lots and 188 would be on multi-family zoned
     parcels along Experimental Station Road, east and west of Buena Vista Drive.
x    Union/46 Specific Plan: 67 potential new units, of which 18 would be on vacant recorded
     single family lots and 49 on large (1-6 acre) parcels that may still be subdivided for single
     family lots.
x    Other Infill: 759 potential new units, of which 94 would be single-family residential on
     vacant lots, 440 multi-family units on vacant lots, 197 multi-family units on underdeveloped
     infill lots, and 28 units on a mixed-use site.
     d. Housing-Related Activities in Progress in 2014
As the 2014 Housing Element is being prepared for adoption, the City is actively engaged in the
following activities:
x    Guiding and supporting the redevelopment of Oak Park Public Housing. In 2010, the City
     Council approved an application for a development plan filed by Housing Authority of the
     City of Paso Robles that proposes to remove the 148 existing aging dwelling units and
     replace them with 302 new dwelling units. All units will be reserved for occupancy by low,
     very-low, and extremely low income households. Phase One began construction in 2013,
     and is scheduled to be complete in mid-2014. It consists of 80 units, of which 41 units will
     replace existing apartments and 39 will be new inventory. In March 2014, the Housing
     Authority submitted its 4th application for Federal Tax Credits for Phase Two, which
     consists of 70 units. The City has provided financial support for Phase One in the form a
     low interest loan of up to $1.018 million in General Funds to defer payment of City fees over
     30 years. The City has approved a similar loan for Phase Two.
x    Preparation of specific plans featuring compact urban design and a mix of residential
     densities and types for the Chandler Ranch, Olsen Ranch, and Beechwood areas. The City
     Council has directed that these specific plans incorporate many of the principles used in the
     Uptown/Town Centre Specific plan that compact, urban design to increase walkability,
     alternative transportation modes and connectivity, and to preserve and manage the City’s
     natural resources, which collectively will help lower housing and living costs for residents.
x    Implementation of the Climate Action Plan, which was adopted in November 2013
     Preparation to provide a healthy environment and save energy.
                                              H-8

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
     e. Expected Major Housing Issues and Challenges 2014 - 2019
x    Ensuring that the Chandler Ranch, Olsen Ranch, and Beechwood Area Specific Plans:
     ¾    Incorporate a mix of housing types and densities, consistent with Land Use Element
          designations, so that housing for all income levels is provided and evenly distributed
          throughout the City.
     ¾    Incorporate principles used in the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan that promote
          compact, urban design to increase walkability, alternative transportation modes and
          connectivity, and to preserve and manage the City’s natural resources, which
          collectively will help lower housing and living costs for residents.
x    Availability of financial resources, to assist construction of new low and moderate income
     housing projects, preservation of existing low income housing at risk of being converted to
     market rate housing, and conservation of housing in need of rehabilitation. In 2011, the
     State Legislature eliminated Redevelopment. With the elimination of Redevelopment, a
     major source of supplemental funding for affordable housing, the Redevelopment Low and
     Moderate Income Housing (LMIH) Fund, has been lost. Much of the affordable
     (government subsidized) housing in Paso Robles had been assisted with LMIH funds.
x    Availability of staff resources to pursue actions. Since 2008, the Planning Division of the
     Community Development Department has lost three of six positions which, because of
     decreased City revenues, have not been replaced. In order for any of these positions to be
     replaced during the period of this Housing Element (by 2019), the City will need to
     experience continued growth in revenue and a pressing demand for additional staff
     resources to process development applications.
                                              H-9

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
This page left blank intentionally.
                                       H-10
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
2.0       Housing Goals, Policies, and Action Items
This section describes both the qualitative goals, policies, and action items and the quantified
objectives for providing safe, adequate housing for residents in Paso Robles. An assessment of
current local housing conditions and needs has been prepared to facilitate the formulation of these
qualitative goals, policies, and action items and quantitative objectives. This assessment is contained
in Chapters 4 and 5 of this Housing Element.
The responsibility for administering the Housing Element and ensuring that policies are implemented
will rest with the Community Development Department. The funding for all programs for which the
expense will be staff time will be the annual budget for the Community Development Department.
The sources of funding for staff time are the Community Development Block Grant Funds (20% of
annual allotments allowed for administrative and capacity building activities) and General Funds.
The sources of funding for housing construction, rehabilitation, and/or preservation projects will be
noted with those action items as appropriate.
As noted in Chapter 1, in 2011, Redevelopment was eliminated in California. and with it, Low and
Moderate Income Housing (LMIH) funds, a major source of supplemental funding for affordable
housing, was lost and many of the actions suggested in prior Housing Elements may not be feasible to
be accomplished during the period of this Housing Element.
2.1       Qualitative Goals, Policies, and Action Items
     a. Goals
H-1.      Develop a range of housing types, densities, and affordability levels to meet the diverse needs
          of the community, maintaining a balanced supply of ownership and rental units.
H-2.      Preserve the City’s inventory of housing that is affordable to low income households.
H-3.      Preserve the City’s neighborhoods in a safe and decent condition and eliminate the causes and
          spread of blight.
H-4.      Mitigate or remove existing and potential governmental constraints to housing production
          and affordability.
H-5.      Ensure choice of housing types and locations to all persons regardless of race, creed, age, or
          sex.
H-6.      Design neighborhoods, subdivisions, sites, and housing units to effectively manage natural
          resources.
     b. Policies and Actions
Goal H-1          Develop a range of housing types, densities, and affordability levels to meet the diverse needs of
the community, maintaining a balanced supply of ownership and rental units.
                                               H-11

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
     Policy H-1.1         Provide an adequate number of housing sites to accommodate the City‘s share
     of regional housing needs and its special housing needs.
     Policy H-1.2         Promote and expand housing opportunities for all segments of the community,
     recognizing such factors as income, age, family size, and physical ability. Integrate such housing
     opportunities in each neighborhood or planning area so as to avoid concentrations of any type of
     housing in limited areas of the City. NOTE: It is not the intent of this policy that housing projects
     that are designed for 100 percent occupancy by moderate, low, and very low-income households
     should be discouraged.
     Ongoing Actions/Programs
     1    Evaluate all proposed amendments to the General Plan’s Land Use Map and the Zoning Map
          for their affect on the City’s capacity for meeting its Regional Housing Needs Allocation
          (RHNA).
     2    Continue to participate in the countywide Ten Year Plan to End Homelessness with the goal of
          eliminating duplication of homeless services and concentrating common efforts.
     3    Maintain a Comprehensive Housing Program with sufficient resources available to administer
          the various Housing Element programs, CDBG Program, and other sources of housing funds.
     4     Evaluate all proposed amendments to the General Plan’s Land Use Map and the Zoning Map
          for their affect on the City’s policy of integrating diverse housing opportunities in each
          neighborhood or planning area.
     5    Require new specific plans for undeveloped areas (Chandler Ranch, Olsen Ranch, Beechwood
          Area, and any to follow) to provide a balance of housing opportunities (types and densities)
          for all income groups.
     6    Encourage provision of affordable housing in the vicinity of the Cuesta College North County
          Campus through the designation of multi-family sites near the campus.
     7    For those housing units and/or projects for lower income households that are assisted with
          General Funds for the purpose of offsetting development impact fees, allow for deferral of
          payment of fees several years beyond occupancy.
     One-Time Actions/Projects
     8    Work with developers to increase the supply of new housing for all income groups and special
          needs throughout the City. Examples would include: prioritizing staff time to process permits for
          units affordable to lower income households; providing technical assistance in applying for
          government financing (e.g., HOME funds); concessions and incentives, using General Funds to
          offset City development fees; providing preliminary staff review of development proposals at no
          cost to developers. The City will continue to work with the Paso Robles Housing Authority to
          provide financial and technical assistance to complete all phases of the redevelopment of Oak
          Park Public Housing. The City will consider options for providing financial assistance to
          Habitat for Humanity for its proposed project at 2811 Vine Street.
          Target Dates:
                                             H-12

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
          Oak Park Public Housing Phase Two: December 31, 2014 to issue building permits
          Oak Park Public Housing Phases Three-Five: Ongoing through June 30, 2019 to secure financing
          Habitat for Humanity - Approve Amended Tentative Tract: December 31, 2014
          Habitat for Humanity - Secure Financial Assistance: December 31, 2015
     9    Adopt an ordinance to amend the Zoning Code to accomplish the following:
          a. Implement SB 745 (Statutes of 2013) to amend the Zoning Code’s definitions for
              “Supportive Housing” and “Transitional Housing” and add a definition for “Target
              Population” to implement this bill.
          b. Amend Table 21.16.200’s description of Second Units (Item B.4.a) to remove the reference
              to “related senior citizens” as State Law requires that second units be open to any
              occupants, regardless of age or family relationship;
          c. Amend Subsection C.3 of Section 21.21.160 (Emergency Shelters) to provide that the City
              may require a separation of any emergency shelter from any other emergency shelter
              provided that such separation shall not be required to be more than 300 feet (as provided
              in Government Code Section 65583.
          Target Date: December 31, 2014
     10 Concurrent with consideration of approval of specific plans for the Beechwood Area and
          Olsen Ranch, amend the Land Use Element Map to allow for reduction in numbers of low
          income units at 20 units/acre in both specific plan areas as follows:
          a. In the Beechwood Area, reduce the number of dwelling units at 20 units per acre from 200
              to 100 and add acreage for Residential Multi-Family, 8 units per acre to accommodate 50
              units;
          b. In the Olsen Ranch, reduce the number of dwelling units at 20 units per acre from 95 to 60.
          The objective of this action is to enable a viable mix of housing types for all income groups in
          these areas as an alternative to relatively high concentrations of low income housing that
          would be contrary to Policy H-1.2). Such reductions in numbers of land designated for low
          income households at 20 units/acre is possible because: (a) the combined Regional Housing
          Needs Allocation for low and very low income units has dropped substantially from 1,094 in
          2001 (which were the basis for the original assignments in these specific plan areas) to 200 in
          2013 and (b) the City has more than sufficient sites zoned for multi-family residential at 20
          units/acre in other locations in the City. Target Date: Concurrent with consideration of adoption of
          the Beechwood Area and Olsen Ranch Specific Plans (timing is dependent on private development).
     11 Encourage developers of single family dwellings to incorporate “Universal Design” and/or
          ”visitability” improvements to the greatest extent feasible. Include policy statements to this
          effect in the Chandler Ranch, Olsen Ranch, and Beechwood Area Specific Plans. Provide
          technical assistance to developers in this area. Target Date: Fiscal Year 15/16.
     12 Work with the Tri-Counties Regional Center to implement an outreach program that informs
          families within the City of housing and services available for persons with developmental
          disabilities. The program could include the development of an informational brochure,
          including information on services on the City’s website, and providing housing-related
          training for individuals/families through workshops. Target Date: Fiscal Year 15/16.
                                               H-13

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
Goal H-2          Preserve the City’s inventory of housing that is affordable to low income households.
     Policy H-2.1 Protect subsidized housing designated for occupancy by low and very low-income
     households from premature conversion to market rate.
     Policy H-2.2 Maintain an inventory of market rate housing that is affordable to low-income
     households.
     Ongoing Actions/Programs
     13       As part of the General Plan Annual Report, evaluate the need/urgency to amend the
              Zoning Code to incorporate regulations for the conversion of rental housing (apartments)
              to condominiums in order to maintain residential stability, prevent a decline in the supply
              of rental housing, and to require that affected tenants receive right of first refusal to
              purchase and/or relocation assistance.
     14       Provide technical assistance to owners and non-profit housing corporation buyers of
              existing subsidized low income housing complexes that are at risk of conversion to market
              rate to extend subsidy contracts and/or find government financing (e.g., HOME funds)
              for acquisition and rehabilitation, including the following:
              x   Monitor complexes that are At-Risk of conversion to market rate.
              x   Work with Potential Purchasers - Establish contact with public and non-profit agencies
                  interested in purchasing and/or managing units at-risk to inform them of the status of
                  such projects. Where feasible, provide technical assistance and support to these
                  organizations with respect to financing.
              x   Tenant Education – In the event that conversion of a subsidized complex to market rate
                  becomes likely, the City will work with tenants of at-risk units and provide them with
                  education regarding tenant rights and conversion procedures. The City will also
                  provide tenants in at-risk projects information regarding Section 8 rent subsidies
                  through the Housing Authority, and other affordable housing opportunities in the
                  City.
     One-Time Actions/Projects
     15       Amend the Zoning Code to establish minimum densities for multi-family zoned
              properties. Target Date: Fiscal Year 15/16.
Goal H-3          Preserve the City’s neighborhoods in a safe and decent condition and eliminate the causes and
spread of blight.
     Policy H-3.1 Invest in the redevelopment of neighborhoods with aging and deteriorating housing
     and infrastructure.
     Ongoing Actions/Programs
     16       Enforce the City’s zoning, property maintenance, building, fire, parking and nuisance
              abatement codes.
                                                H-14

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
     17       Actively implement the vision for development and redevelopment of the West Side as
              established in the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan. This will include: seeking grants
              for infrastructure improvements; preparing an appendix to expand the list of acceptable
              architectural styles; providing technical assistance to developers in understanding and
              applying the new development standards; and regular monitoring and updating the plan
              as necessary to ensure that the development standards are effective in promoting
              affordable housing
     One-Time Actions/Projects
     18       Continue to provide financial assistance to the redevelopment of Oak Park Public
              Housing, particularly Phase Two (build 70 new units of which 23 will replace deteriorating
              existing units). The City may use General Funds for this purpose if no other funds are
              available (e.g. from a future State program to replace Redevelopment housing funds).
              Additionally, the City should continue to fully support applications for Federal HOME
              funds for this project. As part of this effort, the City will also give top priority for the
              housing for extremely low-income households. Target Date: Fiscal Year 13/14 and subsequent
              years.
     19 Work with non-profit organizations to obtain financial assistance to rehabilitating dwellings
          owned or rented by lower-income households. Outreach should include such organizations as
          Community Action Partnership of San Luis Obispo County (i.e., their weatherization
          program), Rebuilding Together, Christmas in April. Target Date: Fiscal Year 15/16.
Goal H-4          Mitigate or remove potential governmental constraints to housing production and affordability.
     Policy H-4.1 Assess each proposed ordinance or policy that would affect housing for its effects on
     housing cost recognizing that some increases in housing costs might be offset by decreases in
     other household costs (e.g. energy bills).
     One-Time Actions/Projects
     20       Prepare a report that reviews zoning regulations, standard conditions, and permit
              processing procedures to identify any provisions which unnecessarily increase the cost of
              housing. Present this report in conjunction with the Annual Review of the General Plan.
              Target Date: February/March 2016.
Goal H-5          Ensure choice of housing types and locations to all persons regardless of race, creed, age, or sex.
     Policy H-5.1         Promote public awareness of federal, state, and local regulations regarding
     equal access to housing.
     Ongoing Actions/Programs
     21       Refer residents involved in housing related civil disputes such as landlord/tenant disputes
              and housing discrimination complaints to the California Rural Legal Assistance (for legal
                                               H-15
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
              matters) and to the State Department of Fair Employment and Housing (for
              discrimination).
     22       Provide information to the public on various state and federal housing programs and fair
              housing law. Maintain referral information on the City’s web site and at a variety of other
              locations such as community and senior centers, local social service offices, and other
              public locations including City Hall the City Library.
Goal H-6          Design neighborhoods, subdivisions, sites, and housing units to effectively manage natural
resources.
     Policy H-6.1         Develop and redevelop neighborhoods and planning areas using compact
     urban forms that foster connectivity, walkability, alternative transportation modes.
     Policy H-6.2         Investigate programs and methods that reduce energy consumption and
     effectively manage natural resources (air and water quality, primarily) for application to
     development of housing.
     Ongoing Actions/Programs
     23        Require new specific plans for undeveloped areas (Chandler Ranch, Olsen Ranch,
              Beechwood Area, and any to follow) to incorporate land use and circulation patterns that
              use compact urban forms that foster connectivity, walkability, and alternative
              transportation modes and to incorporate design principles used in the Uptown/Town
              Centre Specific Plan for these items as well as other energy-saving and environmental
              quality protection measures, as appropriate to the topography, vegetation, and location in
              each specific plan area.
     24       Continue development of the Resource Management Plan initiated in 2008 via Resolution
              08-061 to implement Economic Strategy policies to foster multi-modal transportation
              systems, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, develop Low Impact Development standards,
              water conservation, vegetation and habitat conservation measures.
                                             H-16

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
2.2       Quantified Objectives
     a. New Construction.
The Quantified Objectives below (Table H-1) summarize the expected numbers of dwelling units to be
constructed between January 1, 2014 and June 30, 2019.
           Table H-1. Quantified Objectives for New Construction: 01/01/14 – 06/30/19
                                                              Income Group
                                Above                                               Very           Extremely
       Program                                    Moderate           Lower                                             Total       Note #
                               Moderate                                             Low                Low
West Side Single                     22                  0               0             0                 0               22           1
Family
East Side Single                     30                  0               0             0                 0               30           1
Family (Outside of
Specific Plan Areas)
Chandler Ranch,                     100                  0               0             0                 0              100           2
Olsen Ranch,
Beechwood Area
Specific Plans
West Side Multi-                      0                 62              62             0                 0              124           3
Family
Borkey Area Specific                 28                179              14             0                 0              221           4
Plan (Single potential
family units, Tract
2887 and Buena Vista
Apartments)
Oak Park Public                       0                  0              45            90                15              150           5
Housing
Redevelopment –
Phases 1 and 2
Second Units                         0                  0                0             0                 0                0           6
Total                               180                241             121            90                15              647
Notes:
Overall:  Estimates based on projections stated in Table 1E of the Land Use Element.
1.   Estimate considering capacity and economy.
2.   Assumes Beechwood Specific Plan is adopted in 2015 or 2016, but that housing development will not commence until 2017 or 2018 and
     then, the first 100 units will be designed for above-moderate income households. Assumes other specific plans may be adopted during the
     period of this Housing Element, but construction of homes would occur beyond the period of this Housing Element.
3.   Estimate considering capacity and economy. Assumes 50% of projected units will be in condominiums, duplexes, and second units on
     multi-family zoned lots and will be affordable to moderate income; all others will be affordable to low income.
4.   Tract 2887, approved in 2007, has 51 small single family lots and a density of 12 units per acre. Buena Vista Apartments, approved in 2013,
     proposes 142 apartments at 12 units per acre.
5.   Oak Park Redevelopment: Phases One (80 units) and Two (70 units) based on Tax Credit applications
6.   5 second units were built between 2006 and 2008; none have been built since. The City’s Zoning Code permits second units, but no
     projections of anticipated use will be made.
It should be noted that the Quantified Objectives need not equal the City’s Regional Housing Need
Allocation (RHNA) of 492 units. The RHNA is a requirement for residential capacity (expressed in terms
of potential numbers of dwelling units from land that is appropriately zoned and accessible to utilities)
that assumes a need for more capacity than there is actual demand in order to help keep land prices
relatively low. The RHNA is discussed in Chapter 5.
                                                            H-17

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
     b. Rehabilitation.
The Quantified Objectives for Rehabilitation (Table H-2 ) shows the expected numbers of dwelling units
to be “substantially” rehabilitated between January 1, 2014 and June 30, 2019. “Substantial
rehabilitation” is defined as having a valuation of work that is 25 percent or greater of the combined
assessed value of the land and improvements. It is assumed that the rate of substantial rehabilitation in
the period of the Housing Element (i.e., through June 30, 2019) will be as it was between 2009 and 2013.
          Table H-2. Quantified Objectives for Rehabilitation: 01/01/14 – 06/30/19
                                                    Income Group
   Program            Upper         Moderate        Lower Very Low                  Extremely Low            Total           Note #
Market                         6                5          0                  0                0                     11        1
Total                          6                5          0                  0                0                     11
     Notes:
     1. Units to be substantially rehabilitated under free market conditions between January 1, 2014 and June 30, 2019. Rate assumed to be
          the same as experienced between 2009 and 2013. Source: Building Division records.
NOTE: Oak Park replacement units are now tallied in Table H-1 (as part of the 150 units).
     c. Conservation.
The Quantified Objectives below (Table H-3) summarize the expected numbers of dwelling units to
be conserved between January 1, 2014 and June 30, 2019.
           Table H-3. Quantified Objectives for Conservation: 01/01/14 – 06/30/19
                                                    Income Group
   Program            Upper         Moderate        Lower Very Low                  Extremely Low            Total           Note #
Action 12                      0                0         89                89                 0                   178         1
Total                          0                0         89                89                 0                   178
     Note:
     1.   During this Housing Element period, four subsidized apartment complexes (Hacienda del Norte, Riverview Apartments, Creston
          Gardens Apartments, and Paso Robles Garden Apartments) with a total of 178 low income units will become eligible for prepayment
          of the loans securing the affordability covenants for these projects. It is assumed that 50% of the units in each complex are affordable
          to low income households and 50% are affordable to very low income households. The National Low Income Housing Preservation
          and Resident Homeownership Act (LIHPRHA) requires that, in order for a loan to be prepaid, a finding must be made that there does
          not exist a need for low income housing in the community. If this finding cannot be made, prepayment may be made subject to
          granting right of first refusal to purchase the project to public agencies for 12 months and to private nonprofit corporations for 15
          months (periods overlap). Because of the severe shortage of affordable housing, the City should oppose the prepayment and assist
          non-profit housing corporations purchase and rehabilitate the complexes as a back-up measure. This is addressed under Action 12.
                                                            H-18

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
3.0       Status and Evaluation of Existing 2011 Housing Element
The 2011 Housing Element was adopted on June 21, 2011. On August 15, 2011, the State Department
of Housing and Community Development sent the City a letter finding the Housing Element to be in
compliance with State Housing Element Law.
This Chapter of the Housing Element will:
     x    Summarize new residential construction activity between January 1, 2008 and December 31,
          2013;
     x    Summarize the City’s efforts to assist the development of affordable housing, including
          removing constraints, undertaken through December 31, 2013;
     x    Report on progress towards implementing the Action Items contained in the 2011 Housing
          Element.
3.1       Completed New Housing Units: Regional Housing Need and Quantified Objectives
Government Code Section 65583(c)(1)(A) requires that the City’s General Plan identify adequate sites
which will be made available through appropriate zoning and developments standards and with
services and facilities, including water and sewer, to meet the City’s housing needs for all income groups,
including its share of the Regional Housing Need pursuant to Section 65584.
The Regional Housing Allocation Plan adopted by the San Luis Obispo Council of Governments in
August 2008 assigned the City following numbers of dwelling units as its share of the Regional Housing
Need to be met during the period January 1, 2008 through June 30, 2014. A new set of numbers were
issued for the period January 1, 2014 through June 30, 2019. Those numbers will be discussed in Chapter 5.
                                  Table H-4: 2008 Regional Housing Needs
                               Income Category            Dwelling Units (Target)
                           Above Moderate                                 270
                           Moderate                                       120
                           Low                                            105
                           Very Low                                       151
                           TOTAL                                          646
The City was not obligated to ensure that the number of dwelling units shown above is built within this
time frame, it is only obligated to ensure that there is sufficient land appropriately zoned and served. The
Housing Element did, however, establish quantified objectives for building new dwelling units within
the same time frame as shown in the table on the following page.
                                                       H-19

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
                                             Table H-5: 2011 Quantified Objectives
                                                               Income Group
                               Above                                                 Very           Extremely
        Program                                  Moderate             Lower                                               Total         Note #
                             Moderate                                                Low                Low
2008 - 2010 Activity              85                   0                 26            6                  34                151             1
(Appendix D-1)
West Side Single                  10                   0                 0             0                   0                10              2
Family
East Side Single                 147                   0                 0             0                   0                147             2
Family (Outside of
Specific Plan
Areas)
Chandler Ranch,                    0                   0                 0             0                   0                 0              3
Olsen Ranch,
Beechwood Area
Specific Plans
West Side Multi-                   0                   9                 6             0                   0                15              4
Family
Borkey Area                        0                  38                 0             0                   0                38              5
Specific Plan (Tract
2887)
Entitled Low                       0                   0                 72            63                 15                150             6
Income Family
Apartments
Second Units                       0                   0                  5             0                  0                 5              7
Total                            242                  47                109            69                 49                517
     Notes:
     1.    Units constructed (Certificates of Occupancy) between 1/01/08 and 12/31/10.
     2.    Estimate considering capacity and economy.
     3.    Assumes specific plans are adopted in 2012, but that housing development will not commence until 2014, beyond the period of this
           Housing Element.
     4.    Estimate considering capacity and economy.        Condominiums, duplexes, and second units on multi-family zoned lots will be
           affordable to moderate income; all others will be affordable to low income.
     5.    Tract 2887, approved in 2007, has 51 small single family lots and a density of 12 units per acre.
     6.    (a) Hidden Creek Project at 80 S. River Road (completed in 2011). The Tax Credit Application indicates that, of the 81 units, 53
           (including the manager’s) would be for lower income households, 20 would be very low income households, and 8 would be
           extremely low income households. (b) Oak Park Redevelopment (approved in 2010, seeking financing in 2011). The Tax Credit
           Application for Phase One indicates that, of the 69 units, 19 would be for low income households, 43 would be very low income
           households, and 7 would be extremely low income households.
     7.    5 second units were built between 2006 and 2008; it is conservatively expected that this rate will continue for the next 5 years.
Between January 1, 2008 and December 31, 2013, a total of 392 new dwelling units were issued
Certificates of Occupancy, and those dwelling units can be divided among the following income groups:
           Above Moderate                  228
           Moderate                          15
           Lower                             81
           Very Low                          26
           Extremely Low                     42
           Total                           392
                                                                         H-20

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
Details showing the composition of the above new units are attached in Appendix D-1. Together with the
“Historic” housing activity reported in the first row of the Quantified Objectives Table, the total numbers of new
dwelling units developed between January 1, 2008 and December 31, 2013 are shown in the table below.
                                    Table H-6: Dwelling Units Constructed 2008 – 2013
                                        Income Category
                     Above                                                           Extremely
     Year           Moderate          Moderate          Lower         Very Low           Low                 Total
      2008                    44                  0             20                6              34             104
      2009                    21                  0              6                0               0              27
      2010                    20                  4              0                0               0              24
      2011                    38                  0             54              20                8             120
      2012                    56                10               1                0               0              67
      2013                    49                  1              0                0               0              50
     Total                   228                15              81              26               42             392
3.2       New Housing Units: Under Construction and Approved
As of December 31, 2013, there were active building permits for 103 units, which can be classified by
income groups as follows:
          Above Moderate            20   (single family development)
          Moderate                    3  (West Side apartments)
          Lower                     24   (Oak Park Redevelopment, Phase One)
          Very Low                   48  (Oak Park Redevelopment, Phase One)
          Extremely Low               8  (Oak Park Redevelopment, Phase One)
          Total                    103
In addition to the above figures, there are hundreds of vacant lots in recorded and tentatively-
approved subdivisions. Most of these will be affordable only to above moderate income households.
3.3       New Housing Units for Lower Income Households: Proposed
In June 2010, the City Council approved an application to develop 302 apartments for low
income families at Oak Park Public Housing (between 28th and 34th Streets, east of Park
Street. 154 of the units will be new; 148 will be replacement units. The project will be
developed in 4 or more phases. That application included a request for a density bonus and
an extra density bonus. On December 4, 2012, the City Council approved a deferral of City
fees up to $1.018 million for Phase One of this project (80 units). The deferral will be financed
via a loan of General Funds with a 33 year term. The applicants received Federal Tax Credits
for Phase One in 2012 and commenced construction in early 2013. Construction of Phase One
is scheduled for early 2014.
In November 2010, the Redevelopment Agency adopted a resolution reserving LMIH funds
to assist Habitat for Humanity build 6 single family homes for very low income households
                                                          H-21

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
in the 2800 Block of Vine Street. In April 2011, the City approved a development plan and
subdivision map for this project. In 2011, the City Council approved a loan of $225,000 in
CalHome Funds to purchase the site. In 2012 and 2013, Habitat for Humanity met with City
staff to explore alternatives such as a revised plan with increased density and deferral of City
fees similar to those approved for Oak Park (to replace LMIH funds which are no longer
available).
3.4       New Housing Units for Lower Income Households: Completed Since January 1,
          2011
In 2011, Certificates of Occupancy were issued 81 apartment units (Hidden Creek Village).
In 2012, Certificates of Occupancy were issued for one caretaker unit above a commercial
building.
In 2013, no Certificates of Occupancy were issued for dwelling units that would be affordable
to lower income households.
3.5       Rehabilitated Units
Housing rehabilitation presently occurs on a market rate/unsubsidized basis. Between 1988
and 1995, the City offered CDBG-funded low interest loans to rehabilitate homes and
apartments owned or occupied by lower income households. The 2010-2014 Redevelopment
Implementation Plan provided that LMIH funds may be used to assist such an activity.
However, with the passage of AB 1X 26, LMIH funds were no longer available for such use.
Additionally, annual allocations of CDBG funds have not been sufficient to fund such an
activity.
3.6       Conserved Units
There are subsidized housing units at risk of conversion to market rate. The 2010-2014
Redevelopment Implementation Plan provided that LMIH funds may be used to assist such
an activity. However, with the passage of AB 1X 26, LMIH funds were no longer available for
such use. In 2013 and early 2014, the City was notified that Domus Development of Santa
Monica is investigating purchasing Paso Robles Gardens Apartments and Peoples’ Self-Help
Housing Corp. is investigating purchasing Creston Gardens Apartments with the intent of
continuing to operate these projects as subsidized housing affordable to lower income
households. (Both projects are in the city’s inventory of subsidized housing and are described
in Appendix G.) City staff has offered technical assistance to both companies.
                                                H-22

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
3.7       Removal of Constraints
On May 3, 2011, the City Council adopted the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan, which
establishes new vision and development standards for the historic West Side of the City. This
specific plan includes zoning regulations that encourage and enable mixed use (residential units
in combination with commercial space), a wider range of housing types, and higher residential
densities. The Plan also reduced parking standards for multi-family development by
elimination the requirement for visitor parking spaces and reduced the amounts of required
open space per residential unit.
On December 6, 2011, in compliance with SB 2 (Statutes of 2007), the City Council adopted
Ordinance 976 N.S., which provided that emergency homeless shelters could be established in
certain zoning districts as “permitted” uses, i.e., without a conditional use permit. Ordinance
976 N.S. also provides that “supportive” and “transitional” housing are permitted uses in all
residential zones. A copy of Ordinance 976 N.S. appears in Appendix L.
On January 15, 2013, the City Council adopted Ordinance 988 N.S. to update several sections of
the Zoning Code. Included in that ordinance was a provision to reduce the minimum size of
community rooms in multi-family residential developments with 32 or more units from 40
square feet per unit to 20 square feet per unit. This will reduce the cost of constructing larger
multi-family developments.
During 2013, staff and a City Council Ad Hoc Committee worked on updating the
Development Impact Fees in a manner that would pare down the list of public improvements
and thereby reduce the amount of fees for residential units. In December 2013, a draft fee
update was circulated to several stakeholders. A public hearing will be conducted in early 2014
to consider the proposed fee update.
3.8       Progress Toward Implementation of Action Items
The table on the following pages reports efforts made through December 31, 2013 to implement
the Action Items and gives a brief statement about the schedule for future implementation.
The 2011 Housing Element contained three actions that were “postponed” until improved economic
times when the City could add staff resources to address these issue. The 2014 Update proposes to
eliminate these actions for the following reasons:
     a. Redevelopment Low and Moderate Income Housing Funds are no longer available. Actions 6
          and 8 now propose using General Funds to assist Oak Park Redevelopment and Habitat for
          Humanity.
     b. Most of Paso Robles is situated on rolling topography which has precedence in orienting streets
          and lots. Additionally, State Law now preempts local zoning codes in allowing placement of
          solar collectors.
     c. The City’s only transit is a regional bus system with one-hour headways. Most of the City’s
          inventory of multi-family zoning is located along transit corridors.
                                                       H-23

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2011 Update
                                                  Table H-7: Progress Made in Implementing 2011 Housing Element
Policy               Action Item/ Brief Description                 Schedule                Actions through 12/31/13                          Future Scheduling
H-1.1 &      1. Evaluate all proposed amendments to the General     Ongoing  The Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan, adopted in May       Upon review of any applications
H-1.2           Plan and Zoning maps for their effect on the                 2011, increased the supply of housing types that would be  for general plan amendments
                City’s capacity for meeting its Regional Housing             affordable at all levels.
                Needs Allocation (RHNA).
             2. Continue to participate in the countywide Ten       Ongoing  The City adopted Ordinance 976 N.S. on December 6, 2011    As needed
                 Year Plan to End Homelessness.                              to comply with SB 2’s direction to allow establishment of
                                                                             emergency shelters in specified zones without a
                                                                             requirement for a conditional use permit.
            3. Maintain a Comprehensive Housing Program with        Ongoing  Although the Housing Programs Manager position is          As needed
                sufficient resources available to administer the             vacant, City staff has continued to administer these
                various Housing Element programs, CDBG                       programs.
                Program, and other sources of housing funds.
            4. Evaluate all proposed amendments to the General      Ongoing  The Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan, adopted in May       a.   With the preparation of the
                Plan and Zoning for their effect on the City’s               2011, increased the supply of housing types that would be       Chandler Ranch, Olsen Ranch/
                policy of integrating diverse housing opportunities          affordable at all levels.                                       Beechwood Area specific
                in each neighborhood or planning area.                                                                                       Plans
                                                                                                                                        b. With any other applications
                                                                                                                                             for GPAs or Rezones.
            5. Require new specific plans for undeveloped areas     Ongoing  A substantial amount of staff time was spent in 2013 to    Staff efforts will continue in 2014.
                (Chandler Ranch, Olsen Ranch, Beechwood Area,                work with property owners in these specific plan areas to
                and any to follow) to provide a balance of housing           have these plans, and their appurtenant environmental
                types and densities for all income groups.                   studies prepared.
            6. Work with developers to increase the supply of new   Ongoing  Staff has continued to work with the Paso Robles Housing   Staff efforts will continue in 2014.
                housing for all income groups and special needs              Authority to assist the redevelopment of Oak Park Public
                throughout the City.                                         Housing and with Habitat for Humanity to facilitate permit
                                                                             processing and financial assistance for their projects.
                                                                 H-24

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2011 Update
                                                  Table H-7: Progress Made in Implementing 2011 Housing Element
Policy                Action Item/ Brief Description                Schedule                   Actions through 12/31/13                           Future Scheduling
            7. Encourage provision of affordable housing in the     Ongoing     On June 4, 2013, the City Council approved a develop-      Staff will assist review of building
                vicinity of the Cuesta College through the                      ment plan for 142 apartment units on the south side of     permit applications in 2014.
                designation of multi-family sites near the campus.              Experimental Station Road, west of Buena Vista Drive.
                                                                                Building Permits for Phase 1 were applied for in 2013.
            8. For affordable housing projects that are assisted    Ongoing     Accomplished for Hidden Creek Village, which was           Consider use of General Funds for
                with LMIH Funds for the purpose of offsetting                   completed in September 2011.                               deferral of City Fees for future
                development impact fees, allow for deferral of                                                                             phases of the Redevelopment of
                                                                                On December 4, 2012, the City Council approved a deferral
                payment of fees several years beyond occupancy.                                                                            Oak Park Public Housing.
                                                                                of City fees for Phase One of the Redevelopment of Oak
                                                                                Park Public Housing with a loan of up to $1.018 million in
                                                                                General Funds.
             9. Adopt an ordinance to implement SB 2 to provide     December    Completed via adoption of Ordinance 976                    None: action is completed
                that emergency shelters be permitted by right.      31, 2011    N.S. on December 6, 2011.
            10. Encourage developers of single family               Fiscal Year None in 2012                                               May be delayed due to reduced
                  dwellings to incorporate “Universal Design”       11/12                                                                  staff resources.
                  and/or ”visitability” improvements to the
                  greatest extent feasible.
H-2.1 &     11. As part of the General Plan Annual Report,          Ongoing     There is no evidence, particularly given the current       Re-evaluate in 2014
H-2.2             evaluate the need to amend the Zoning Code to                 economic recession, that there is any demand to convert
                  incorporate regulations for the conversion of                 apartments to condominiums.
                  rental housing (apartments) to condominiums.
             12. Provide technical assistance to owners and non-    Ongoing     In 2013 (and early 2014) the City learned that two         The City will continue to provide
                  profit housing corporation buyers of existing                 subsidized complexes (Paso Robles Gardens Apartments       staff support to these proposals.
                  subsidized low income housing complexes that                  and Creston Gardens Apartments) are being considered for
                  are at risk of conversion to market rate to                   conversion and that different housing corporations are
                  extend subsidy contracts and/or find                          investigating acquiring them. The City has provided staff
                  government financing for acquisition and                      support to these proposals.
                  rehabilitation, including the following:
                  x Monitor complexes that are at-risk of
                     conversion to market rate.
                                                                 H-25

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2011 Update
                                                 Table H-7: Progress Made in Implementing 2011 Housing Element
Policy              Action Item/ Brief Description                    Schedule                    Actions through 12/31/13                               Future Scheduling
                 x Work with Potential Purchasers
                 x Tenant Education
            13. Amend the Zoning Code to establish minimum            Fiscal Year None in 2013                                                    May be delayed due to reduced
                 densities for multi-family zoned properties          11/12                                                                       staff resources.
H-3.1       14. Enforce the City’s zoning, property                   Ongoing     Enforcement is carried out by the Police and Emergency          As needed
                 maintenance, building, fire, parking and                         Services Departments on a complaint basis by several City
                 nuisance abatement codes.                                        departments.
            15. Actively implement the vision for development         Ongoing     In 2011, the City applied for and received grants to improve    Staff efforts will continue in 2014.
                 and redevelopment of the West Side per the                       21st Street (as a “green” street) and to develop a
                 Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan. This will                      neighborhood park in this specific plan area. In 2013,
                 include: seeking grants for infrastructure                       construction of both improvements commenced.
                 improvements; preparing an appendix to expand
                                                                                  City staff continued to work with the Paso Robles Housing
                 the list of acceptable architectural styles;
                                                                                  Authority to assist the redevelopment of Oak Park Public
                 providing technical assistance to developers in
                                                                                  Housing to facilitate permit processing and financial
                 understanding and applying the new
                                                                                  assistance for their projects.
                 development standards; and regular monitoring
                 and updating the plan as necessary to ensure                     In 2013, the City applied for a grant to improve 12th Street
                 that the development standards are effective in                  (as a “green” street). The City did not receive this grant, but
                 promoting affordable housing.                                    was invited by the State to re-apply in 2014.
            16.Give top priority for use of Redevelopment Low         Fiscal Year In June 2011, the State Legislature passed AB 1X 26,            None: LMIH Funds are no longer
               and Moderate Income Housing (LMIH) Funds to            11/12       which dissolved all redevelopment agencies in the state.        available.
               the redevelopment of Oak Park Public Housing,
               and fully support applications for Federal HOME
               funds for this project. As part of this effort, the
               City will also give top priority for the housing for
               extremely low-income households.
H-4.1 &     17. Prepare a report that reviews zoning regulations,     February/   None in 2013                                                    In Calendar Year 2014
H-4.2           standard conditions, and permit processing            March 2013
                procedures to identify any provisions which
                unnecessarily increase the cost of housing.
                Present this report in conjunction with the
                                                                   H-26

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2011 Update
                                                 Table H-7: Progress Made in Implementing 2011 Housing Element
Policy               Action Item/ Brief Description                 Schedule               Actions through 12/31/13                           Future Scheduling
                Annual Review of the General Plan.
H-5.1       18.    Refer residents involved in housing related      Ongoing  The City maintains such information on its web site.       As needed
                   civil disputes such as landlord/tenant disputes           Additionally, staff provides responses to inquiries at the
                   and housing discrimination complaints to the              Public Counter, on the phone, and via email.
                   California Rural Legal Assistance (for legal
                   matters) and to the State Department of Fair
                   Employment and Housing (for discrimination).
            19. Provide information to the public on various        Ongoing  The City maintains such information on its web site.       As needed
                 state and federal housing programs and fair
                 housing law. Maintain referral information on
                 the City’s web site.
H-6.1 &     20. Require new specific plans for undeveloped          Ongoing  A substantial amount of staff time was spent in 2013 to    Staff efforts will continue in 2014.
H-6.2            areas (Chandler Ranch, Olsen Ranch, Beech-                  work with property owners in these specific plan areas to
                 wood Area, and any to follow) to incorporate                have these plans, and their appurtenant environmental
                 land use and circulation patterns that use                  studies prepared.
                 compact urban forms that foster connectivity,
                 walkability, and alternative transportation
                 modes and to incorporate design principles used
                 in the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan for
                 these items as well as other energy-saving and
                 environmental quality protection measures, as
                 appropriate to the topography, vegetation, and
                 location in each specific plan area.
            21. Continue development of the Resource                Ongoing  In 2013, the City adopted a Climate Action Plan and        Staff efforts will continue in 2014.
                 Management Plan initiated in 2008 via                       invested substantial staff time in low impact development
                 Resolution 08-061 to implement Economic                     regulations.
                 Strategy policies to foster multi-modal
                 transportation systems, reduce greenhouse gas
                 emissions, and develop Low Impact
                 Development standards, water conservation,
                 vegetation and habitat conservation measures.
                                                                 H-27

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2011 Update
This page left blank intentionally.
                                       H-28
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
4.0       Housing Needs Assessment
4.1 Population Characteristics
Population growth and other demographic variables are important indicators of the type and
number of housing units needed in a community. Population attributes such as age,
race/ethnicity, occupation, and level of income combine to influence the type of housing
needed as well as the ability of current and future residents to afford housing.
     a. Population Trends. The 2003 General Plan, as updated through General Plan
Amendment 2014-001, projects that residential growth will attain build-out after 2045, well
beyond the plan’s horizon year of 2025. Table H-8, below, shows the new population projection;
it is the same information provided in Table LU-3B of the Land Use Element.
                                         Table H-8: Population Projection
                      Year                       Population 1                       Total Dwelling Units 2
                      2010                            29,800 3                               11,652
                      2012                            30,200 4                               11,711
                      2015                            30,100 5                               11,917
                      2020                             32,300                                12,775
                      2025                             34,400                                13,602
                      2030                             37,700                                14,933
                      2035                             39,900                                15,775
                      2040                             41,900                                16,586
                      2045                             42,800                                16,924
            Notes:
            1. All population figures are rounded to the nearest 100. Except for 2010 and 2012, population figures are
               estimates based on household size and vacancy rate in Section 1 of the Land Use Element.
            2. Numbers of dwelling units in 2010 and 2012 are based total numbers of existing units reported on
               City’s Land Use Inventory;
            3. Source: 2010 U.S. Census Bureau
            4. Source: 2012 State Department of Finance (DOF) E-5 Report (for January 1, 2012)
            5. Population “decrease” caused by application of the General Plan’s assumptions stated in Section 1 of
               the Land Use Element. The 2012 DOF population estimate reported 2.73 persons per household, which
               yielded a higher population estimate than projected in 2015.
     b. Age Characteristics. As people move through different age groups, housing needs,
income levels, and preferences typically change. As a result, an evaluation of the age
characteristics of a community is important in addressing the housing needs of its residents.
Appendix E-1 contains a comparison of age characteristics of residents in Paso Robles to the
County of San Luis Obispo and the State of California based on Census data from 2000 and
2010.
Appendix E-1 shows that between 2000 and 2010, the 65 and over age group for the City and
the County remained at 14%, give or take a percent. At the State level, this age group
comprised 11.4% of the population. The conclusion is that the City and the County have a large
percentage of seniors. With the retirement of the Baby Boomer Generation, which was expected
to commence in 2011, the percentage of this age group, and the attendant need for housing that
is livable for seniors is expected to rise. Types of housing that there may be an increased
                                                            H-29

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
demand for would include smaller single family units (as developed in the early 2000s in the
Traditions Neighborhood north of Highway 46 East and west of Buena Vista Drive), senior
apartments, residential care facilities, and assisted living facilities.
Appendix E-1 shows that between 2000 and 2010, there was some moderate shifting of
percentages in the other age groups. However, given the recent recession and expected length
of recovery, it is not expected that age will have a measurable impact on the type and size of
housing.
     c. Race and Ethnicity. The racial and ethnic composition of a community may have
implications for housing to the extent that different groups have different household
characteristics, income levels, and cultural backgrounds that affect their needs and preferences
for housing.
The Hispanic and Latino community makes up the largest minority group in the City and the
County. The US Census does not consider “Hispanic/Latino” to be a race, rather it is an
“ethnicity”, which refers to a group of people of common culture and language who fall within
a group. Thus people called “Hispanic/Latino” still consider their race to be “Black, White,
American Indian, etc…” Due to the confusion over this interpretation, many Hispanic
respondents choose “some other race”.
Race and Ethnicity statistics from the 2000 and 2010 US Censuses are attached in Appendix E-2.
As can be seen from that data, the percentage of population of Hispanic or Latino persons grew
from 18% of the City’s population in 2000 to 34.5% in 2010. While the percentages of Hispanic
or Latino persons in the City lagged behind those state-wide (26% in 2000 and 37.6 % in 2010),
the growth of this group reflected a statewide trend.
As shown in Appendix E-2, in 2010, the average number of persons per household was 2.73
city-wide (over all races and ethnicities), but the average number of persons per
Hispanics/Latino household was 3.93. If this ratio remains steady while the percentage of
Hispanics and Latinos continues to rise in the City, it could indicate a need for larger dwelling
units (i.e., 3 or more bedrooms).
Appendix E-3 shows Income Levels by race for City residents as reported in the 2000 US
Census. (Income data from the 2010 Census is not yet available.) There does not appear to be a
strong indication of a relationship between race/ethnicity and income. Therefore, an expected
growing percentage of Hispanics and Latinos does not, in itself, indicate a need for more
housing that is affordable to the lower income groups.
     d. Employment Market. Employment also has an important impact upon housing needs
to the extent that different jobs and income levels determine the type and size of housing a
household can afford. According to the State Employment Development Department, in March
2014 a total of 13,400 Paso Robles residents were in the labor force, of which 12,400 were
employed and 1,000 (7.3%) were unemployed. According to the 2009-2011 American
Community Survey (U.S. Census), there were 6,566 women in the labor force, of which 578
(9.0%) were unemployed.
                                                 H-30

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
According to the San Luis Obispo Council of Government’s (SLOCOG) 2040 Population,
Housing & Employment Forecast, Paso Robles had an estimated 11,800 jobs in 2010, and the
2010 U.S. Census reported 11,426 dwelling units. This yields has a job-housing ratio of 1.03. A
job-housing ratio over 1.5 is considered high and may indicate an increasing imbalance between
jobs and housing, i.e. new residential construction has not kept up with job creation.
Appendix E-4 shows the economic sectors in which City residents were employed in 2000 and
in 2009-2011 according to the US Census. This appendix shows the following shifts in
employment sectors in Paso Robles during that period:
     x    Manufacturing declined from 13% of the workforce to 10%;
     x    Retail trade increased from 11% to 17%;
     x    Education, health and social services decreased from 19% to 15%;
     x    Public administration increased from 8% to 12%.
Most retail jobs are held by low income residents, and an increase in the percentage of residents
in that sector could indicate an increased demand for multi-family housing. Decreases in
manufacturing and education sectors could also increase demand for multi-family housing.
On the positive side, the City has a diverse portfolio of businesses in different economic sectors:
agriculture, manufacturing, tourism, construction, retail, and services. With such a degree of
diversification, it is anticipated that the City will “weather” the economic storm and emerge in a
healthy state.
4.2       Household Characteristics
Household characteristics, such as type and size, income levels, and the presence of special
needs populations, determine the type of housing needed by residents. This section details the
various household characteristics affecting housing needs.
     a. Number of Households. In January 2014, according to the State Department of Finance
(DOF), there were an estimated 11,076 households in the City. During the period of this
Housing Element, it is estimated that about 980 dwelling units will be added In 2013, the City
amended the Land Use Element of the General Plan to adopt a 5% vacancy rate based on a 30
year average as reported by the U.S. Census Bureau. If the 5% vacancy rate remains constant,
the number of households at the end of the period of this Housing Element (June 30, 2019)
could be 12,007.
     b. Household Type. According to the US Census, in 2010, 70.8% of city households were
families and 29.2% were non-families (Table H-9). Families are comprised of married couples
with or without children and other family types, such as female-headed households with
children. Non-family households are defined by the Census as a householder living alone or
with nonrelatives only. Householders living alone comprised 22.9% of all households in the
city, of which nearly half were age 65 and over. Table H-9 shows that there was some minor
shifting of percentages of various household types.
                                                  H-31

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
            Table H-9. Paso Robles Household Characteristics by Type 2000-2010
                                                                           2000                 2010
                      Household by Type
                                                                 Number         Percent Number       Percent
                         Total Households                            8,556       100.0   10,833       100.0
          Family households (families)                               6,042        70.6   7,669         70.8
                       With own children under 18 years              3,197        37.4    3,719        34.3
          Married-couple family                                      4,569        53.4   5,721         52.8
                       With own children under 18 years              2,251        26.3    2,588        23.9
          Female householder, no husband present                     1,072        12.5   1,345         12.4
                       With own children under 18 years               695         8.1      775         7.2
          Non-Family households                                      2,514        29.4    3,164        29.2
              Householder living alone                               2,028        23.7   2,486         22.9
                          Householder 65 years and over               974         11.4    1,192        11.0
          Average household size                                           2.73                 2.73
          Sources: U.S. Census: 2000 Summary File 1 and 2010 Profile
     c. Household Size. Table H-9 shows that the average household size was estimated to
have remained steady at 2.73 between 2000 and 2010. The State Department of Finance (E-5
Report) estimated that the average household size on January 1, 2014 was 2.73 persons. As
noted under the discussion of “race and ethnicity” on Page H-36, the average household size
may increase as the percentage of Hispanic or Latino population increases as projected.
In 2013, the City amended the Land Use Element of the General Plan to adopt an average
household size of 2.66 persons based on a 30 year average as reported by the U.S. Census
Bureau.
     d. Household Income Targets. The Regional Housing Needs Plan establishes targets for
housing types serving four income categories. The four income category definitions are defined
in Title 25 Sections 6926, 6928, 6930 and 6932, of the California Code of Regulations. These
income categories are based on definitions established by the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development (HUD) and State Health and Safety Code Sections 50079.5, 50093, and
50105.
The City of Paso Robles is located in San Luis Obispo County, which has a median household
income of $77,000 for a 4 person household in 2014. The following lists the categories as defined
by State Law.
x    Extremely Low Income (ELI): 30% or less of the area (County) median household income
     with adjustments for household size. (Note: The Regional Housing Needs Plan does not yet
     assign any units to this category, which is defined in Health and Safety Code Section 50106.)
x    Very Low Income (VLI): 31 - 50% of the area (County) median household income with
     adjustments for household size.
                                                             H-32

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
x    Low Income (LI): 51% - 80% of the area median household income with adjustments for
     household size.
x    Moderate Income (M): 81% - 120% of the area median household income with adjustments
     for household size.
x    Above Moderate Income (AM):                         more than 120% of the median household income, as
     adjusted for household size.
Table H-10 lists these income limits for San Luis Obispo County for 2014.
                          Table H-10. San Luis Obispo County 2014 Income Limits
                                                      HOUSEHOLD SIZE (# of Persons) and INCOME ($)
  Income Group (% of
                                      1              2             3              4            5             6           7             8
  Median Income)
  Extremely Low (30%)               15,850         18,100        20,350         22,600        24,450      26,250       28,050        29,850
  Very Low (50%)                    26,400         30,200        33,950         37,700        40,750      43,750       46,750        49,800
  Low (80%)                         42,250         48,250        54,300         60,300        65,150      69,950       74,800        79,600
  Median (100%)                     53,900         61,600        69,300        77,000         83,150      89,300       95,500       101,650
  Moderate (120%)                   64,700         73,900        83,150         92,400        99,800     107,200      114,600       121,950
Source:   California Department of Housing and Community Development
According to the 2010-2012 American Community Survey (US Census), it is estimated that the
median income in Paso Robles is 96% of the County median income.
     e. Household Income in Paso Robles. Appendix E-3 shows the income levels reported by
the 2000 Census and by the 2010-2012 American Community Survey. Between 2000 and 2012, the
percentage of households in the Extremely Low Income level decreased from 13% to 9% 29%,
while the percentage households in the Above Moderate Income level increased from 36% to
40%. The percentages of the other income levels remained essentially the same during the same
8 year period. Table H-11 compares the Regional Housing Need to the Quantified Objectives and
identifies anticipated shortfalls and surpluses; it estimates the number of Extremely Low Income
households that would be a part of the Regional Housing Need.
          Table H-11. Projection of Households by Income Group Through 2019
      Income Level                   AM                   M                 LI               VLI             ELI*           Total
Regional Housing                      205                 87                77                70               53             492
Need
Quantified Objectives                 180                241               121                90               15             647
Unmet Need                             25               -154               -44               -34               38            -155
*    The Regional Housing Need Allocation did not specifically include an assignment of ELI households. The VLI assignment was 123 151
     households and the ELI portion was calculated based on percentages reported in the 2012 American Community Survey.
                                                                   H-33
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
As noted on Page H-61 and in Appendix F, VLI and ELI households cannot find affordable
housing without government subsidy. Proposed projects that will offer an opportunity to
increase the amount of subsidized housing during the period of this Housing Element are
discussed under “Assisted Housing Projects” on Page H-61. Based on the 2012 American
Community Survey and phone conversations with managers of subsidized housing complexes
in 2014, this Housing Element assumes that affordability in subsidized housing developments
split affordability 55/45 between Low and Very Low Income households. Table H-11 reflects
that assumption in dividing the Regional Housing Need, and except for a total of 15 units to be
built in Hidden Creek Village (8 units) and in Phase One of Oak Park Redevelopment (7 units),
does not assign any ELI units to the Quantified Objectives. It is noteworthy that several of the
subsidized housing complexes listed in Appendix G reserve some units for ELI households as a
condition of the Federal subsidy. Based on phone conversations with managers of these
complexes conducted in April 2014, it is estimated that there are about 130 units that are
affordable to ELI households.
     f. Tenure of Households. The term, “tenure”, refers to whether housing units are owned
or rented. According to the 2010 Census (Profile), 6,412, or 59% of all households in Paso Robles
owned their own home and 4,421, or 41%of all households were renters. These are the same
ratios of owners to renters reported in the 2000 U.S. Census.
Although the City provided first-time homebuyer assistance to 85 lower income households
during the 1990s, most of the increase in the rate of ownership is attributable to a higher rate of
construction of single family dwellings. In 2000, single family homes they accounted for 72% of
the housing stock. According to the State Department of Finance (E-5 Report), this percentage
increased to 78% in 2014.
Since 2004, five sizable multi-family apartment complexes were completed: Peoples’ Self-Help
Housing Corp.’s 29 unit Creekside Gardens low income senior apartments and their 68 unit
Canyon Creek low income family apartments; Harrod Development’s 80 unit market rate Vista
del Rio Apartments; Paso Robles Nonprofit Housing Corp.’s 40 unit Chet Dotter Senior
Housing (low income senior apartments); and San Luis Obispo Housing Corp.’s Hidden Creek
Village with 81 low income family units. Multi-family development of this scale had not
occurred in Paso Robles since 1986.
In addition to the large apartment complexes listed above, since 2010, 9 infill multi-family units
have been constructed. These units consist of two duplexes and 5 units on multi-family zoned
lots.
In June 2010, the City Council approved a development plan for the redevelopment of Oak Park
Public Housing to build 302 new affordable apartments (of which 154 would be additional units
and 148 would be replacement units.) Construction of Phase One with 80 units (39 new
inventory and 41 replacement) began in 2013 and is scheduled to be complete in mid 2014. On
several occasions, the Housing Authority has applied for Federal Tax Credits for Phase Two (69
units). The Tax Credit Program is highly-competitive, and it is not uncommon for filing several
applications before attaining an award. The Housing Authority most recently applied for Tax
Credits in March 2014 and hopes to be awarded in June 2014.
                                               H-34

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
Table H-12 shows the number of households by income group by tenure in 2012 as reported by
the US Census Bureau’s American Community Survey.
                               Table H-12: Tenure in 2010 by Income Group
             Income Group                              Homeowners                  Renters
             Extremely Low (ELI)                          491 (43%)                648 (57%)
             Very Low (VLI)                               368 (30%)                872 (70%)
             Low (LI)                                     824 (38%)               1,328 (62%)
             Moderate                                    1,325 (55%)              1,084 (45%)
             Above Moderate                              3,055 (70%)              1,378 (30%)
             Source: American Community Survey 2010-2012
     g. Overpaying for Housing. State Law (Health and Safety Code Sections 50052.5 and
50053), defines overpayment for lower and very low income households as spending more than
30% of their annual income for housing costs, which includes mortgage or rent, utilities,
property insurance, and real estate taxes.
Table H-13 shows the percentages of homeowners and renters by income group overpaid for
housing per the 2010-2012 American Community Survey.
                         Table H-13: Overpayment in 2012 by Income Group
                                    Percent of Income               Homeowners           Renters
             Income Group
                                    Spent on Housing                (Households)     (Households)
            Extremely Low             Total Households                491 (100%)        648 (100%)
                                            <=30%                      144 (29%)         67 (10%)
                                             >30%                      347 (71%)         581 (90%)
            Very Low                  Total Households                368 (100%)        872 (100%)
                                            <=30%                      181 (49%)          68 (8%)
                                             >30%                      187 (51%)         804 (92%)
            Low                       Total Households                824 (100%)       1,328 (100%)
                                            <=30%                      336 (41%)         323 (24%)
                                             >30%                      488 (59%)        1,004 (76%)
            Moderate                  Total Households               1,325 (100%)      1,084 (100%)
                                            <=30%                      672 (51%)         614 (57%)
                                             >30%                      653 (49%)         469 (43%)
            Above Moderate            Total Households               3,055 (100%)      1,378 (100%)
                                            <=30%                     2,278 (75%)       1,218 (88%)
                                             >30%                      777 (25%)         160 (12%)
            Sources: American Community Survey 2010-2012
Since 2000, rents and housing prices have risen substantially. The percentages of households
that are overpaying for housing have increased somewhat. A major contributing factor to the
recent recession was the practice of making subprime adjustable rate loans, many of which
resulted in foreclosures. Comparison of numbers of foreclosures reported by RealtyTrac for
                                                            H-35

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
January 2011, the foreclosure rate was 3.2 per 1,000 homes in San Luis Obispo County, which
was relatively low, compared to rates of 8.6 per thousand for San Bernardino County, 7.1 per
thousand in Sacramento County, and 8.8 per thousand for Riverside County in the same period.
In March 2014, RealtyTrac reported foreclosure rates of 0.5 per 1,000 homes in San Luis Obispo
County, compared to rates of 1.9 per thousand for San Bernardino County, 1.4 per thousand in
Sacramento County, and 1.9 per thousand for Riverside County.
Generally, overpayment can be reduced via support for construction of new small lot single
family, single-family attached, and multi-family units (both assisted and market rate). New
construction eases the demand that drives purchase and rental prices up.
     h. Overcrowded Housing. The U.S. Census Bureau defines “overcrowding” as a situation
in which a household has more than 1.01 persons per room (excluding kitchens, halls, closets
and bathrooms). Table H-14 (next page) shows overcrowding percentages for 2000 and 2012
for the City, County, and State. The percentage of overcrowded units in the City fell in the
2000s, which reflected a statewide trend in overcrowding. The most effective remedy for
overcrowding is to increase the supply of multifamily (rental) housing units.
                         Table H-14: Overcrowded Housing in Paso Robles
                                              2000                                  2012
                             Total#     Total    Owner      Renter   Total    Total    Owner Renter
                               du        %*        # du      # du    # du      %*       # du  # du
                    City      956        11%       261        695     458      4%        76   382
                  County                  6%                                   4%
                   State                 15%                                   8%
                  * % = percent of all occupied dwelling units (du)
                  Source: US Census 2000; 2010-2012 American Community Survey
According to the 2010-2012 American Community Survey, a total of 458 Paso Robles
households lived in overcrowded conditions in 2012, representing approximately 4% of all
households. Overcrowding rates vary substantially by income, type, and size of household.
Generally, lower-income households and large families experience a disproportionate share of
overcrowding.
4.3       Special Needs Groups
Certain groups have greater difficulty in finding decent, affordable housing due to their special
needs and/or circumstances. Special circumstances may be related to an individual’s
employment, income, family needs, household characteristics, or special housing requirements
relating to a disability.
State Housing Element law identifies the following special needs groups: senior households,
disabled persons, female-headed households, large families, families and persons in need of
emergency shelter, and farm workers. Table H-15 summarizes data from the 2000 and 2010
Censuses regarding special needs groups residing in Paso Robles.
                                                           H-36

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
                                      Table H-15: Paso Robles Special Needs Groups
                     Special Needs Groups                                Source                  Persons      Households
                     Seniors (65 and over)                             2010 Census                 3,996         2,691
                        Living Alone                                   2010 Census                 1,192         1,192
                        With a Disability                            2010-2012 ACS                 2,592           -
                     Disability (5 years and older) *                  2000 Census                 8,319           -
                     Female-headed Household                           2010 Census                    -          3,144
                        With Children                                  2010 Census                    -          1,345
                     Large Households**                                2010 Census                    -          1,471
                     Homeless Persons                                                       Less than 745 ***      -
                     Source: 2000 and 2010 Census; 2010-2012 American Community Survey (ACS)
                     * Disabilities include sensory, physical, mental, and self-care types.
                     ** Large households are defined as having five or more members residing in the home.
                     ** Based on an enumeration of homeless persons conducted in January 2013
     a. Senior Households. Senior households typically have special housing needs due to
three primary concerns: fixed income, high health care costs, and physical disabilities.
According to the 2010 Census, 1,192 persons age 65 years and older were living alone in Paso
Robles.
The 2010 Census reported that there were 2,691 senior households. In 2000, 73% of senior
households and 27% were renters. (2010 Census data for senior tenure statistics is not yet
available for Paso Robles.) Compare this to the overall City population, of which 59% are
owners and 41% are renters. Because of physical and/or other limitations, senior homeowners
may have difficulty in performing regular home maintenance or repair activities. Elderly
women are especially in need of assistance. Because many seniors have fixed or limited income,
they may have difficulty making monthly mortgage or rent payments.
Various programs can assist senior needs, including congregate care, supportive services, rental
subsidies, shared housing, and housing rehabilitation assistance. For the frail elderly, or those
with disabilities, housing with architectural design features that accommodate disabilities can
help ensure continued independent living. Senior housing with supportive services can also be
provided to allow independent living. According to the State Department of Social Services,
there are 13 care facilities in the City, one of which has a pending license. The licensed facilities
have a total capacity of 202 beds.
Since 2004, the City has added two low income senior apartments complexes: Creekside
Gardens (29 units) and Chet Dotter Senior housing (40 units). In 2008, the City approved
zoning applications to build a senior housing complex of 68 market rate apartment units and 57
beds in an assisted living facility at 1450 Golden Hill Road. This project will includes both
unassisted and assisted living. This approval is still valid through 2016 and is eligible to apply
for time extensions through 2022.
                                                               H-37
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
Since the majority of undeveloped land in the City is located within the Chandler Ranch, Olsen
Ranch, and Beechwood Areas, the specific plans being prepared will offer the best opportunity
to develop new housing that is designed to meet seniors’ needs.
A method to increase the opportunities for senior-friendly housing is to design homes that
allow for occupants to “age in place” without having to move should one or more household
members develop physical disabilities. The concept of “Universal Design” strives to promote
home design that can be used by all persons, regardless of physical ability. This concept
incorporates a broad range of design principles and depth of applications. At the simplest level,
is a sub-concept known as “visitability”, in which homes would be designed with the following
features, which would allow someone of any level of physical ability to visit a home:
        x   At least one no-step entrance;
        x   Doors and hallways at least 36 inches wide;
        x   At least one half-bathroom on the ground floor big enough to accommodate a person
            in a wheelchair.
To accommodate “aging in place”, additional Universal Design features would be needed.
These could include:
        x   Providing at least one room, ideally 12 feet by 12 feet, on the ground floor that could
            be used as a bedroom;
        x   Providing a full bathroom on the ground floor, which is designed to accommodate
            grab bars;
        x   Providing an “open” floor plan with minimal use of halls;
        x   Providing open areas under sinks in the kitchen and ground floor bathrooms so that a
            wheelchair-bound person could use them. Cabinet fronts may be installed, but should
            be removable.
Several of the above measures are already required by the California Building Code for multi-
family units. They are not, however, required for single family dwellings.
There are many other design features that could be considered which would further facilitate
“aging in place”. The City could encourage builders of single family homes to incorporate such
design features. Some cities require certain percentages of new homes to incorporate such
features. Incorporation of Universal Design features would increase the supply of housing that
would meet the needs of seniors.
     b. Disabled Persons. Disabled persons have special housing needs because of their fixed
income, the lack of accessible and affordable housing, and the higher health costs associated
with their disability. The Census Bureau defines four types of disability: Sensory, physical,
mental, self-care. Disabilities are defined as mental, physical or health conditions that last over
six months. According to the 2010-2012 American Community Survey, a total of 2,928 persons
with disabilities over the age 5 reside in Paso Robles, representing approximately 10% of the
City’s population.
                                                H-38

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
The living arrangements of disabled persons depends on the severity of the disability. Many
persons live at home independently or with other family members. To maintain independent
living, disabled persons may need assistance. This can include special housing design features
for the physically disabled, income support for those who are unable to work, and in-home
supportive services for persons with medical conditions. Such services may be provided by
public or private agencies.
To facilitate housing for persons with disabilities, in 2009, the City adopted a “reasonable
accommodation” ordinance (Ordinance 958 N.S.) to remove constraints for housing the
disabled. This ordinance:
        x   Provides an administrative procedure to enable necessary alterations to make a
            dwelling unit accessible to the disabled should such alterations conflict with existing
            zoning code regulations for such standards as setbacks, projections into yards (e.g. for
            wheelchair ramps), and maximum heights for graded slopes and/or retaining walls;
        x   Clarifies that a variety of group living arrangements with 6 or fewer residents,
            primarily those for disabled persons, are permitted by right in all residential zoning
            districts.
This ordinance did not establish any requirements that such housing be separated from another
similar facility by a minimum distance.
In 2011, SB 812 became effective. This law requires that the Housing Element include an
analysis of the special housing needs of developmentally disabled persons. According to the
Tri-Counties Regional Center, there were about 425 families with developmentally-disabled
children or adults with developmental disabilities in Paso Robles (actually within the 93446 Zip
Code) in 2014.
Supportive Housing: AB 745 (2013) defines supportive housing as “housing with no limit on
length of stay, that is occupied by the “target population” and that is linked to an onsite or
offsite service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving
his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in
the community.” That bill also defines “target population” as “persons with low incomes who
have one or more disabilities, including… services provided to the Lanterman Developmental
Disabilities Services Act… “
In 2014, there is no supportive housing in the City dedicated specifically to the developmentally
disabled. NCI Affiliates, a local business that provides employment opportunities to the
developmentally disabled provides supportive services to helps 60 of its clients live in market
housing. Transitions Mental Health of San Luis Obispo provides supportive services to families
with mental health challenges and has indicated that it hopes to establish supportive housing in
Paso Robles.
     c. Female-headed Households. Female-headed households with children often require
special consideration and assistance as a result of their greater need for affordable housing,
accessible day care, health care, and other supportive services. Because of their relatively lower
                                                H-39

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
incomes and higher living expenses, such households usually have more limited opportunities
for finding affordable, decent, and safe housing.
In 2010, Paso Robles had 2,120 female-headed households, of which 775 have children under 18.
These households are a particularly vulnerable group because they must balance the needs of
their children with work responsibilities. According to the 2000 Census, 23% of all female-
headed families and 25.8% of female-headed families with children under 18 in Paso Robles
lived in poverty. (2010 Census data for poverty in Paso Robles is not yet available.)
The most effective remedy for this problem is to increase the supply of multifamily (rental)
housing units.
     d. Large Households. Large households are defined as having five or more members
residing in the home. These households constitute a special need group, because there is often a
limited supply of adequately sized, affordable housing units in a community. In order to save
for other basic necessities such as food, clothing and medical care, it is common for lower-
income large households to reside in smaller units, which frequently results in overcrowding.
Paso Robles has a total of 1,471 large households (13.7% of all households). In 2010, 45% of these
large households were owners and 55% were renters. In the same year, 59% of all City
households were owners and 41% were renters.
The housing needs of large households are typically met through larger units. In 2,010, Paso
Robles had 6,412 occupied ownership units and 4,421 occupied rental units (2010 US Census).
However, because the majority of these units are single-family homes, which are generally more
expensive, overcrowding is more prevalent among large families.
To address overcrowding, communities can provide incentives to facilitate the development of
larger apartments with three or more bedrooms for large households. A shortage of large rental
units can also be alleviated through the provision of affordable ownership housing
opportunities, such as first-time homebuyer programs and self-help housing (e.g. People’s Self
Help Housing Corp., Habitat for Humanity) to move renters into homeownership. Financial
assistance for room additions may also help to relieve overcrowding.
     e. Farmworkers. Farmworkers are traditionally defined as persons whose primary
incomes are earned through permanent or seasonal agricultural labor. Permanent farm laborers
work in fields, orchards, processing plants, or support activities on a generally year-round
basis. Workloads are generally very high during harvest season, with labor force being
supplemented by seasonal or migrant workers.
The primary labor-intensive agriculture in the area around Paso Robles is wine grape growing.
Other agricultural uses in the area such as dry farming for barley and hay tend to be capital
(machinery)-intensive.
Farmworkers are generally considered to have special housing needs because of their very
limited income and the seasonal nature of their employment. Some of the issues related to
                                               H-40

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
farmworker housing include residency, limited income, overcrowding, and substandard
housing conditions.
In 1990, People's Self-Help Housing Corporation, under contract to the County of San Luis Obispo,
prepared a report entitled “San Luis Obispo County Farm Worker Housing Needs Study”. This
report indicated the following:
     x    That Paso Robles has an established resident farmworker population. These farmworkers
          live in the City on a year-round basis; many have families. The report stated the
          Employment Development Department estimates that there were 2,080 farmworkers in the
          County in 1989 but it did not have an estimated farmworker population figure for the Paso
          Robles area.
     x    That rents for the most affordable market rate housing would require half of farmworkers’
          income. This plus the need to provide first and last months’ rent plus a deposit leads to
          doubling up of households within a single dwelling unit. These dwelling units are
          scattered in different parts of the City and wherever affordable housing can be found.
     x    That there are some migrant farmworkers who work the area. However, their numbers are
          not known. The report indicates that the best locations for housing migrant workers is in
          the agricultural area in the County (as opposed to within urban areas). The report urged
          the County to amend its Land Use Element/Land Use Ordinance to facilitate provision of
          migrant worker housing such as bunkhouses with kitchens, bathrooms and recreation
          rooms. Since the report, the County has amended its land use regulations to accommodate
          migrant housing in its Agricultural Land Use Category.
The 1990 Study provided the most detail of the farmworker population, and a similar effort has not
been undertaken since. However, some limited data has since become available as noted below.
     x    In 2000, the US Census reported that there were 527 persons residing in Paso Robles
          who were in the “employed in the farming, forestry and fishing, and mining” sector.
          This figure would include farm owners, managers, and skilled laborers as well as non-
          skilled, “farmworker” laborers.
     x    In 2007, the US Department of Agriculture’s Census of Agriculture reported that there were
          9,175 “workers” employed in agriculture in San Luis Obispo County and of these, 4,805
          worked less than 150 days. The instructions for that census state that farm labor includes
          “paid family members, bookkeepers, office workers, maintenance workers, etc.”
     x    The 2008 Economic Forecast Project for Paso Robles estimated that there are 1,008
          persons employed in the “agricultural” sector in the “Paso Robles Metro Area” in 2007.
          These figures would include farm owners, managers, and skilled laborers as well as
          non-skilled, “farmworker” laborers.
     x    The US Department of Agriculture’s 2012 Census of Agriculture reported that there
          were 10,669 workers employed in agriculture in San Luis Obispo County and of these,
                                                    H-41

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
          4,704 were employed 150 days or more and 5,965 were employed for less than 150 days.
          This census also reported that, county-wide, 2,656 were “migrant workers”.
Agricultural employment data from the 2010 Census is not yet available. From the above, it is
estimated that the population of farmworkers in the City might be 700, of which about 330 could
be permanent residents and 370 could be migrants.
The best means to address the housing needs of the City’s year-round farmworker population is to
facilitate development of new rental housing that is affordable to low and very-low income
households, particularly in the RMF-20 land use category.
In 2009, to accommodate the housing needs of seasonal farmworkers, the City adopted an
amendment to the Zoning Code (Ordinance 958 N.S.) to comply with the provisions of Sections
17021.5 and 17021.6 of the State’s Health and Safety Code. This code amendment provides for the
following:
     x    That any employee (farmworker) housing providing accommodations for six or fewer
          employees shall be deemed a single-family structure permitted in an agricultural or
          residential zoning district and shall not require a conditional use permit;
     x    That any employee (farmworker) housing consisting of no more than 36 beds in a group
          quarters or 12 units or spaces designed for use by a single family or household shall be
          deemed a an “agricultural land use designation” permitted in the AG (Agriculture) and
          RA (Residential Agriculture) zoning districts and shall not require a conditional use
          permit
f.        Homeless Persons. In January 2013, the Homeless Services Oversight Council, an
advisory agency to the San Luis Obispo Board of Supervisors tasked with implementing the
County’s 10 Year Plan to End Homelessness, conducted a county-wide point-in-time (PIT) count
and survey of homeless persons.
Key findings of PIT count and survey and a comparison to HUD’s Homeless Management
Information System (HMIS) and other data included the following.
1. A total of 2,186 people were counted as homeless in January 2013. Using a HUD-provided
     formula, this equates to a total of 3,497 persons estimated to be homeless at some point in
     time within a one year period. Comparatively, 2,534 unique individuals were served last
     year according to HMIS data.
2. Compared to 2011 Point-in-Time (PIT) count data, there was a 3% increase in homelessness
     in 2013 among those who met the HUD definition of homelessness. Annual school data
     from the County Office of Education also suggests there was an increase – the number of
     homeless children counted by local schools rose substantially from 2011 to 2013.
3. Of those counted by the PIT count on a single night in 2013, approximately 89% of the
     population was unsheltered. This is consistent with the 89% who were unsheltered on the
     night of the 2011 count. It should be noted that HMIS data is not used to estimate the
                                                  H-42

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
     percentage of the homeless population that is unsheltered, because it does not include those
     who are not receiving services,
4. A majority of the homeless population resided in San Luis Obispo County prior to
     becoming homeless. 71% of persons surveyed during the PIT Survey were living in San Luis
     Obispo County when they became homeless; and 18% were living in other counties in
     California when they became homeless. HMIS data from 2012 indicates that 54% of those
     using McKinney-funded services, shelter or housing reported that their most recent
     permanent residence was located in San Luis Obispo County. This disparity may be a result
     of differences in the wording of the question in HMIS versus the PIT Survey.
     •    In the 2013 PIT Survey, homeless people were asked where they were living most
          recently when they became homeless, whereas from HMIS, clients were asked to
          provide the zip code for their last permanent residence (where they had stayed for 90
          days or more).
     •    HMIS data is also collected over the course of a year, whereas PIT data is a single point-
          in-time snapshot.
     •    PIT data also includes people not receiving services; these people are not included in
          HMIS data.
5. 70% responded they would want to move into safe, affordable permanent housing if it were
     available; 16% indicated they were unsure.
6. 49% reported they were experiencing mental illness. This is a significant increase from 2011,
     when 31% answered yes. The increase appears to be partly due to the way in which the
     question was asked (as noted above, chronic depression and PTSD were included in 2013,
     per HUD’s standards for disabilities). In 2013, 36% of respondents reported they were
     experiencing chronic depression and 25% reported they were experiencing PTSD, but only
     20% answered “yes” when asked if they were currently experiencing a mental illness.
7. Survey respondents were asked about any incarcerations. 62% reported no incarcerations.
     4% reported having spent between 21-50 nights in jail or prison in the last 12 months and 8%
     reported having spent 51 nights or more in jail or prison. 12% reported having spent 1-5
     nights and 13% reported having spent 6-20 nights in jail or prison.
8. 8% were unaccompanied minors or Transitional Aged Youth (aged 18-24 years old) in 2013.
     The 2011 Count and Survey did not distinguish Transitional Aged Youth from other adults,
     so it was not possible to provide a count of that population, and no unaccompanied minors
     were counted.
9. 12% of the adult homeless population surveyed in 2013 reported being veterans, compared
     to 16% of those surveyed in 2011. HMIS data indicates 7% of individuals served at
     McKinney-funded programs in 2012 reported being veterans.
10. Only 3% of the persons surveyed in 2013 reported they were currently experiencing
     domestic violence. This is much lower than indicated by HMIS and other data. According to
     HMIS, 18% of those receiving services in 2012 had experienced domestic violence. Because
     the 2013 Point-In-Time survey was administered in public places and was administered by
     other homeless persons who may have known the interviewee, it is possible that persons
     experiencing domestic violence may not have felt safe in disclosing that information.
                                                H-43

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
The 2013 PIT count reported that there were 466 homeless persons in the North County. Of
these, 73 were sheltered and 393 were unsheltered. Using the ratio indicated by the HUD
formula described in key finding #1, above, it is estimated that there may be 745 homeless
persons annually in the North County. According to the 2010 US Census, population in the City
of Paso Robles is one-third of that for the North County. Therefore it is estimated that there may
be about 250 homeless persons annually in Paso Robles.
Facilities and services available to the City’s homeless population include the following:
     x    Since 1996, the Community Action Partnership of San Luis Obispo County (CAPSLO) has
          operated the Maxine Lewis county-wide shelter with 50 beds (supplemented with 25-35
          beds by the Interfaith Coalition) in the City of San Luis Obispo at 750 Orcutt Road.
          Operating funds for this Shelter have come from federal Community Development Block
          Grant (CDBG), federal Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG), and General funds provided by
          the “Urban County” of San Luis Obispo (consisting of the County and those cities,
          including Paso Robles, which participate in the entitlement CDBG, HOME and ESG
          programs) and the City of San Luis Obispo. The biggest challenge in operating this shelter
          is amassing enough operating funds on an annual basis.
     x    CAPSLO also operates the Prado Road homeless day center in San Luis Obispo, which is
          generally funded in the same manner as the shelter and faces the same annual challenges in
          obtaining sufficient operating funds.
     x    The North County Women’s Resource Center operates a domestic violence shelter in Paso
          Robles. The City has supported this facility with several grants of CDBG funds to
          rehabilitate the shelter building.
     x    El Camino Homeless Organization (ECHO), a nonprofit organization based in northern
          San Luis Obispo County, provides a 50 bed shelter in Atascadero. Since an estimated 20-
          25% of their clients come from Paso Robles (of which most are families with children), the
          City has made several grants of CDBG funds to support their annual operating costs.
     x    Transitional Food and Shelter, a nonprofit organization based in San Luis Obispo County,
          provides homeless who are incapable of staying in a regular homeless shelter because of
          illness or disability with motel vouchers or rooms rented in apartments. The City has made
          several grants of CDBG funds annually to support this program.
     x    The Second Baptist Church, in partnership with several local churches, provides daily
          meals, donated clothing, and showers for the homeless. The City has provided grants of
          CDBG funds to support the costs of equipment (e.g. refrigerators) and materials (food) for
          this service.
The County of San Luis Obispo, in conjunction with the cities and a large stakeholder group,
convened in 2008 to create a plan entitled “Path to a Home: 10 Year Plan to End Homelessness”.
This 10-Year Plan provides a clear vision of steps necessary to help homeless or at-risk persons
arrive to stable housing as productive members of the community. A central goal of this Plan is
to assist the county in stabilizing and sustaining critical services to people who are homeless
                                                  H-44

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
and at-risk by enhancing interagency collaboration and increasing system-wide efficiency in
provision of services and utilization of resources. Four priorities and several implementing
strategies based on each priority are incorporated in the 10 Year Plan. Priorities include:
     Priority 1.      Facilitating access to affordable housing to put an end to homelessness.
     Priority 2.      Stopping homelessness before it starts through prevention and effective
                      intervention.
     Priority 3.      Ending and preventing homelessness through integrated, comprehensive,
                      responsive supportive services.
     Priority 4.      Coordinating a solid administrative & financial structure to support effective
                      plan implementation.
At its meeting of February 3, 2009, the Paso Robles City Council received a presentation on the
“Path to a Home” plan. The Council took action to (1) receive the 10 Year Plan to End
Homelessness; (2) Endorse the guiding principles; and (3) designate a City Councilmember for
ongoing County-wide collaboration.
In 2007, the State Legislature adopted SB 2, which requires local jurisdictions to take the
following actions with regard to homeless persons:
     x    Estimate the numbers of homeless persons on an annual and seasonal basis;
     x    Identify one or more zoning districts where emergency shelters are permitted by right
          (without requiring a conditional use permit);
     x    The identified zoning districts must have sufficient capacity to accommodate the
          estimated need;
     x    Amend its zoning code to implement the above within one year of the adoption of the
          updated housing element;
     x    Amend its zoning code to allow “transitional housing” and “supportive housing” by
          right in residential zoning districts.
SB 2 also provides that emergency shelters may only be subject to those development and
management standards that apply to residential or commercial development within the same
zone except that a local government may apply written, objective standards that include all of
the following:
     x    The maximum number of beds or persons permitted to be served nightly by the facility.
     x    Off-street parking based upon demonstrated need, provided that the standards do not
          require more parking for emergency shelters than for other residential or commercial
          uses within the same zone.
     x    The size and location of client exterior and interior onsite waiting and client intake areas.
                                                   H-45

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
     x    The provision of onsite management.
     x    The proximity to other emergency shelters, provided that emergency shelters are not
          required to be more than 300 feet apart.
     x    The length of stay.
     x    Lighting.
     x    Security during hours that the emergency shelter is in operation.
State law provides the following definitions for “emergency shelter”, “transitional housing” and
“supportive housing”:
     x    “Emergency shelter” means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless
          persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No
          individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.
          (Health and Safety Code Section 50801(e))
     x    “Transitional housing” and “transitional housing development” means buildings
          configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements
          that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another
          eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no
          less than six months. (Health and Safety Code Section 50675.2(h))
     x    “Supportive housing” means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by
          the target population as defined in subdivision (d) of Section 53260, and that is linked to
          onsite or offsite services that assist the supportive housing resident in retaining the
          housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live
          and, when possible, work in the community. (Health and Safety Code Section
          50675.14(b))
To comply with SB 2, the City adopted Ordinance 976 N.S. in December 2011. That ordinance
accomplished the following.
1. Identified Zones Where Emergency Shelters Would Be Permitted By Right.
To calculate the shelter needs in terms of beds/acre, an accepted factor of 150 beds per acre is
assumed. On that basis, one or more shelters with a total of 771 beds would require 5.2 acres of
vacant land.
While capacity is primarily measured by large, vacant parcels, it could include
commercial/light industrial buildings or properties with minimal improvements (e.g. storage
yards) that could be converted to use as a shelter.
Ordinance 976 N.S. provides that emergency shelters are permitted by right in the following areas:
     a. Riverside Corridor (RC) Zone within the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan: This zone
          extends the length of Riverside Avenue through the West Side of the City, between
          Highway 101 and the Railroad; it also includes Paso Robles Street. Properties in this zone
          are presently used for service commercial, light industrial, and multi-family residential use.
                                                   H-46

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
          Riverside Avenue is a collector street. There are presently no fixed local transit routes on
          this street, but the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan proposes that such routes be
          considered in the future. The Second Baptist Church is located in the geographic middle of
          this zone. As noted above, this church hosts a program that provides daily meals, donated
          clothing, and showers for the homeless. Within this zone there are presently 8 vacant
          parcels ranging in size from 0.2 to 1.7 acres; the total area of all 8 vacant parcels is 5.4 acres.
          Additionally, within this zone, there are 17 parcels with land uses that have potential for re-
          use as a shelter. Some parcels are used as contractor’s yards or outside storage, some have
          vacant commercial and industrial buildings, some have occupied industrial buildings. The
          total area for these 17 lots is 16.2 acres. See Appendix K-5 for a map of this Zone.
     b. Commerce Industrial Park: This area, which is zoned PM for industrial use, is located
          south and east of Creston and Sherwood Roads, both of which are arterial streets. This area
          is developed with light industrial buildings that have insignificant levels of industrial-
          related nuisances such as fumes, dust, noise, etc. and is adjacent to a neighborhood
          shopping center and a local transit stop. Within this area, there are 6 vacant PM-zoned
          parcels ranging in size between 1.9 and 3.4 acres. There is also a 5.4 acre parcel of which
          only 2.4 acres is developed, leaving 3.0 vacant acres. See Appendix K-6 for a map of this
          Zone.
          Within both of the areas described above, there is sufficient capacity to locate emergency
          shelters with 771 beds.
2.        Amended the Zoning Code to Address Transitional and Supportive Housing.
Ordinance 976 N.S. defined “transitional housing” and “supportive housing” and provided that
these types of housing were permitted uses in all residential zones.
In 2013, AB 745 amended definitions of “supportive housing”, “transitional housing”, and
“target population”. In turn, the City will need to amend its Zoning Code to update its
definitions to be consistent with AB 745.
4.4       Housing Stock Characteristics
This section addresses various housing characteristics and conditions that affect the well-being
of Paso Robles residents. Housing factors evaluated include the following: housing stock and
growth, tenure and vacancy rates, housing age and condition, housing costs, and affordability.
     a. Housing Growth. According to the State Department of Finance, between 2010 and
2014, the housing stock in Paso Robles increased by 2%, from 11,471 to 11,682 units. As
exhibited in Table H-16, this level of growth was greater than countywide growth.
                                                      H-47

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
                Table H-16: City and County Housing Growth Trends 2010-2014
                  Jurisdiction                 2010                 2014         2010 – 2014 % Change
              Paso Robles                     11,426               11,682                   2%
              S.L.O. County                  118,996              119,032                   1%
              Sources: State Department of Finance: E-5 Reports (2010 and 2014)
     b. Housing Type. Table H-17 summarizes various characteristics of the housing stock in
Paso Robles. With relatively limited housing growth occurring since 2007, the composition of
the housing stock in 2013 was essentially the same as in 2010. Single-family homes make up the
majority of housing units. Multi-family dwelling units comprise less than one quarter of the
housing stock. Mobile homes account for the remaining 4%.
     c. Vacancy Rate. A measure of the availability of and demand for housing is the vacancy
rate. Generally, a vacancy rate of 4-5% is considered “healthy”, allowing persons to move and
find housing without undue upward pressure on housing prices because of a lack of supply to
meet the need.
         Table H-17: Changes in Housing Stock, City of Paso Robles 2010-2013
                                                         2010                             2013
                Housing Type
                                           No. of Units       % of Total       No. of Units % of Total
        Single-Family                            8,844            75%              8,997           75%
           Detached                              7,924            67%              8,077           67%
           Attached                                920              8%               920            8%
        Multi-Family                             2,494            21%              2,577           21%
           2-4 Units                             1,106              9%             1,108            9%
           5+ Units                              1,388            12%              1,469           12%
        Mobile Homes                               417              4%               418            4%
        Total Units                             11,755           100%             11,992         100%
        Homeowner Vacancy Rate                           13%                          Not Available
        Rental Vacancy Rate                              1.7%                            ±1.6%
        Sources: State Department of Finance: E-5 Reports (2010 and 2014); 2010 US Census; City’s Rental
        Vacancy Status Survey, February 2014
The 2010 Census showed that the overall vacancy rate in Paso Robles was 5.2%, which was
divided among homeowners 1.3%, renters 1.7%, and others (e.g., recreational and other homes)
2.2%. The State Department of Finance (E-5 Report) reported an overall vacancy rate of 5.2%
2.67% in 2014.
     d. Housing Age and Condition. Housing age can be used as an indicator of housing
conditions within a community. Like any other tangible asset, housing is subject to gradual
deterioration over time. If not properly and regularly maintained, housing can deteriorate and
discourage reinvestment, depress neighboring property values and eventually impact the
                                                            H-48

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
quality of life in a neighborhood. Consequently, maintaining and improving housing quality is
an important goal for the City of Paso Robles.
Table H-18 provides a breakdown of the City’s housing stock by year built. As of 2013, about
50% of the City’s 11,924 housing units are over 30 years old. A general rule in the housing
industry is that structures older than 30 years begin to show signs of deterioration and require
rehabilitation or replacement. Unless properly maintained, homes older than 50 years usually
require major renovations to remain in good working order.
                            Table H-18: Paso Robles Age of Housing Stock
                      Year Structure Built                   # of Units           % of Stock
                      2010 to 2013                                  261                       2%
                      2000 to 2009                                2,999                      25%
                      1990 to 1999                                1,787                      15%
                      1980 to 1989                                2,998                      25%
                      1970 to 1979                                1,529                      13%
                      1960 to 1969                                  727                       6%
                      1940 to 1959                                1,154                      10%
                      1939 or earlier                               469                       4%
                      Total                                      11,924
                      Source: 2000 Census; City Building Records (Total # of units does not account for
                      demolitions that occur from time to time.)
In 2009, City staff (building inspector) conducted a “windshield survey” of the exterior
conditions of 134 residential properties in several neighborhoods where housing ranged
between 30 and 70 years old. The properties were primarily developed with single family
residences and duplexes; there was one 10 unit apartment building in the survey. Eight
characteristics were evaluated. Table H-19 shows the results of that survey.
                            Table H-19: Housing Conditions Survey (2009)
                                                                  Number of Properties
           Characteristic          Good Condition           Fair Condition     Poor Condition        Not Applicable
            Foundation                     37                      97                none                   0
                Roof                       88                      45                  1                    0
               Stucco                      86                      22                none                  26
               Siding                      25                      40                  1                   68
             Brickwork                     16                       7                  1                  110
                Paint                      71                      97                none                   0
               Doors                       98                      34                  2                    0
             Windows                       73                      57                  4                   0
The results of the survey indicate that the need for a rehabilitation program is not critical. What
is critical, however, is the need to replace the 148 lower income units in Oak Park Public
Housing. These units were built in 1941 on about 25 acres of land as Army Housing; they are
rapidly deteriorating. In 2009, one unit had to be removed from service as the root damage to
                                                             H-49

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
the plumbing system was too severe to be feasibly repaired. In 2010, an additional 5 units had to
be removed from service for the same reason. In June 2010, the City Council approved a
development plan to build 302 new units at Oak Park: 148 units to replace the existing units and
154 additional units. The Housing Authority of the City of Paso Robles, which owns and
operates Oak Park Public Housing, has contracted with the Housing Authority of the County of
Monterey. Building permits for 80 units in Phase One were issued in February 2013; these units
are scheduled to be completed mid-2014. An application for Federal Tax Credits to build 69
units for Phase Two was filed in March 2014. To assist this project, the City has provided a low
interest loan of General Funds to defer payment of up to $1.018 million for City Fees for Phase
One and has approved a second low interest loan of up to $899,000 to defer payment of City
Fees for Phase Two.
     e. Replacement Need. Appendix D-2 lists the dwelling units lost to demolition or
conversion (final inspections) between January 1, 2010 and December 31, 2013 by income group.
The table also notes whether or not the lost units had been replaced on site. The net effect on
supply of housing is that there were gains of 8 units for above moderate income households, 53
units affordable to low income households, 18 units affordable to very low income households,
and 8 units affordable to extremely low income households. Moderate income households,
experienced a net loss of 1 unit.
     f. Housing Costs and Affordability. The cost of housing is directly related to the extent of
housing problems in a community. If housing costs are relatively high in comparison to
household income, there will be a correspondingly higher prevalence of overpayment and
overcrowding.
Table H-20 shows median home prices and the number of homes sold in the City of Paso Robles
during the period from 2007 to 2013. Home prices rose steadily during the early 2000s but began
to fall in 2007. Beginning in 2007, home prices adjusted downward, and in 2012 they appear to
be slowly rebounding.
           Table H-20: Median Home Prices in City of Paso Robles (2007 – 2013)
                                                          2007 *         2009         2010          2012         2013
Median Home Price ($ thousands)                            441.0         317.5        301.6         310.0        358.0
Number of Homes Sold                                        372          N/A            541         N/A           694
Sources: 2008 UCSB Economic Forecast Project estimate for Paso Robles: 2007; DataQuick: 2009, 2010, 2012, and 2013
Table H-21 shows the ability of 4 person households earning 80 – 120 percent of the 2010
Median Income to purchase housing, assuming that the purchase was financed with a CalHFA
FHA First-Time Homebuyers Loan (96.5% first trust deed) and a 3% CHFA CHDAP deferred-
payment second trust deed loan.
Together, Tables H-20 and 21 show that only those moderate income households in the 110 –
120% range (in 2014) can afford a median-priced home. In 2004, the City made first-time
                                                                 H-50

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
homebuyers loans to six low income households under the CalHome Program. At that time,
housing prices and qualifying income levels were such that a $500,000 CalHome Grant only
provided six loans. The City has not aggressively pursued additional CalHome Grants as the
degree of benefit is not supported by the cost (of grant funds and staff time).
In February 2014, City staff conducted a survey of apartment and house rents and found the
results shown in Table H-22. Supporting details are in Appendices F-1 and F-2.
                                            Table H-21: Ability to Purchase
           % of 2010                                                                                             Cash Required *
                                               Annual Income                     Purchase Price *                 (For Downpayment
       Median Income                                                                                               and closing costs)
               70%                                    $53,900                   $196,000 – 201,500                 $9,800 – 15,500
               80%                                    $61,600                   $224,000 – 230,000               $10,600 - $17,500
              100%                                    $77,000                   $326,000 - $335,000              $18,500 – $23,700
              120%                                    $92,400                   $379,000 - $407,000              $21,000 - $28,000
Assumptions:
1. First Loan (96.5%) is 30 year fixed rate at 4.5% (rate quoted 04/01/08); 1.5 points loan origination fee.
2. 2nd Loan (3%) is a deferred-payment (30 years) loan at 4.5% (rate quoted 04/01/08)
3. Maximum monthly payment is 30% of income for low income (80%) and 35% for moderate income (90-120%).
4. Property Tax Rate is 1.18%; $7,000 Home Owner's Exemption deducted from purchase price.
5. Homeowners Insurance Rate is 0.25% of value of house, which is assumed to be 75% of sales price.
6. Private Mortgage Insurance: 0.0096% of purchase price monthly.
* Lower number (on the right) assumes 2nd mortgage loan used for closing costs and higher number assumes 2nd mortgage used for
   lowering the affordability gap (amount on which first trust deed loan is based).
                                           Table H-22: Rental Affordability
                                                                                                   Affordability to
                              Monthly Rent                  Persons per                                                     Extremely
    Rental Type                                                                          Lower            Very Low
                                    Range                    household                                                         Low
                                                                                        Income               Income
                                                                                                                             Income
Studio apt                        $400 – 800                     1–2                      Yes                  Yes              Yes
1 bedroom apt                   $625 - $1,225                    1–2                   Partially            Partially           No
2 bedroom apt                   $850 - $1,350                    2–4                   Partially            Partially           No
2 bedroom house                $1,000 - $1,700                   2–5                   Partially            Partially           No
3 bedroom house                $1,200 - $2,100                   3-6                   Partially               No               No
Source: City Rent Survey, February 2014
Generally, market rate apartments are marginally affordable to low income and very low
income households (meaning a portion of the inventory is priced to be affordable to that income
group), but, other than studio apartments, are not affordable to extremely low income
households. Subsidized housing is needed to provide affordable housing to very low and
extremely low income households.
Appendix F-3 assigns affordability levels for new dwelling units. In making these assignments,
it is assumed that market rate rentals in second units, duplexes, triplexes, and larger apartment
                                                                  H-51

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
complexes are affordable to lower income households based on the information shown in Table
H-22. In these assignments, the City has conservatively assumed that no ownership housing
(single family detached or attached homes) is affordable to lower income households unless
they are built by a non-profit housing developer and include financing to make the homes
affordable.
     g. Assisted Housing Projects. Housing projects can obtain financial assistance through
government programs that require the housing remain affordable for a specified contract
period. There are presently ten apartment complexes that receive assistance (see Appendix G).
Presently, four of the complexes: Hacienda del Norte (44 units), Riverview Apartments (48
units), Creston Gardens Apartments, and Paso Robles Gardens (26 units) are eligible for
prepayment. City staff has maintained regular contacts with the managers of these apartments
and with the USDA Rural Development Offices in Visalia and Salinas. Paso Robles Gardens
Apartments is presently (March 2014) in escrow to be acquired by Domus Development, which
has applied for Federal Tax Credits to assist purchase and rehabilitation to enable this project to
remain affordable. The managers of Creston Gardens Apartments have notified the City that
they are presently (April 2014) negotiating with two buyers that wish to continue the
complexes’ affordability. The manager of Hacienda del Norte reports that they are presently
working with HUD to renew their subsidies. The manager of Riverview Apartments reported
that the owners are committed to maintaining the affordability of that project.
If, for some reason the contracts are not renewed, the complexes do not convert to market rate
immediately. The conditions of government assistance require that the City inform either the
US Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) or Rural Development whether a
need for subsidized housing remains in the community, and if so, the complexes must be first
be offered for sale to interested parties. Pursuant to Government Code Section 65863.11, the
State maintains a list of “Entities Interested in Participating in California's First Right of Refusal
Program” at http://www.hcd.ca.gov/hpd/hrc/tech/presrv/hpd00-01.xls. This list includes 4
entities interested in properties in San Luis Obispo County and several entities interested in
properties located in any county.
It is worthy to note that City staff has contributed time in recent years to assisting owners of
assisted housing to negotiate with lenders such as the U.S. Department of Agriculture to extend
their subsidies.
As noted previously, Hidden Creek Village, an 81 unit low income family apartment project
was completed in September 2011. Phase One of the Redevelopment of Oak Park Public
Housing (80 units) is scheduled to be completed in mid-2014. An application for tax credit
financing for Phase Two was submitted in March 2014. The City has provided a low interest
loan to defer payment of City fees for Phase One and has approved a similar loan for Phase
Two.
4.5       Energy Conservation
Energy conservation has become a more important issue in California. Energy prices have
escalated in recent years making consumers and builders more aware of energy costs. In the
1970’s standards were adopted in California dealing with energy conservation. Title 24 of the
California Administrative Code sets mandatory energy standards for new development and
                                                 H-52

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
requires adoption of an “energy budget.” The home building industry is required to comply
with these standards which are enforced by the relevant local municipality.
The City has updated its Building Codes to comply with the 2010 and 2013 California Building
Code (Title 24), which includes the State’s Green Building Standards (CalGreen). Chapter 4 of
these standards prescribes standards for residential buildings and sites that include: drainage,
energy efficiency, water efficiency and conservation, material conservation and resource
efficiency, and environmental quality. These “green” standards are described as being minimal
and the State has indicated that additional standards will be developed over time.
Paso Robles has adopted the Building Codes, including CalGreen, and complies with the Title
24 standards and enforces compliance by requiring certified energy calculations for building
designs and conducting on-site inspections of energy devices and improvements needed.
The 2006 Economic Strategy included the following policies (bold type) and actions (bulleted
items) designed to conserve energy, including:
Implement development policies to achieve more efficient use of infrastructure.
x Encourage community development in live/work, mixed use, and compact, pedestrian
     oriented forms to accommodate all income levels and lifestyles;
x Increase labor force residents in the City (rather than encouraging further sprawl into
     surrounding County land).
Develop distinctive design standards and invest in design excellence to:
x Create streetscapes, pathways, and public spaces of beauty, interest, and functional benefit
     to pedestrians;
x Encourage adaptive reuse of historic buildings;
x Preserve energy and natural resources.
Increase intensification, supply, and range of housing to attract and accommodate a skilled
labor force.
x    Develop and implement form based code and architectural design, “green” building, and
     historic preservation/reuse standards.
x    Prepare and implement target area vision/plans including Downtown Center – Salinas
     River Corridor Plan, Downtown Expansion Plan, Civic Center Plan, City Park Master Plan...
To implement the above policies and actions, the City has completed the following projects.
x    Circulation Element Update: This update was adopted on April 5, 2011. It:
     ¾ Incorporates “complete streets” principles, as directed by AB 1358 (2008) in which
          streets are designed for use by pedestrians of all ages, bicycles, and transit, as well as
          autos and trucks.
     ¾ Promotes alternative modes of transportation: pedestrians, bicycles, and transit.
     ¾ Establishes safe routes to school to encourage walking as an alternative to autos.
     ¾ Discontinue using Level of Service (LOS) as standard for vehicular traffic. LOS drove
          the need for continuous widening of streets and expensive intersection improvements
                                               H-53

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
          that encouraged higher speeds, exhaust emissions, greater use of fuel, and greater
          amounts of asphalt that consumed petroleum products and generated heat.
     ¾ Calls for subdivisions to incorporate grid street patterns.
x    Bike Master Plan Update: In December 2009, the City adopted an updated Bike Master
     Plan, which provides for an extensive system of bikeways throughout the City to provide
     safer routes to schools, employment centers, and parks, to encourage an alternative mode of
     transportation that reduces energy and pollution.
x    Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan: This specific plan encompasses 1,100 acres of
     urbanized land on the historic West Side of the City, between 1st and 38th Streets and
     between the Salinas River and Vine Street. This specific plan will establish a vision for infill
     development and redevelopment in a manner that incorporates mixed uses, increased
     residential densities, a variety of housing types (but mostly multi-family residential)
     improved circulation (primarily bicycle and pedestrian paths and transit). This specific plan
     was adopted in May 2011. It:
     ¾ Promotes/enables substantially increased use of mixed use.
     ¾ Replaces residential density standards (maximum units per acre) with performance
          standards (parking, setbacks, open space) that are reduced from the current Zoning
          Code. If relatively smaller units (e.g. one-bedroom or 800-900 sq ft two bedroom units
          as opposed to 1,200 sq ft two bedroom units) are built, a combination of factors will
          allow higher densities than the current Zoning Code would. This leads to a compact
          urban form that facilitates/raises demand for transit and walking and cycling as an
          alternative to use of personal vehicles.
     ¾ Encourages use of solar energy to generate electricity and heat water for residential uses.
     ¾ Proposes infrastructure improvements to serve pedestrians and cyclists.
     ¾ Proposes new neighborhood commercial centers to reduce vehicle miles traveled.
x    Climate Action Plan: On November 19, 2013, the City Council adopted a Climate Action
     Plan to provide a roadmap for reducing greenhouse gas emissions pursuant to AB 32. This
     plan contains a variety of voluntary and mandatory measures to be taken by the private
     sector and the City.
x    Low Impact Design: On February 18, 2014 the City Council adopted updated design
     standards for the City to conform to the Regional Water Quality Control Boards’ post-
     construction stormwater regulations. On July 2, 2013, the City Council adopted Ordinance
     991 N.S., which reduced off-street parking requirements (number of spaces and dimensions
     of spaces and drive aisles) to facilitate addition of low impact design measures.
x    Landscape and Irrigation Ordinance: In 2010, the City adopted an ordinance that limits the
     amount of turf area and types of irrigation that may be provided in residential and
     commercial development.
4.6       Regional Housing Needs
State law requires all regional councils of governments, including the San Luis Obispo Council
of Governments (SLOCOG) to determine the projected housing need for its region (Government
                                                   H-54

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
Code Section 65580 et. seq.) and determine the portion allocated to each jurisdiction within the
SLOCOG region. This is called the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) process.
SLOCOG approved the Regional Housing Need Plan in April 2013, and the City was assigned
an allocation of 492 dwelling units. The distribution of the 492 units among the income groups
is discussed in more detail in Chapter 5.
4.7       Other Opportunities to Meet Housing Needs
Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan: encompasses 1,100 acres of urbanized land on the historic
West Side of the City, between 1st and 38th Streets and between the Salinas River and Vine
Street. This specific plan was adopted in May 2011 and establishes a vision and a form-based
zoning code that facilitates infill development and redevelopment in a manner that incorporates
mixed uses, increased residential densities, a variety of housing types (but mostly multi-family
residential) improved circulation (primarily bicycle and pedestrian paths and transit).
Chandler Ranch Specific Plan: 837 acres of undeveloped land on the east side of the City,
generally north of Linne Road, south of Union Road, and east of Golden Hill Road. The General
Plan presently designates this area for 1,439 dwelling units. The plan will offer a variety of
single and multi-family residential housing types and limited amounts of neighborhood
commercial. Property owners have indicated a desire to incorporate compact urban design,
interconnecting grid street patterns, pedestrian and bicycle trails, and integrated open space.
Draft versions of this plan have been prepared, but not adopted. The challenge appears to be in
getting the several property owners to collaborate on a unified vision. In 2009, the City
informed land owners in the Chandler Ranch, Olsen Ranch, and Beechwood Areas that they
would be responsible for preparing specific plans for their areas as the City lacked financial
resources to initiate the plans. One of the major chandler Ranch land owners attempted to
prepare a plan starting in 2011, but ceased progress in 2013. It is not presently known when
preparation of this plan may resume.
Beechwood Area Specific Plan: 238 acres of agricultural land on the southeast side of the City,
south of Meadowlark Road, north of Creston Road, and east of Beechwood Drive. The General
Plan presently designates this area for 674 dwelling units. A draft specific plan had been
prepared by the City’s consultants in 2007. However, progress on that plan had been hampered
by the economic recession and environmental constraints related to the 2003 Circulation
Element. In 2013, the owners of a majority of the properties in this area organized to prepare a
new specific plan. On October 29, 2013, the City Council conducted a public workshop to
review a conceptual development plan. The Council gave direction to guide the owners in the
preparation of a specific plan that would offer a variety of single and multi-family residential
housing types and limited amounts of neighborhood commercial. The plan will incorporate
compact urban design, interconnecting grid street patterns, pedestrian and bicycle trails, and
integrated open space. In early 2014, the owners are having environmental studies prepared.
Olsen Ranch Specific Plan: 254 acres of agricultural land on the southeast side of the City,
south of Linne Road, north of Meadowlark Road, and west of Hansen Road. The General Plan
presently designates this area for 673 dwelling units. A draft specific plan had been prepared by
the City’s consultants in 2007. However, progress on that plan had been hampered by the
economic recession and environmental constraints related to the 2003 Circulation Element. The
                                               H-55

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
property owners have expressed their disapproval of the 2007 draft plan, but have not yet
indicated a desire to prepare a plan of their own.
The above three plans will offer a variety of housing types and densities integrated in a compact
urban pattern so that all income groups have an opportunity to find affordable housing. This is
a concept referred to as “affordable by design” and is an alternative to inclusionary zoning.
4.8       Equal Housing Opportunity
Federal and State Fair Housing laws make it illegal to discriminate against any person on the
basis of race, sex, color, religion, ethnicity, national origin, ancestry, lawful occupation, familial
status, disability, or age in the enjoyment of residence, land ownership, tenancy, or any other
land use.
Since 1994, all complaints about housing disputes have been referred to the City’s Housing
Division (in the Community Development Department). Complaints have been received at the
rate of about 5 per year. Almost all complaints center on landlord-tenant disputes or questions
about rent control (which the City has not adopted). Persons with landlord-tenant disputes
have been referred to the San Luis Obispo office of the California Rural Legal Assistance. In the
very few instances that someone has complained about discrimination, they were referred to the
State Department of Fair Employment and Housing (Ventura Office: 800-884-1864 or on the web
at www.dfeh.ca.gov). This information was recently added to the FAQ (frequently asked
questions) link on the Housing Division’s page under Community Development Department on
the City’s web site (www.prcity.com). A copy of this page is attached as Appendix I.
The “Reasonable Accommodation” Ordinance (No. 958 N.S.) adopted by the City in 2009
furthers this effort by removing constraints to meeting the housing needs of disabled persons.
                                                  H-56

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
5.0       Identification of Adequate Sites for Future Housing Needs
Housing Element law (Government Code Section 65583(a)(3)) requires an inventory of “land
suitable for residential development”. An important purpose of this inventory is to determine
whether a jurisdiction has allocated sufficient land for the development of housing to meet the
jurisdiction’s share of the regional housing need, including housing to accommodate the needs of
all household income levels. This chapter will also address the matter of providing sites to
households with special needs as discussed in Chapter 4 and required by Government Code
Section 65583(a)(6).
Government Code Section 65583.2 establishes standards for the inventory of available sites.
Subsection (a) defines “land suitable for residential development” as including all of the following:
          (1)     Vacant sites zoned for residential use.
          (2)     Vacant sites zoned for nonresidential use that allows residential development.
          (3)     Residentially zoned sites that are capable of being developed at a higher density.
          (4)     Sites zoned for nonresidential use that can be redeveloped for, and as necessary,
                  rezoned for, residential use.
As will be discussed in detail in this Chapter, the City’s housing needs, both those for meeting its
share of the Regional Housing Need Allocation (RHNA) and its special housing needs, can be met
with vacant sites zoned for residential use. However, via the, Chandler Ranch, Beechwood Area,
and the Olsen Ranch Specific Plans, all of which are all in progress in 2014, the City is considering
changes in land use designations to increase densities on land already designated for residential
use, and expanding opportunities for mixed use development.
Subsection (b) of Government Code Section 65583.2 requires that the inventory of land include all
of the following:
          (1)     A listing of properties by parcel number or other unique reference.
          (2)     The size of each property listed pursuant to paragraph (1), and the general plan
                  designation and zoning of each property.
          (3)     For non-vacant sites, a description of the existing use of each property.
          (4)     A general description of any environmental constraints to the development of
                  housing within the jurisdiction, the documentation for which has been made
                  available to the jurisdiction. This information need not be identified on a site-
                  specific basis.
          (5)     A general description of existing or planned water, sewer, and other dry utilities
                  supply, including the availability and access to distribution facilities. This
                  information need not be identified on a site-specific basis.
                                                    H-57

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
          (6)     Sites identified as available for housing for above-moderate income households in
                  areas not served by public sewer systems. This information need not be identified
                  on a site-specific basis.
          (7)     A map that shows the location of the sites included in the inventory, such as the
                  land use map from the jurisdiction’s general plan for reference purposes only.
The above requirements will be discussed in detail in the following sections of this Chapter.
5.1 Regional Housing Targets
Table H-23 shows the Regional Housing Needs Allocation Plan (RHNA) goals for the City as
described in the SLOCOG April 2013 RHNA Plan:
                               Table H-23. Target Housing Unit Distribution
                                    Income Category            Dwelling Units (Target)
                            Above Moderate                               205
                            Moderate                                      87
                            Low                                           77
                            Very Low                                     123
                            TOTAL                                        492
                            Source: SLOCOG, April 2013
It should be noted that Housing Element law does not require the City to ensure that the numbers
of dwelling units identified in the RHNA are built within the planning period. The law does,
however, require that the City provide an inventory of land suitably zoned and with available
infrastructure and utilities to meet that need. Government Code Section 65583.2(c)(3)(B) specifies
that a minimum density of 20 units per acre is necessary to meet the City’s Low and Very Low
Income Housing need.
Table H-24 (next page) aggregates the land use categories by the income levels used in the
Regional Housing Needs Assessment. It should be noted that these are assumptions for the
purpose of estimating housing affordability.
     a. Inventory to Meet Above Moderate Income Needs
The RHNA assignment for this income category is 205 dwelling units. The City’s inventory of vacant
and partially-developed land includes the following:
            214 units on vacant finished lots (See Appendix J-1)
             99 units on large parcels capable of lot splits or subdivisions (See Appendix J-1)
          1,214 units in the Chandler Ranch Area Specific Plan (See Table H-25, below)
            550 Units in the Beechwood Specific Plan (See Table H-25, below)
            613 Units in the Olsen Ranch Specific Plan (See Table H-27, below)
          2,341 Units total
                                                       H-58

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
                                 Table H-24: Land Use Categories by Income Level
                     Land Use Category              Density (units/acre)             Income Category
                              RS                           0.33                      Above Moderate
                            RSF-1                            1                       Above Moderate
                            RSF-2                            2                       Above Moderate
                            RSF-3                            3                       Above Moderate
                            RSF-4                            4                       Above Moderate
                            RSF-6                            6                           Moderate
                            RMF-8                            8                           Moderate
                            RMF-9                            9                           Moderate
                           RMF-12                           12                           Moderate
                           RMF-16                           16                           Moderate
                           RMF-20                           20                 Low (50%) Very Low (50%)
                             MH                              5                           Moderate
            Table H-25: Specific Plan Area Residential Capacities by Income Level
   Specific Plan           Land Use Category            Density          Dwelling Units          Income Category
         Area                                          Units/acre
Chandler Ranch           Mixed Single Family               1-4               1,214                Above Moderate
Chandler Ranch           RSF-6                               6                    90                  Moderate
Chandler Ranch           RMF-9                               9                  135                   Moderate
Olsen Ranch              RSF-3                               3                  275               Above Moderate
Olsen Ranch              RSF-4                               4                  338 *             Above Moderate
Olsen Ranch              RMF-20                             20                    60 *           Low & Very Low
Beechwood Area           RSF-3                               3                  550 **            Above Moderate
Beechwood Area           RMF-20                             20                  120 **           Low & Very Low
*    60% reduction in RMF-20 based on proportionate reduction proposed for Beechwood Area.
**   60% reduction in RMF-20 based on conceptual plan submitted 01/17/14 by applicants. Current General Plan
     provides for 474 units at RSF-3 and 200 units at RMF-20. Proposal is subject to approval of an amendment to the
     Land Use Element.
Progress on completion of these three specific plans was interrupted in 2008 for three reasons:
1. The draft Environmental Impact Reports (EIR) for these specific plans identified significant
     traffic impacts that were beyond the financial capacity of property owners and the City to
     mitigate, given standards set in the Circulation Element. The City initiated an update to the
     Circulation Element to identify alternative solutions to congestion management, including
     incorporation of “complete streets” methods mandated by State Law.
2. Property owners in these specific plan areas indicated a desire to revise earlier draft versions of
     these plans, partly to consider higher residential densities.
3. The economic recession that began in 2007 impacted City’s and property owners’ capacities to
     fund planning efforts.
An update of the Circulation Element was adopted on April 5, 2011. This update provides the city
with a traffic model capable of evaluating impacts associated with both existing General Plan
densities and scenarios of higher residential densities.
                                                          H-59

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
In 2014, owners of property in these specific plan areas are in various stages of preparing specific
plans. In 2012, owners of property in the Beechwood Area Specific Plan applied for a General Plan
Amendment to increase the density from 674 units to 1,011 units. They have since revised their
proposal to request only 915 units, of which 124 units would be designated for Residential Multi-
Family, 20 units per acre. In 2013, the owner of 113 acres in the Borkey Area Specific Plan applied for a
General Plan Amendment to redesignate these 113 acres from Agriculture to Residential, Single
Family, 4 units per acre in order to add 271 units. In 2014, both of these applications are in process of
preparing a specific plan (Beechwood Area) and an amendment to the Borkey Area Specific Plan and
the necessary accompanying environmental documents.
The Land Use Element presently designates 10 acres in the Beechwood Specific Plan Area and 4.5
acres in the Olsen Ranch Specific Plan Area for Residential Multi-Family, 20 units per acre (RMF-20).
Those acreages were assigned in 2003 when the City’s RHNA allocation was 2,266 units, of which
1,094 units were to be designated to accommodate low- and very low-income households. Since the
2008 and 2013 RHNAs greatly reduced the City’s allocation for those income groups, the City will
consider amendments to the Land Use Element to reduce acreages of RMF-20 in these two specific
plan areas as a means of encouraging residential development for moderate income households in
these areas so as to provide a mix of income groups. (The Land Use Map does not presently designate
any portion of these two specific plan areas for residential densities that are affordable to moderate-
income households).
The City has sufficient water and sewer capacity to serve a build-out population of 44,000, which is
accommodated by the existing Land Use Element (as adopted in 2003 and amended through 2012).
The City is requiring the preparation of water supply evaluations for the pending applications for
general plan amendments mentioned in the previous paragraph.
Water and sewer mains are stubbed out to the specific plan areas, but would need to be extended
into the areas as they are subdivided. Streets are either stubbed out to these specific plan areas or
run along one or more of their boundaries. The update of the Circulation Element identified those
off-site street improvements that would need to be made to accommodate the increases in traffic
generated by development under the existing General Plan densities.
     b. Inventory to Meet Moderate Income Needs
The RHNA assignment for this income category is 87 dwelling units. The City’s inventory of vacant
and partially-developed land includes the following:
             95 units on vacant finished lots (See Appendix J-2)
            625 units on partially-developed lots (See Appendix J-2)
            343 units on large parcels (See Appendix J-1B)
            278 units on commercially-zoned parcels in the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan *
            225 units in the Chandler Ranch Area Specific Plan (See Table H-25, above)
          1,681 Units total
     *    The Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan assumes development of residential units in mixed use projects.
                                                       H-60

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
     c. Inventory to Meet Low and Very Low Income Needs
The RHNA assignments for these income categories are 200 dwelling units: 77 units for low income
households and 123 units for very-low income households. As noted above, State Law only considers
densities of 20 units per acre as being capable of providing affordable housing for low and very-low
income households. Table H-26 shows the inventory of vacant land available to meet this need. An
inventory of these properties appears in Appendix J-3; a map of these sites is shown in Appendix K.
     d. Availability of Sewer and Water Service
Following the adoption of the 2003 General Plan Update, the City updated its Water and Sewer
Master Plans. As noted in the 2010 Urban Water Management Plan, with the City’s decision to
participate in the (Lake) Nacimiento Water Project (which began in 1992), it will have adequate
capacity to serve all properties in its current boundaries at densities/intensities consistent with
current land use designations. Water and sewer service will need to be extended into the specific
plan areas (Chandler Ranch, Olsen Ranch, and Beechwood) as properties in those areas are
subdivided following adoption of the specific plans. New development will need to pay for its fair
share of Lake Nacimiento Water as part of development impact fees.
As mandated by SB 1087 (Statutes of 2005), the City has adopted Resolution 09-034, which grants
priority for water and sewer connections to housing reserved for lower income household in the
unforeseen event that capacity for either utility becomes limited. (A copy of Resolution 09-034 is available
at www.prcity.com/government/citycouncil/resolutions/2009/2009_CC_RES_09-034.pdf.)
                     Table H-26: Inventory for Low and Very-Low Income Households
                    Location                                     APN                  Acres     Unit Yield         See Note Below
 East side Creston Road, north of Food 4           009-571-010                          10.0           199                  1
 Less Center (zoned 20 du/ac)
 Northwest corner of Creston and                   009-641-008, 009, -010, -             6.2           126                  2
 Rolling Hills Roads (zoned 20 du/ac)              011, and -022
 Southeast corner of S. River Road and             009-815-007                           2.8            26                  3
 Serenade Drive (zoned 20 du/ac)
 Olsen Ranch Specific Plan (General Plan           009-795-001 through -006              4.8            60                  4
 designates at 20 du/ac)
 Beechwood Area Specific Plan (General             009-863-001 through -013             10.0           120                  4
 Plan designates at 20 du/ac)
 Oak Park Public Housing: between 28th             008-042-015, 008-071-013             20.0           154                  5
 and 34th Sts, Park St and the Railroad            and -014, 008-081-030
 Total                                                                                  52.8           685
 1. Site is flat and has no environmental constraints (oaks, stream courses, habitats). Sewer, water, and streets are available.
     199 units represents new inventory and does not include an existing single family home that is expected to be replaced.
 2. Site is flat and has no environmental constraints (oaks, stream courses, habitats). Sewer, water, and streets are available.
     Five parcels are presently under a single ownership; a development application for 117 dwelling units was filed in 2005, but
     found to be incomplete. The application has not been refilled. 125 units represents new inventory and does not include an
     existing single family home that is expected to be replaced.
 3. About 2/3 of the site is flat and has no environmental constraints (oaks, stream courses, habitats); 1/3 has steep slopes and
     oaks. Sewer, water, and streets are available. A tentative tract (2654) with a combination of 26 units in townhouse
     condominiums and apartments was approved in October 2006. This map expires in October 2015, but is eligible for 5 more
     one-year time extensions.
 4. See the discussion of status of the Olsen Ranch and Beechwood Area Specific Plans above under “Above Moderate Income
     Housing”.
 5. Although the site is only zoned for 12 units per acre, it is owned by the Housing Authority of the City of Paso Robles and
     residency is limited to lower income households. In 2010, the City approved a development plan for a total of 302 units of
     which 154 will be new inventory and 148 will be replacement units. Phase I of the development (80 units) is under
     construction. The applicants applied for Tax Credit Financing for Phase 2 (70 units) in March 2014.
                                                                   H-61

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
     e. Are densities of 20 units per acre attainable?
The City has not had any multi-family residential development at densities of 20 units per acre
since the zoning regulations for multi-family residential were revised in 1995. However, in the
mid-late 1980’s, three multi-family complexes, with 32, 40, and 72 units, were built on Spring
Street, between 30th and 36th Streets at densities ranging between 25 and 30 units per acre (under
previous General Plan and Zoning which allowed densities up to 30 units per acre north of 24th
Street).
Two development standards that have a substantial effect on density are the Zoning Code’s off-
street parking and open space requirements. The off-street parking requirements in the 1980s were
similar to those presently required. Prior to 1995, the Zoning Code only specified setbacks and
maximum lot coverage percentages; usable open space (balconies, patios, playgrounds, and/or
passive open space (that could not be occupied with parking, steep slopes, or accessory buildings)
were not required. The Zoning Code currently requires 375 sq ft of open space per unit. Private
open space (patios and balconies) that meet specified minimum dimensional requirements may
take a double credit for area. For example, a 100 sq ft patio qualifies for providing 200 sq ft of the
required 375 sq ft per unit. For residences in the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan, the
requirement to provide on-site visitor parking spaces was eliminated; and open space
requirements were substantially reduced overall.
Other factors that greatly affect density are: (1) the size of dwelling unit: larger dwelling units
create larger footprints which compete with parking and open space for lot area, and (2) number of
stories. The City has never mandated a minimum or maximum unit size or number of bedrooms
for multi-family residential. The City has always allowed 3 story construction for multi-family
residential zoned for 20 or more units per acre.
The three complexes referenced above had 1 and 2 bedroom units with floor areas ranging
between 650 and 870 square feet. All three of those complexes were two stories in height. Had
current open space requirements been in place in the 1980s, it is likely that three-story construction
might have been necessary to achieve the same 25-30 unit per acre densities. Densities of 20 units
per acre, however, would likely be achievable with two-story construction, even under current
open space requirements, if the unit sizes are kept to the 700 - 900 sq ft range.
The form-based code in the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan provides for parking, setback, and
open space standards that are less than those specified in the Zoning Code. It also dispenses with
the Zoning Code’s density factors for multi-family residential. In this specific plan area, densities
will be determined by compliance with the reduced standards for parking, setbacks, and open
space. Projects that propose smaller units (e.g. studios, one-bedroom units, and 800-900 sq ft two
bedroom units) should be able to attain higher densities.
     f.   Opportunities for Additional Inventory Affordable to Low Income Households
Second Units. In 2003, the City adopted a new second unit ordinance, which allows development
of a second unit on all single family-zoned parcels. The ordinance provides that second units must
be rentals, the size is limited to 1,200 sq ft, second unit occupants need not be related to the owner
or occupant of the primary dwelling (which may itself be a rental unit). Since adoption of the
ordinance, five second units have been built.
                                                    H-62

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
Infilling of Multi-Family Zoned Lots. The original subdivision of the West Side of the City created
50’ x 140’ (7,000 sq ft) lots. On such lots, the previous Zoning Code allowed 2 dwelling units to be
built in the R-2 Zone and 3 dwelling units in the R-3 Zone. These zones were replaced by the
Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan’s T-3 and T-4 Zones, respectively.) The T-3 and T-4 zones
allow the opportunity for the development of more units than the R2 and R3 zones did. A great
number of these lots were developed with only one dwelling unit and opportunity exists to
develop additional units on these lots. These extra units are generally affordable to lower income
households. Between 2001 and 2013, 81 such dwelling units (including some in new duplexes)
were developed on the West Side.
Mixed Use: The Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan introduced T-3F, T-4F Zones and allows
residential uses in the various commercial zones (TC-1, TC-2, and RC) to much of the West Side of
the City. This replaced the former Mixed-Use Overlay Zone on the West Side. On the East Side, a
single 1.76 acre parcel on Oak Hill Road between Creekside Gardens and the Highlands Shopping
Center allows for residential development up to 20 units per acre.
Specific Plans.
See discussion on Page H-59 regarding the Uptown/Town Centre, Chandler Ranch, and Olsen
Ranch/Beechwood Area Specific Plans. These plans offer potential to substantially increase the
number of dwelling units affordable to the various income groups.
Density Bonus
State Law (Government Code Section 65915) mandates that the City provide density bonuses and
incentives to residential projects that restrict the occupancy of certain percentages of their units to
lower and/or very low income households. Incentives are defined as modifications (reductions) of
zoning development standards, mixed use zoning, other regulatory incentives or concessions,
additional density bonuses (above the minimums mandated by State law), and financial assistance.
Since 2001, the City has granted density bonuses to five low income housing projects: Los Robles
Terrace (40 senior housing units at 2940 Spring Street); Canyon Creek Apartments (68 family units
at 401 Oak Hill Road); Chet Dotter (Oak Park) Senior Housing (40 senior housing units at 801 – 28th
Street); Hidden Creek Village Apartments (81 family units at 80 Cary Street), and the
redevelopment of Oak Park Public Housing (302 family units between 28th and 34th Streets and
between Park Street and the Railroad). In all five of these projects, 100% of the units were/are to
be restricted to low and very low income households. The first four have been completed; Phase
One of the redevelopment of Oak Park Public Housing (80 units) is under construction and due to
be completed in early 2014; Phase Two (69 units) is seeking Federal Tax Credit financing in 2014.
     g. Conclusion
The City has ample properly zoned land capacity, with available utilities, to accommodate its share
of the Regional Housing Need.
                                                   H-63

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
5.2 Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types
Government Code Sections 65583(c)(1) and 65583.2(c) require that the Housing Element identify
and analyze sites as needed to facilitate and encourage the development of a variety of types of
housing for all income levels, including multifamily rental housing, factory-built housing,
mobilehomes, housing for agricultural employees, supportive housing, single-room occupancy
units, emergency shelters, and transitional housing.
Multifamily Rental Housing. This was essentially discussed above under the “Inventory to Meet
Low and Very Low Income Needs” (Page H-65) and “Opportunities for Additional Inventory
Affordable to Low Income Households” (Page H-66) sections. Appendix J-1C shows an inventory of
vacant and underdeveloped lots zoned for multi-family residential use.
Single-Room Occupancy (SRO) Units. This type of multi-family housing, which is essentially a
studio apartment complex, could be developed in Multi-family zones and mixed use zones,
particularly within the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan Area.
Factory-Built Housing. The City’s Zoning Code permits placement of factory-built housing and
mobilehomes on permanent foundations in all single-family zones. Currently, there are about 15
such housing units in various locations on the East Side.
Mobilehomes. The City presently has four mobilehome parks. Three are located on Spring Street,
between 28th and 34th Streets and were developed when Spring Street was Highway 101. These are
aging parks in which the units are largely single-wide travel trailers. On the East Side of the City,
on the north side of Sherwood Road, at Commerce Way is Quail Run Mobile Home Park, with 310
units on condominium lots. Phase One of this park, with 173 units, was developed in the early
1980s; Phase Two with 137 units, was developed in the early 2000s. Presently, there is no land
other than Quail Run designated by the Land Use Element for mobile home parks. In the last 30
years, other than development of Phase Two of Quail Run, the City has not received any inquiries
to develop a new mobilehome park.
Housing For Seasonal Agricultural Employees. In 2009, the City adopted a zoning code
amendment to allow farmworker housing by right in accordance with Health and Safety Code
Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6. The latter section provides that housing for 6 or fewer farmworkers
would be similar to any other permitted use in residential zones. With 11,863 dwelling units in the
City (as of December 2013), the capacity to meet the anticipated needs of an estimated 370 seasonal
farmworkers can easily be met.
Transitional and Supportive Housing. In December 2011, pursuant to SB 2 (Statutes of 2007), the
City adopted Ordinance 976 N.S. to amend its Zoning Code to allow transitional and supportive
housing by right in all zones allowing residential development. A copy of Ordinance 976 appears
in Appendix I. The capacity to provide transitional and supportive housing would be found in the
existing supply of 11,863 dwelling units.
Emergency Shelters. In December 2011, pursuant to SB 2 (Statutes of 2007), the City adopted
Ordinance 976 N.S. to amend its Zoning Code to allow emergency shelters by right in two zones
that were determined to have sufficient capacity to meet the City’s needs for emergency shelters as
identified in Chapter 4. A copy of Ordinance 976 appears in Appendix I.
                                               H-64

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
6.0       Housing Constraints and Incentives
6.1       Governmental Constraints
In the Introduction to the City’s General Plan are two overall City goals that directly affect
housing:
Goal 1: In order to enhance Paso Robles’ unique small town character and high quality of life,
             the City Council supports the development and maintenance of a balanced community
             where the great majority of the population can line, work, and shop.
Goal 4: Strive to ensure that City services and facilities are maintained at current (2003) levels
             and/or in accordance with adopted standards.
In 1992 and again in 2002, the City Council adopted a “Fiscal Policy” “to assure that the City’s
finances are managed in a manner that will (1) provide for the delivery of quality services and
products cost effectively, (2) provide for an acceptable level of services and products as the
community grows, (3) ensure that the City is living within its means, and (4) provide reserves for
unbudgeted needs that might arise from time to time.”
In order to protect the public health and safety, the State of California regularly adopts and
updates its Building Code (Title 24) and requires that cities adopt the same codes.
In order to implement the General Plan goals, the City’s Fiscal Policy, and to protect the public
health and safety, the City has established a Zoning Code, Subdivision Code, Building Code, and
a schedule of fees for development and permit processing. Altogether, these codes and fees can
pose constraints to the development of affordable housing.
     a. Zoning Code. The City’s Zoning Code (Chapter 21 of the Municipal Code) establishes
zoning districts to implement the Land Use Categories described in the Land Use Element of the
General Plan, establish development regulations, and establish the processes for obtaining
development permits.
          i. Permitted and Conditional Uses. The Zoning Code establishes which types of
residential uses are permitted in the various zoning districts. Some types of residential uses
require approval of a conditional use permit; these include residential care facilities for more than
6 persons, mobile home parks, and more than 2 units per lot in the Office Professional Zone.
Appendix L contains a list of housing types permitted in each zoning district.
          ii. Development Standards. Development standards are contained within the following
chapters of the Zoning Code:
     x Chapter 21.16E for the R-1 single family zone;
     x Chapter 21.16I for the R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5 multi-family zones;
     x Chapter 21.16B for specific plan areas;
     x Chapter 21.22 for off-street parking regulations.
                                                  H-65

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
Appendix N contains a table that summarizes the development standards and their affect on
affordability of housing. The paragraphs below discuss those standards that impact affordability.
              (a) Parking Requirements. Appendix M lists the City’s parking requirements for
both single and multi-family residential zones. It notes that the parking space requirements for
one-bedroom and studio units and for visitor parking in multi-family residential zones do affect
affordability. The effect is minor, however, and is primarily related to cost for asphalt and base
material for the additional spaces. On the other hand, reduction of the amount of paved surface in
a development would reduce rainwater runoff, allow increased opportunities for groundwater
recharge, and would improve water quality.
The Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan, which designates all residential property within its
boundaries for multi-family use, reduces the parking space requirement for one-bedroom and
studio units from 1.5 spaces per unit to 1.0 space per unit and eliminates the requirement for
visitor parking spaces. These new requirements are consistent with the parking requirements in
the State’s Density Bonus Law (Government Code Section 65915). This will offer an opportunity
to assess the viability of making similar changes to parking requirements for properties located
outside of this specific plan area.
In 2013, Chapter 21.22 of the Zoning Code was amended to provide that, for mixed uses
(commercial and residential on the same property) the combined parking requirements may be
reduced by 33 percent. This provision facilitates development of mixed use housing.
              (b) Open Space Requirements for Multi-Family Residential Development. Chapter
21.16I of the Zoning Code presently requires each multi-family residential unit to provide 375 sq
ft of usable open space on site. Private open space (patios and balconies) that meet prescribed
dimensional standards qualify for double credit. For example, a 100 sq ft patio satisfies the
requirement for 200 of the 375 sq ft. Shared (non-private) open space is deemed usable if it has a
slope of 10 percent or less. The open space requirement provides a valuable residential asset, but
can exert pressure to reduce achievable density. Such pressure can be relieved, however, if
housing developers plan to build smaller units. This was discussed in Chapter 5 under the
section entitled “Are densities of 20 units per acre attainable?”
The Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan provides for reduced open space requirements for most
multi-family buildings. As with parking requirements, this may offer an opportunity to assess the
viability of making similar changes to open space requirements for properties located outside of
this specific plan area.
              (c) Storage Space for Multi-Family Residential Development. Section 21.16I.185.C
of the Zoning Code requires that each dwelling unit in a multi-family development provide a
separate, enclosed, lockable storage space at least 250 cubic feet in area. This space may be
located in a carport allocated to such unit (if a garage is provided to a dwelling unit, the storage
requirement is deemed to be met), attached to such unit, but accessible only from the exterior, or
elsewhere in the development (e.g., in a storage building). Two subsidized low income projects:
Chet Dotter Senior Housing and Hidden Creek Village requested (and were granted) relief from
this requirement in the form of lesser cubic feet as “incentives” in conjunction with the density
bonuses they sought. The City may wish to reconsider reducing this code requirement to
facilitate affordability of multi-family housing.
                                                 H-66

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
              (d) Grading Limitations. Section 21.16E.140 provides that mass grading and pad
grading is not permitted on single family zoned properties with an average slope of 10 percent or
greater. In such areas, raised wall foundations and retaining walls, which add to the cost of
housing, are required. The multi-family regulations (Section 21.16I.100) refer to Section
21.16E.140, but also provide that the Planning Commission may waive compliance, subject to
approval of a development plan application, if it can be demonstrated that compliance would
prevent a reasonable type of development from occurring. The Uptown/Town Centre Specific
Plan also makes this reference. It should be noted, however, that the City has an ample supply of
land designated for single family use that has average slopes less than 10% and that almost all
vacant multi-family designated land has average slopes less than 10%.
               (e) Other Development Standards for Multi-Family Residential Development. The
Zoning Code includes development standards such as height limits and setbacks, which impose
physical limits on the amount of development on multi-family zoned lots. However, none of
these have proven to be a constraint to achievement of allowable density. The City permits three-
story construction in zones that allow 12 or more units per acre. Setbacks for multi-family land
use categories and zoning districts are less than those required for single family development.
Additionally, the Zoning Code (Section 21.16I.140) allows for the Planning Commission to modify
development standards with a development plan application if strict adherence can be
demonstrated to be infeasible for any reasonable type of development and subject to a finding
that the modified standards would not create a physical hazard or negative visual impact.
The Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan provides mixed-use zones (T-3F and T-4F) in which
commercial and residential uses may be developed on the same property. This plan also allows
for more residential use in commercial zones than the City’s Zoning Code does. This plan also
provides incentives for increased density in residential zones (over current Zoning Code density
limits) provided that smaller dwelling units become a part of the mix.
              (f) Architectural/Design Guidelines for Multi-Family Housing. Section 21.16I.210
prescribes general architectural requirements for multi-family housing. This section addresses
roofing and siding materials, architectural articulation, and provides that the Planning
Commission may limit the numbers of dwelling units in a building to 4 or 8 if doing so would
enhance the safety of the neighborhood. (Note: This is not a density control.) This section also
provides that the City may adopt design guidelines for multi-family residential and may require
that development plans and site plans conform to such guidelines. In 2005, the City Council
adopted Multi-Family Residential Design Guidelines, which are attached in Appendix O.
Section 5.3.3 of the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan prescribes architectural guidelines for
property located within that planning area, which would supersede the guidelines in Appendix
O. The guidelines in this section are generally comparable to those in Appendix O. They do,
however, require that housing be designed to conform to a range of architectural styles.
In the drafting of the design guidelines discussed above, the City has taken care to ensure that
they do not require expensive materials or treatments or limit density. For example, asphalt
shingle roofs, stucco and concrete lap siding are permitted. These guidelines address items such
as entry and window orientation, location of parking, basic articulation, avoidance of large blank
masses, and the like.
                                               H-67

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
               (g) Development Standards for Second Units. Paso Robles adopted its “Second Unit
Ordinance” in 2003 which allows for the construction of second units in single family residential
zoning districts. This ordinance was updated in 2005 to implement changes to Government Code
Section 65915 mandated by SB 1818 (2004) and SB 435 (2005). The ordinance sets standards for
second unit size, lot coverage, height, setback, and separation from other buildings, parking, and
architectural design.
               (h) Specific Plans. The City has adopted three specific plans: Union/46, Borkey Area,
and the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan. State law provides that specific plans may adopt
development regulations that supplement or supersede zoning regulations. As noted in
Appendix M, there are no development regulations in either of the Union/46 or Borkey Area
Specific Plans that affect housing affordability.
The Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan adopted a “form-based” zoning code that mostly
supersedes the City’s Zoning Code for properties located within the specific plan area. For the
most part, the regulations in the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan are beneficial to housing
affordability. In the residential zones (T-3N, T-3F, T-4N, and T-4F), density is not regulated by a
formula that prescribes a maximum number of units per acre, but rather by such performance
standards such as: allowed building types, setbacks, open space, and parking requirements. This
specific plan would allow greater densities than would the regular City Zoning Code if the mix of
units includes smaller units such as 1 bedroom and studio units, which have lesser parking and
open space requirements. Additionally, the off-street parking requirements for housing in this
specific plan were reduced from the City’s Zoning Code to match those prescribed by
Government Code Section 65915 for density bonuses. Specifically, the parking requirements in
this area do not include visitor parking spaces, and studio and one-bedroom units are only
required to provide one off-street parking space (where the Zoning Code would require 1.5
spaces).
The Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan also allows for a greater amount of housing in mixed use
and commercial zones than the does the regular City Zoning Code.
          iii. Permit Processing Procedures. The City of Paso Robles development permitting
process includes three levels of review as discussed below. Table H-27 shows typical processing
times for the three types of review, once an application has been determined to be complete.
Government Code Section 65943 requires that the City determine whether or not an application is
complete within 30 days of its submittal. It is not uncommon for the City to take 30 days for
applications that require discretionary review. The reason for this is that such applications are
commonly complex and staff resources are limited. For items that require semi-discretionary and
staff review, the amount of time needed to determine if an application is complete is commonly 1-
2 weeks.
               (a) Discretionary review by the Planning Commission at a public hearing:
Applications for subdivision (tract and parcel) maps, development plans (e.g., residential
development with 5 or more units per lot), conditional use permits, and variances require that
findings be made at a public hearing. The Findings required by various sections of the Zoning
Code and by the State’s Subdivision Map Act are listed in Appendix O. The Planning
Commission meets twice monthly. Prior to a Planning Commission meeting, such applications
                                                  H-68

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
are reviewed by the Development Review Committee (DRC), which is a standing subcommittee
of the Planning Commission. The DRC meets weekly. The DRC may suggest revisions to
proposed project design, which applicants may or may not elect to undertake prior to having the
Planning Commission review their plans. The City has found that having the DRC pre-review
discretionary applications tends to expedite their processing. The Planning Commission often
tasks the DRC with reviewing detailed plans for building elevations, landscaping, and signage
after approval of a discretionary application, but prior to issuance of a building permit (as a
condition of approval). This secondary use of the DRC reduces up-front costs associated with
providing detailed drawings earlier in the process. Applicants can receive conceptual approval
on major site-plan and grading issues before incurring expense for details.
               (b) Semi-discretionary review by the Development Review Committee (DRC):
Applications for site plans (generally development that is categorically exempt from review
under the California Environmental Quality Act - CEQA) including multi-family housing with 4
or fewer units may be approved by the DRC, which does not impose conditions of approval, but
may direct applicants to revise the design of a development to be compatible with neighboring
properties or to conform with the design guidelines discussed above. Membership of the DRC is
comprised of 3 Planning Commissioners. DRC meetings are conducted weekly and are open to
the public.
              (c) Ministerial review by City Staff: City staff has been authorized to approve plot
plans for individual single family homes, including those on hillside lots. City staff may also
approve lot line adjustments.
Time spent processing development permits present a cost to developers (e.g., land holding costs
and construction loan interest) that is ultimately passed onto buyers and renters and can impact
the affordability of housing. To reduce the amount of time necessary to process development
permits, the City has taken, and continues to implement the following measures:
     x    The City encourages development projects that require multiple applications (e.g. tract
          map and development plan) and the review of their environmental documents (required
          under CEQA) to be processed simultaneously.
     x    The City complies with the State Permit Streamlining Act (Government Code Sections
          65920 et seq) and Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Sections 66410 et seq), which
          mandate that the City take action to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a
          development application within prescribed time periods (depending upon the
          environmental review status of an application) following receipt of a complete
          application.
     x    The City strives to process complete applications for discretionary applications within 90
          days of receipt of a complete application. (Single family tracts and multi-family
          complexes are processed in the same time frame. The City does not have any overlay
          zones that have increased level of permit processing review.) However, the actual speed
          of processing a complete application depends upon the scale of a development application
          (e.g. acres, number of dwelling units, complexity of environmental issues, etc.).
                                                  H-69
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
                                          Table H-27: Planning Permit Process
                                                                                       Typical Processing
 Residential Types                Applications               Level of Review                                       Findings 2
                                                                                              Time 1
Single Family, 4 or        Site Plan if in Hillside      Semi-Discretionary          2-4 weeks                 Not Required
fewer units                Development Overlay           (DRC)
                           Zone
                           Plot Plan outside of          Ministerial (City Staff)    1-2 weeks                 Not Required
                           Hillside Development
                           Overlay Zone
Single Family, 5 or        Development Plan (PD) –       Discretionary 3             3-6 months if no EIR 4    Section 21.23B.050
more units                 if in PD Overlay Zone,        (Planning Commission)       is required.              for PD; Gov’t.
                           Subdivision (Tentative                                                              Code Section
                           Tract) Map                                                                          66474 for
                                                                                                               Subdivisions
Multi-Family, 4 or         Site Plan                     Semi-Discretionary 3        2-4 weeks                 Not Required
fewer units                                              (DRC)
Multi-Family, 5 or         Development Plan (PD)         Discretionary 3             3-6 months if no EIR 4    Section 21.23B.050
more units                                               (Planning Commission)       is required               for PD
Res. Care Facility –       None                          None                        None                      None
6 or fewer
Res. Care Facility –       Conditional Use Permit        Discretionary 3             3-6 months if no EIR 4    Not Required
6 or more                  (CUP)                         (Planning Commission)       is required
Emergency Shelter          Site Plan                     Semi-Discretionary 3        2-4 weeks                 Not Required
                                                         (DRC)
Manufactured               Same as single family
Homes (1 per lot)
Mobile Homes               If one per R-1 Lot, Plot      Ministerial (City Staff)    1-2 weeks                 Not Required
                           Plan
                           If mobile home park,          Discretionary               3-6 months if no EIR*     Section 21.23.250
                           CUP and PD                                                is required               for CUP; Section
                                                         (Planning Commission)
                                                                                                               21.23B.050 for PD
Transitional and           None for occupancy of         None for occupancy of       None for occupancy
Supportive                 existing buildings,           existing buildings          of existing buildings
Housing                    otherwise same process
                           as for single and multi-
                           family housing.
Farmworker                 State Permit for Employee Housing per Health and Safety Code Sections 17021.5 and 17021.6 Required. No
Housing                    City permit required.
Second unit                Plot Plan                     Ministerial (City Staff)    1-2 weeks                 Not Required
1.   Measured from date of finding that an application is complete. See Government Code Section 65943.
2.   All findings are listed in Appendix O.
3.   Discretionary to design only, not to land use.
4.   EIR = Environmental Impact Report
                                                               H-70

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
     x    Complete applications for DRC review are typically reviewed and presented in a 2-3 week
          time period; staff level ministerial review is completed within a week.
     x    To assist developers file complete applications, the City of Paso Robles has amended its
          Zoning Code to provide detailed and clear residential zoning development standards.
          (This was done in the mid-1990’s for multi-family development standards to reduce
          ambiguity and uncertainty.) It should be noted that the City’s development standards do
          not mandate expensive materials (e.g. tile roofs) or complex site arrangements.
     x    The City has also prepared detailed application requirement handouts for all types of
          development applications.
     x    The City encourages developers to meet informally with City staff to pre-view
          applications in order to identify design, environmental, neighborhood compatibility, and
          general plan conformance issues before finalizing plans. The City does not charge for its
          pre-application review services.
     x    The Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan includes detailed architectural guidelines to help
          explain the City’s expectations for design. It is expected that these guidelines will help
          developers prepare better submittals and thereby reduce the amount of time in the
          permitting process.
     b. Building Codes and Enforcement. The Building Division oversees the plan check and
inspection process for all construction requiring a Building Permit. These activities are necessary
to protect the safety of the public but serve as a constraint to housing affordability because of the
additional time that is necessary for permit application review and field inspections.
Enforcement of violations of the Building Code in existing residential buildings is conducted on a
complaint basis.
The City has adopted several amendments to the International Building Code (IBC). The only
amendment or codes as stated in the California Building Code (CBC) that would appreciably
affect the affordability of housing would be a requirement that all new buildings, including
residential, 5,000 square feet or more in area must have fire sprinklers. Generally, this
requirement would affect multi-family housing with 4 or more units. Although this requirement
would increase the cost of multi-family housing, it would protect lives and limit any fire damage
that might occur, preventing the loss of units from the City’s inventory.
On, January 2, 2014 the State’s Green Building Standards (CalGreen), Part 11 of the California
Building Code (Title 24) became effective. Chapter 4 of these standards prescribes standards for
residential buildings and sites that include: planning & design, energy efficiency, water efficiency
and conservation, material conservation and resource efficiency, and environmental quality.
These “green” standards are described as being minimal and the State has indicated that
additional standards will be developed over time.
Conservative estimates of the up-front cost of constructing a single family house under the State’s
Green Standards are $2,000 per single family home and less for a multi-family unit. Many sources
                                                    H-71

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
argue that the lifetime savings for operating costs (e.g., heating, cooling, water) will more than
offset the up-front increase.
     c. Fees and Exactions.
        i.      Planning Permit Processing Fees. The City collects various fees to cover the cost of
processing development permits at the City. The fees generally include planning and zoning
review. Examples of these fees for typical residential projects are shown in Table H-28. The fees
are necessary for the City to fund the staff and resources required for adequate permit application
review. Most fees are charged on a time and materials basis; however, plot plan review of
individual single family units is charged a flat fee. Applicants must deposit the estimated or fixed
amount of fees prior to approval of their plans. Therefore, the financial risk is a constraint on the
development of housing.
       ii.      Building Permit and Plan Check Fees: The City collects building permit fees to recover
the costs of issuing permits, conducting plan checks, funding state-mandated programs (e.g.
Strong Motion Instrumentation Program [SMIP]), and maintaining building permit records.
These fees must be paid prior to issuance of a building permit, and the City requires that a
deposit be made at the time that building permit applications are submitted. Table H-29 shows
Building Permit and Plan check fees for typical projects.
                                 Table H-28: Planning Permit Processing Fees
   Type of Development                        # of units              Total Fee Paid        Fee per Unit          Fee Basis
Single Family Subdivision:                                                                                        Time and
                                                55 lots                    $2,275               $41
(Tract 2593)                                                                                                       Materials
Single Family: individual
                                                    1                        $20                $20                 Flat Fee
plot plan review
Multi-Family Development                                                                                          Time and
                                                   142                    $17,300               $122
(Arjun Apts. PD 12-005)                                                                                            Materials
Multi-Family Development:
                                                   1-4                       $50             $12.50-$50             Flat Fee
4 units and under
Source: City of Paso Robles; fees in effect as of June 2008
                                                Table H-29: Building Permit Fees
                                 Type of Fee                      1,800 sf single family dwelling      Multi-family
                                                                  with 400 sq ft attached garage *      dwelling **
                   Building Permit                                              $4,828                    $1,280
                   Building Plan Check                                          $1,010                    $ 450
                   SMIP                                                         $ 26                      $    9
                   State Stds Dev’t (SB 1473)                                   $ 11                      $     4
                   Planning/Engineering Review                                  $ 317                     $ 103
                   Total                                                        $6,192                    $1,937
                   *    City of Paso Robles; fees in effect as of July 2014.
                   **   Based on fees for triplex(3 units) paid 2013.
      iii.      Water and Sewer Connection Fees: The City collects fees to recover its costs for
providing water and wastewater (sewer) services. These fees are collected at time of building
permit issuance as that is the point that the impact to these systems is realized. The current fee
schedule was adopted in March 2009 and became effective January 1, 2010. The fee schedule
provides for annual increases in water and sewer connection fees through 2014.
                                                                         H-72

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
                                Table H-30: Water and Sewer Connection Fees
           Type of Fee                         1,800 sf single             Multi-family dwelling                 Time of Fee Collection
                                              family dwelling                       per unit
Water Connection & Meter *                          $23,719                          $13,083                             Prior to BPI **
Sewer Connection                                    $ 8,700                          $ 7,800                              Prior to BPI
Total                                               $32,419                          $20,883
Source: City of Paso Robles; fees in effect as of January 2014
*    Since January 1, 2010, water connection fees are charged by the meter. For single family residential, the fee assumes 1 inch meter. For
     multi-family residential, which typically uses one meter to serve several units, the water connection fees will be a function of design and
     the meter preferences of the developer. The $13,083 per unit estimate appearing above was prepared by taking the fee for a 1-inch meter
     ($39,250) and dividing it by 3, for a triplex project.
**   BPI = Building Permit Issuance
       iv.       Development Impact Fees: In 2002, the City adopted an updated “Fiscal Policy” that
calls for the City to (1) provide for the delivery of quality services and products cost effectively,
(2) provide for an acceptable level of services and products as the community grows, (3) ensure
that the City is living within its means, and (4) provide reserves for unbudgeted needs that might
arise from time to time. To implement this policy, the City collects development impact fees to
recover its costs for constructing infrastructure (bridges, traffic signals, storm drain systems,
public buildings, park development etc.). The payment of these fees occurs at the time that the
impact is realized. Since impacts to the circulation system occur upon occupancy of a dwelling
unit, those impact fees must be paid prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. Postponing
payment of fees until issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy helps mitigate the constraint to
affordable housing that would occur if payment of the fees was due upon issuance of a building
permit. In 2014, the City Council re-evaluated which public facilities were still necessary and
adjusted the Development Impact Fee Schedule accordingly. Some facilities were “de-listed” and
impact fees were lowered.
                                       Table H-31: Development Impact Fees
           Type of Fee                          Single family              Multi-family dwelling                 Time of Fee Collection
                                               dwelling unit                        per unit
Development Impact Fee                             $20,337 *                       $16,564 *                           Prior to C of O **
    Specific Plan Fees ***
Union/46 Specific Plan                               $5,857                           $5,857                            Prior to C of O
Borkey Area Specific Plan                            $1,742                           $1,742                            Prior to C of O
Source: City of Paso Robles; fees in effect as of July 1,2014
*    Those applicants for residential building permits for West Side homes that file complete applications no later than September 1, 2014
     may pay Development Impact Fees of $15,437 per single family unit and $13,174 per multi-family unit (Resolution 14-035).
**   C of O = Certificate of Occupancy
***  These fees are collected on a per unit basis for dwelling units located within the two existing specific plan areas.
        v.       School Fees: The Paso Robles Joint Union School District collects school fees for the
purpose of building new classrooms as authorized by State Law. As of April 2014, these fees are
$2.63 per square foot of habitable space (garages are excluded from the fee calculation.)
       vi.       Land Dedication for Streets: The Municipal Code requires that any dedication
necessary to provide the full right-of-way for a local street, or for an arterial or collector street as
                                                                         H-73

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
indicated in the Circulation General Plan, must be made as a condition of development. Since the
developable area of residential property is reduced in order to accommodate rights-of-way,
requirements to dedicate are considered to be a constraint to affordable housing.
     vii.     Land Dedication and Development Standards for Water Quality and Drainage
Control: To implement General Plan policies, drainage law, environmental impact mitigation,
and direction from the as condition of approval of discretionary applications, the City regularly
requires dedication of land for detention basins to ensure that runoff water leaving a site does not
impact downstream properties. In recent years, the Regional Water Quality Control Board, which
issues a Stormwater Discharge Permit to the City, has begun requiring the City to implement
“low impact design” (LID) measures to ensure that runoff maintains minimum water quality
standards. Such measures will increase the cost of housing. However, the necessary measures
vary from site to site and with the nature and scale of proposed development, and the City does
not yet have a clear indication of the average cost of compliance on a per unit basis.
    viii.     Land Dedication for Open Space: To implement General Plan policies restricting
development from oak woodlands and slopes of 35% or greater, as condition of approval of
discretionary applications, the City may require dedication of land for passive open space. The
City recovers the nominal cost of maintaining detention basins and hillside/woodland open
space via annexation of the dedicated land into its Landscaping and Lighting District. Those
properties benefiting from the dedicated land are assessed an annual maintenance fee in
proportion to their benefit, which adds to the cost of housing.
      ix.     Landscaping and Lighting District (LLD): When annexed to the Landscape and
Lighting District, maintenance of parkways, streetscapes and street lights adjacent to new land
developments is provided through a property tax assessment on those properties within the
development. Annexation to the District ensures that public streetscapes are maintained for the
benefit of the community as a whole without fiscal impact.
All new residential development is required annexed to the Landscape and Lighting District
unless, at the discretion of the Planning Commission, the applicant can demonstrate that a home
owners’ association, or other private entity can be relied upon to ensure that maintenance of
public streetscapes, adjacent to and within the development, is comprehensive and perpetual.
Fiscal impacts to the cost of housing include district formation expenses and bi-yearly property
taxes.
     x. Community Facilities Districts: The 2003 General Plan (Land Use Element) calls for the
City to recover the costs of providing City services to the Chandler Ranch Area, Olsen Ranch, and
Beechwood Area Specific Plans, and any other new development in areas to be annexed (after
2003). To accomplish this, the City will be creating a community facilities (Mello-Roos) district in
which new development will be assessed for its share of the costs associated with providing City
services. Such assessment will add to the cost of housing in these areas.
     d. On- and Off-Site Improvement Requirements. In order to provide a safe and suitable
environment for residential development, the City requires that certain public improvements be
made. Each dwelling unit must connect to the City’s water and sewer systems; project sites must
properly capture and discharge runoff water into detention basins and/or storm drain systems; street
                                                H-74

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
improvements (curb, gutter, sidewalk, street lights, paving) must be installed in streets bordering
sites, and in the case of single family detached subdivisions, in interior streets. Additionally,
landscaping and irrigation systems must be installed within parkways of public streets. If a
development borders a noise source such as an arterial street, a sound attenuation wall (usually a 6
foot high masonry wall) must be installed.
Multi-family development and some types of single family development (usually clustered
development) may use private drives instead of full City streets, which reduces the cost of public
improvements. Table H-33 shows the bonding estimate for improvement costs for 3 residential
developments: one that was approved in 2005 (Tract 2654, which is still active); one that was
developed in 2006 (Tract 2593); and one under construction in completed in 2013 and 2014 (Oak Park
Public Housing). (Owing to the national recession, there has not been any subdivision activity since
2007.)
                            Table H-32: Cost of Public Improvements
      Development Project                   Description           Actual Costs * or   Cost per Unit
                                                                  Bonding Estimate
Navajo Ave and Red Cloud Rd      55 lot single family residential         *$1,244,338           $22,624
(Tract 2593)                     subdivision
Oak Park Phase I                 80 low income housing                     $1,703,038           $21,288
                                 apartment units
Serenade Villas (Cameron         25 townhouse condominiums                   $400,000           $16,000
Financial- Tract 2654)
Total                            160 units                                 $3,347,376           $20,921
     e. Constraints on Housing for Disabled Persons: The City implements the California
Building Code (Title 24) and its regulations governing disabled access. Presently this code does
not mandate that new single family units be accessible to the disabled. The code does require that
privately-funded multi-family housing with 3 or more units be “adaptable” for disabled access
and that certain percentages of the units in publicly-funded multi-family housing be made to be
accessible. At most, applications for retrofitting a dwelling unit to become accessible may require
issuance of a building permit, depending upon the actual work to be done. (If load-bearing walls,
electrical, mechanical, plumbing systems, and retaining walls and/or decks/ramps 30 inches or
more above grade are not involved, a permit may not be required.)
It is possible that certain measures to provide disabled access may conflict with zoning
regulations (e.g. ramps that encroach into setbacks). To preclude such conflicts, the City amended
the Zoning Code in 2009 to provide a means by which development standards might be modified
either by staff (Plot Plan Review) or by the Development Review Committee (Site Plan Review)
where no other means exist to make a dwelling accessible to a disabled person. This code
amendment also defines “group care homes” as homes with 6 or fewer residents that have special
needs and provides that such homes are permitted by right in all residential zoning districts.
According to the California Department of Social Services, as of February 2013, the City has one
large (130 bed) residential care facility for the elderly (Creston Village), eleven residential care
facilities for the elderly located in single family homes with 6 or fewer beds, and 2 adult care
                                                         H-75

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
residential facilities located in single family homes with 6 or fewer beds. Additionally, Los Robles
Terrace, a 40 unit subsidized complex accepts the disabled as well as the elderly.
Presently, the City’s Zoning Code provides that state-licensed group care homes with 6 or fewer
residents are permitted in all residential zones. Residential care facilities with more than 6
residents may be located in the R-2, R-3, R-4, R-5, T3-N, T-3F, T-4N, T-4F, TC-1, or TC-2 Zones
subject to approval of a conditional use permit prior to their establishment.
     f. Efforts to Remove Barriers. The following changes to land use regulations have removed
or lessened the governmental constraints to developing housing:
     x    The Permit Streamlining Act (State Code Section 65920) requires public agencies,
          including cities to follow standardized time limits and procedures for specified types of
          land use decisions. Certain zoning districts and permit types allow for deviations from
          the designated zoning regulations.
     x    The multi-family zoning regulations were revised in 2000 so that the City’s expectations
          are more clearly set-forth, thereby eliminating uncertainty on the part of developers and
          the decision making bodies (Design Review Commission, Planning Commission, and City
          Council) and shortening the amount of time to process development applications for
          multi-family housing. Revisions to the multi-family zoning regulations also included the
          incorporation of flexible standards so that Planned Development (PD) overlay zoning was
          not necessary to achieve innovative design.
     x    The second unit ordinance has been updated to:
              a) allow non-seniors and non-relatives of the primary unit residents to live in second
                   units;
              b) increase the maximum allowable floor area; and
              c) allow second units to be detached from the primary unit.
     x    A density bonus ordinance has been adopted allowing for increased density in projects
          that provide affordable housing. This ordinance was updated in 2006.
     x    Revisions to the single family zoning regulations allow for more flexibility in design,
          particularly in decreasing the front yard setback.
     x    Adopted a reasonable accommodation ordinance in 2009 to (a) provide a means to modify
          zoning standards in order to provide fair access to housing for persons with disabilities,
          and (b) provide that “Group Care Homes”, residential care facilities for six or fewer
          residents that are licensed or supervised by any federal, state, or local agency and which
          provide housing and nonmedical care for children, elderly persons, or physically and
          mentally handicapped persons in a family-like environment, are uses permitted by right
          in all residential zones.
     x    Adopted an emergency shelter ordinance (No. 976 N.S.) in 2011 to allow emergency
          shelters “by right” in the Riverside Corridor (RC) zoning district, and the Planned
          Industrial (PM) zoning district along Sherwood and Linne Roads and Commerce Way.
                                                  H-76

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
Additionally, the City has employed the following measures to offset housing costs.
     x    Using Redevelopment LMIH funds (prior to 2011, when the State terminated
          Redevelopment Agencies) to offset some of the cost of development impact fees for
          subsidized (lower income) housing projects.
     x    Using standardized conditions to streamline the development review process.
     x    Using a pre-application review process to facilitate streamlining of the development
          review process.
     x    Using Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funds to provide infrastructure,
          removing one obstacle to providing affordable housing.
     x    Maintaining active working relationships with local private organizations that provide
          affordable housing such as, Peoples Self-Help Housing, the Housing Authority for the
          City of Paso Robles, the Housing Authority for the City of San Luis Obispo, Habitat for
          Humanity, and the Paso Robles Non-Profit Housing Corporation.
     x    The City has waived its portion of the tax credit application fees for Canyon Creek
          Apartments and the Redevelopment of Oak Park Public Housing (subsidized/lower
          income projects) and has supported tax credit applications for low-income housing.
     x    Adopted the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan, which provides development standards
          that increase opportunities for housing affordability.
6.2     Non-Governmental Constraints
     a. Availability of Financing. The availability of financing affects a person’s ability to
purchase and/or improve an existing home. The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA)
requires lending institution to disclose information on the disposition of loan applications by
various demographic characteristics. This information can be obtained for cities and counties.
     b. Land Costs. Land costs vary depending on several considerations. Cost considerations
include the cost of the land per square foot determined by the current market as well as the
intended use, the number of proposed units or density of development permitted on the site. The
location of the site in relation to amenities such as sewer service also affects the cost of land. City
Staff obtained sales price information for 7 vacant, finished (street improvements installed) single
family lots and 5 vacant multi-family zoned parcels (October 2013) and found that the average
land price per 0.54 acre single family lot was $156,285 and the average land price per multi-family
unit was $64,500.
     c. Development Costs. Construction costs can vary widely depending on the environmental
conditions and scale of development at the site. Based on the proforma prepared for the March
2014 Tax Credit Application for Phase Two of the Redevelopment for Oak Park, the average cost
of a good quality of construction for multifamily apartment style housing would be an average of
$130 per square foot (this assumes a prevailing wage rate).
                                                 H-77

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
     d. Prevailing Wages. State and federal law require that any affordable housing project that
is assisted with government funds (e.g., CDBG, HOME, LMIH, and other federal and state funds)
be constructed using prevailing wages per wage determinations adopted by the State Department
of Industrial Relations and/or Federal Department of Labor. Prevailing wages typically add 25 –
30% to the cost of construction.
6.3 Appropriateness of Goals, Objectives, and Policies
The review of the 2011 Housing Element in Chapter 3 of this Element concluded that the City of
Paso Robles is making progress in its provision of housing opportunities for all of its residents.
The City will offset some of the burden from increasing cost of housing in Paso Robles by
providing funding programs, density bonuses, and incentives to developers of low to moderate
income housing. The Housing Element policies also encourage the development of student
housing near the Cuesta College North County Campus and mixed use projects that will offer a
range of housing types. The Housing Element goals, objective, and policies have been adopted as
a result of reviewing the 2011 Housing Element and the current housing context and are
appropriate for the City in providing a wide range of housing types and costs.
                                               H-78

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
7.0       Resources for Providing Affordable Housing
7.1       Redevelopment Low and Moderate Income Housing (LMIH) Funds
In June 2011, the State Legislature enacted AB 1X 26, which dissolved redevelopment agencies
statewide. Prior to this action, the City had used Redevelopment Low and Moderate Income
Housing (LMIH) Funds, which amounted to 20 percent of all property tax increment collected
by the City’s Redevelopment Agency (Agency), to assist development of affordable housing for
low and very-low income households for the projects and programs noted below.
Since adoption of the Redevelopment Plan in 1987, LMIH funds have been used for the
following projects and programs:
x    Housing Rehabilitation Loans. Between 1988 and 1991, the Redevelopment Agency
     provided $49,300 in LMIH Funds to supplement 1988 CDBG funds for housing
     rehabilitation. LMIH funds were used to construct street improvements (curbs, gutters and
     sidewalks) that City Codes required to be installed as a condition of issuance of a building
     permit for rehabilitation. One low-income homeowner and 6 very low-income homeowners
     were assisted with zero percent interest, deferred payment loans, due in 15 years or on
     transfer of property.
x    Los Robles Terrace. In 1991, the Redevelopment Agency granted $119,730 of LMIH Funds
     to assist the development of Los Robles Terrace, a 40-unit apartment complex for low- and
     very low-income elderly and physically disabled persons, which was primarily funded by a
     combination of Federal Section 202 funds from HUD and a CDBG Grant. LMIH funds paid
     for the complex’s share of City development impact fees.
x    George Stephan Center. In 1994, $73,800 in LMIH funds were used to install modular units
     to comprise an interior recreation/activity center at Oak Park Public Housing, which
     consists of 148 low- and very low-income apartment units, located between 28th and 34th
     Streets, east of Park Street.
x    Disaster Assistance Loan. In 1995, a loan of $10,000 in LMIH funds was made to a low-
     income homeowner to supplement federal disaster assistance funds to repair damage to the
     owner’s home from a mudslide caused by heavy rains.
x    Habitat for Humanity. In 1998, the Agency granted $35,000 in LMIH funds to pay for the
     City’s development impact and building permit fees for three single-family homes to be
     constructed by Habitat for Humanity at 2947, 2949, and 2951 Vine Street for low-income
     families. HOME Funds from the County were also provided to assist this project.
     Construction of the first home was commenced in 1999; the third home was completed in
     2002.
x    First-Time Homebuyers Assistance. In 2000, $25,000 in LMIH funds were used as a match
     for $100,000 in Federal HOME funds for providing deferred-payment second mortgage
     loans to low income first-time homebuyers. In 2001 and 2002, a total of $15,600 in LMIH
                                              H-79

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
     funds were approved for use to defray the costs of loan administrative fees for first-time
     homebuyers loans under the CalHome Program.
x    Canyon Creek Apartments. In 2001 and 2005, the Redevelopment Agency approved grants
     totaling $559,000 in LMIH funds to assist Peoples’ Self-Help Housing Corp. develop 68
     apartment units on the southwest corner of Nicklaus Drive and Oak Hill Road. The County
     has approved a grant of $550,000 in HOME funds to this project.
x    Creekside Gardens Apartments. In 2001 and in 2002, the Redevelopment Agency
     approved grants totaling $635,000 in LMIH funds to assist Peoples’ Self-Help Housing Corp.
     develop 29 senior apartments on the northwest corner of Nicklaus Drive and Oak Hill Road.
     In 2001 and 2003, the County approved loans totaling $750,000 in HOME funds to this
     project.
x    Chet Dotter (Oak) Park Senior Apartments. In 2001, 2002, and 2005, the Redevelopment
     Agency approved grants and loans totaling $1,745,000 to assist the development of a 40 unit
     senior apartment complex at 801 - 28th Street. This project was initiated with an Economic
     Development Initiative Grant of about $498,900 from the federal government (via HUD) and
     further assisted with a loan of $1,325,000 in HOME funds from the County.
x    Hidden Creek Village. In 2011, construction was completed on an 81 unit low income
     family apartment project at 80 Cary Street (formerly addressed as 80 S. River Road). This
     project was assisted with a loan of $1,000,000 to defer payments of City Development
     Impact Fees and a grant of $400,000 in HOME funds from the County.
7.2       Deferral of City Fees
With the termination of the Redevelopment Agency, the City has approved low-interest loans of
General Funds in the amounts of $1.018 million and $889,000 to the Paso Robles Housing
Authority to defer payment of City Fees for Phases One and Two of the Redevelopment of Oak
Park Public Housing.
7.3       HOME and Emergency Shelter Grant Funds
The City of Paso Robles does not directly receive federal funds under the federal Home
Investment Partnership (HOME) and Emergency Shelter Grant (ESG) Programs. Those funds
are allocated to the County of San Luis Obispo, which has agreed with other participating cities
in the county to cooperate in the allocation of these funds.
100 percent of HOME and ESG funds must be used to benefit low-income persons. HOME
funds may be used to construct or rehabilitate housing, acquire property for housing, construct
street improvements adjacent to low income housing, purchase affordability covenants (under
which rents would be limited to the amount that low income persons can afford), provide first-
time homebuyer second mortgage loans, provide rental subsidies and other related uses. ESG
funds may be used to construct and operate emergency shelters for homeless persons; they may
also be used to purchase motels rooms for the homeless.
                                                 H-80

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
Federal regulations governing the HOME program requires that recipients provide a 25% match.
Redevelopment Low and Moderate Income Housing (LMIH) funds may be used as a match. The
value of “sweat equity” and welfare property tax exemptions may also be used as a match.
Five of the projects listed above were assisted with HOME funds in the amounts noted.
Additionally, the County has used a portion of the urban county’s annual allotments of HOME
funds for first-time homebuyers deferred payment loans, some of which have purchased homes
in the City. Indirectly, the City benefited from HOME funds used by the County for consultant
services to prepare loan documents prepared for the County’s HOME-funded First-Time
Homebuyers Loan Program. The City basically used the County’s loan documents in the City’s
CDBG-funded First-Time Homebuyers Loan Program.
ESG funds have been spent to support the operation of the homeless shelter and homeless day
center in San Luis Obispo, facilities that serve the homeless needs of the entire county. ESG
funds have also been used to support the operations of women’s shelters in San Luis Obispo
and in Atascadero.
7. 4      Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) Funds
The City of Paso Robles currently annually receives about $300,000 in CDBG funds.
CDBG funds may be used for the following housing-related activities:
        x Acquisition of property for housing restricted to low income persons;
        x Construction of street improvements for housing that is restricted to low income
            persons;
        x Rehabilitation of Construction of street improvements for housing that is owned by or
            in which rental is restricted to low income persons;
        x First-time homebuyer assistance loans for low-income persons.
Federal Regulations provide that CDBG funds may not be used for the following housing-
related activities:
        x   Payment of development impact fees for buildings;
        x   Construction costs for new housing. (That is the purpose of HOME funds.)
The City has used CDBG funds for the following housing activities:
x    Housing Rehabilitation Loans: In 1988 and in 1991, the City received grants of $500,000
     from the State’s Small Cities CDBG Program for the purpose of making low interest housing
     rehabilitation loans to benefit low income persons. As a result of these two grants, a total of
     77 dwelling units were rehabilitated.
x    Senior Housing Project: In 1991, the City received a grant of $499,000 from the State’s Small
     Cities CDBG Program for the purpose of assisting Peoples’ Self-Help housing Corp. acquire
     the land for Los Robles Terrace, a 40 unit low income senior housing project.
                                                  H-81

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
x    First Time Homebuyers Loans I. In 1995, $140,000 in CDBG funds were loaned to Peoples’
     Self-Help Housing Corp. to acquire land to develop the 71 lot Spring Meadows self-help
     subdivision in Paso Robles. In 1997, the $140,000 was reconveyed to 13 low or very low
     income households, as deferred-payment first-time homebuyers second trust deed loans.
     The City also granted a total of $20,000 in CDBG funds to 40 of the homebuyers to defray
     the cost of increases in building permit fees that became effective after the project had begun.
x    First Time Homebuyers Loans II. In 1997 and 1998, $229,700 in CDBG funds were used to
     provide deferred-payment first-time homebuyers second trust deed loans to 14 low income
     households.
x    North County Women’s Shelter Rehabilitation: Since 2000, the City has made 4 grants
     totaling $48,000 in CDBG funds to rehabilitate the new women’s shelter in Paso Robles.
x    Oak Park Public Housing Improvements: In 1995, $45,000 in CDBG funds were used to
     construct improvements to the George Stephan Recreation Center and construct a basketball
     court. In 2000, $277,000 in CDBG funds were used to construct street improvements (curb,
     gutter, sidewalk, paving, street lights) along the Park Street frontage (about 2,000 linear feet)
     of Oak Park Public Housing and to complete unimproved frontages of private properties in
     the neighborhood, across Park Street from Oak Park Public Housing and on 28th Street
     between Park and Spring Streets.
7.5       CalHome Program
In 2001, the City received a grant of $500,000 from the State of California under the CalHome
Program, with which the City made “silent second” (deferred payment) mortgage loans to six
low income first time homebuyers. When the grant application was filed in 2001, housing prices
were relatively low enough that the $500,000 was expected to yield abut 25 loans. However, the
original lending conditions imposed by the State were too restrictive to be feasible until they
were revised in 2003. At that point, housing prices had risen significantly, and it became
necessary for second mortgage loan amounts to be as high as $90,000 to work for low income
households.
The City made 6 first-time homebuyer loans with the CalHome Funds. Three of the loans have
been repaid, and the “re-use” fund is proposed to be used to loaned to Habitat for Humanity to
purchase land at 2811 Vine Street to build 5 homes for very low income households. The loan
will be reconveyed incrementally to each of the 5 homebuyers, upon completion of construction,
as deferred-payment second mortgage loans.
7.6       Other Sources
     a. Homeownership: The following sources of assistance have been available to low
income first-time homebuyers desiring to purchase a home in Paso Robles. More detailed
information is available at the websites indicated for each program.
    x     CalHome Loan Program: In 2001, the City received a grant of $500,000 from the State’s
          CalHome Program for the purpose of making deferred-payment, second trust deed,
                                                 H-82

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
          first-time homebuyers loans to low income households. Between December 2003 and
          June 2004, the City made 6 loans with this grant. (www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/calhome)
    x     CalHFA Affordable Housing Partnership Program: The City participates in this program
          in which first-time homebuyers who obtain deferred-payment, second trust deed loans
          from the City (CalHome or CDBG-funded) or its Redevelopment Agency (LMIH-
          funded) are eligible for a CalHFA primary home loan with an interest rate that is below
          CalHFA’s standard rate. (www.calhfa.ca.gov)
    x     Mortgage Credit Certificates (MCC): This federal program provides income tax credits
          to first-time homebuyers. This program is administered by the Housing Authority for
          the City of San Luis Obispo (HASLO) on a county-wide basis. The number of MCC’s
          annually available in San Luis Obispo County is very limited. (www.haslo.org)
    x     California Housing Assistance Program: This state program offered through the
          California Housing Finance Agency (CalHFA) provides 3% deferred-payment, second
          trust deed loans in conjunction with 97% CalHFA first trust deed loans to low and
          moderate income buyers 100% financing. (www.calhfa.ca.gov)
    x     Building Equity and Growth in Neighborhoods (BEGIN): State grants to local public
          agencies that adopt measures to encourage affordable housing. Grant funds must be
          used for downpayment assistance for low and moderate income homebuyers.
          (www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/begin)
     x    Extra Credit Teacher Program: State deferred-payment, second trust deed loans with
          forgivable interest in conjunction with lower interest rate CalHFA first loans to assist
          eligible teachers to buy homes. Loan amounts are the greater of $15,000 or 3% of the
          purchase price. (www.calhfa.ca.gov)
     x    Affordable Housing Program (AHP). Grants from the Federal Home Loan Bank of San
          Francisco to assist affordable rental and ownership housing projects.
          (www.fhlbsf.com/community/grant/ahp.aspx)
     x    Individual Development and Empowerment Account (IDEA) Program. Matching down
          payment assistance grants for low income first-time homebuyers from the Federal Home
          Loan Bank of San Francisco. (www.fhlbsf.com/community/grant/idea.aspx)
     x    Workforce Initiative Subsidy for Homeownership (WISH) Program. Matching down
          payment assistance grants for low income first-time homebuyers from the Federal Home
          Loan Bank of San Francisco. (www.fhlbsf.com/community/grant/wish.aspx)
     x    USDA Rural Development Section 502 Direct Loans. Long-term subsidized loans for
          low income home buyers. (www.rurdev.usda.gov/HAD-Direct_Housing_Loans.html)
     x    USDA Rural Development Section 502 Guaranteed Loans. Long-term market rate loans
          for low and moderate income home buyers.
          (www.rurdev.usda.gov/HAD-Guaranteed_Housing_Loans.html)
                                                  H-83

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
     x    CalVet Home Loans. Long-term below market rate loans for low eligible home buyers
          from the California Department of Veterans Affairs.
          (www.cdva.ca.gov/HomeLoans/BestValue.aspx)
     b. Rental Assistance:
    x     Section 8: Vouchers for federal Section 8 rental assistance is available through the
          Housing Authority for the City of San Luis Obispo (HASLO). The waiting list for
          Section 8 was last opened on October 27, 2006, but quickly filled up and was closed on
          November 11, 2006. In October 2013 HASLO reported that they still have an active list
          and do not have a projected date for re-opening the waiting list.
    x     Assisted Housing: There are presently ten rental housing complexes in the City in
          which occupancy is limited to low or very low income households and rents are
          subsidized either through site-based Section 8 or USDA assistance. These are described
          in Appendix G.
     c. Housing Development and Rehabilitation: The following sources of financing are
among those available to private (mostly nonprofit) developers of affordable housing. More
detailed information is available at the websites indicated for each program.
     x    HUD Section 202: Federal forgivable loans to non-profit developers of supportive
          housing for the elderly. Funds may be used for site acquisition, rehabilitation, and for
          new construction.
          (http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/housing/mfh/grants/
          section202ptl)
     x    HUD Section 203(k): Federal long-term, low interest loans at fixed rate to finance
          acquisition and rehabilitation of single family homes. Funds may be used for site
          acquisition, rehabilitation, relocation of units, and for refinancing existing indebtedness.
          (http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/housing/sfh/203k/20
          3kmenu)
     x     HUD Section 221(d)(3) and (4): Mortgage insurance to finance rental or cooperative
           multifamily housing for moderate-income households, including projects designated for
           the elderly.
          (http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/housing/mfh/progdes
          c/rentcoophsg221d3n4eld202.cfm)
                                                   H-84
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
     x    HUD Section 811: Federal grants to non-profit developers of supportive housing for
          persons with disabilities, including group homes, independent living facilities and
          intermediate care facilities. Funds may be used for site acquisition, rehabilitation, new
          construction, and rental assistance.
          (http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/housing/mfh/progdes
          c/disab811)
     x    U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), Rural Development Service’s Section 514 Farm
          Labor Housing Program: Federal below market-rate loans for farmworker rental
          housing. Funds may be used for site acquisition, rehabilitation, and for new
          construction. (www.rurdev.usda.gov/rhs/mfh/dev_splash.htm)
     x    U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), Rural Development Service’s Section 515 Rural
          Rental Housing Program: Federal below market-rate loans for low and very low income
          rental housing. Funds may be used for site acquisition, rehabilitation, and for new
          construction. (www.rurdev.usda.gov/rhs/mfh/dev_splash.htm)
     x    CalHome: State grants to local governments and non-profit agencies for owner-
          occupied rehabilitation programs and new home development projects. This program
          includes financing the acquisition, rehabilitation, and replacement of manufactured
          homes. (www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/calhome)
     x    CalHFA Rental Housing Programs: State below market rate financing offered to
          builders and developers of multi-family and elderly rental housing. Tax exempt bonds
          provide below-market mortgages.           Funds may be used for site acquisition,
          rehabilitation, and for new construction. (www.calhfa.ca.gov)
     x    Self-Help Builder Assistance Program (SHBAP): State lower interest rate CalHFA loans
          to owner-builders who participate in self-help housing projects sponsored by non-profit
          housing developers. Funds may be used for site acquisition, site development, new
          construction, and homebuyer assistance. (www.calhfa.ca.gov)
     x    Multi-Family Housing Program (MHP): Stated deferred-payment loans for the new
          construction, rehabilitation and preservation of rental housing. Within this program,
          funds are allocated to general rental housing, supportive housing for the disabled, and
          student housing. (www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/mhp)
     x    Multi-Family Housing Program (MHP) Supportive Housing Allocation: MHP loans for
          supportive housing for special needs populations. (www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/mhp)
     x    Multi-Family Housing Program (MHP) Homeless Youth Allocation: MHP loans for
          housing that serves homeless youth. (www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/mhp)
     x    Emergency Housing and Assistance Program (EHAP): State grants to local government
          agencies and nonprofit corporations that shelter the homeless on an emergency or
          transitional basis and provide support services. Each county receives a formula grant
          allocation. Funds may be used for providing direct client housing, including facility
                                                 H-85

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
          operations and administration, residential rent assistance, leasing or renting rooms for
          provision of temporary shelter, capital development activities of up to $20,000 per site,
          and administration of the award (limited to 5 percent). (www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/ehap)
     x    Emergency Housing Assistance Program Capital Development (EHAP-CD) : State
          forgivable 3% loans (5-10 years) to local government agencies and nonprofit corporations
          that shelter the homeless on an emergency or transitional basis and provide support
          services. Each county receives a formula grant allocation. The purpose of the loans
          includes the repair or development of emergency shelters and transitional housing
          facilities for the homeless (no operating subsidy). Funds may be used for acquiring,
          constructing, converting, expanding or rehabilitating emergency shelter or transitional
          housing sites, major equipment purchase, and administration of the award (limited to 5
          percent). (www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/ehapcd)
     x    Joe Serna Jr. Farmworker Housing Grant Program (JSJFWHG): State grants and loans to
          local governments and nonprofit housing developers for the acquisition, development
          and financing of ownership and rental housing for farmworkers. Within this program,
          funds are allocated to general housing development, migrant housing, and housing with
          related health services. (www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/fwhg)
     x    Federal and State Tax Credits: Both the Federal and State governments offer income tax
          credits for the purpose of financing affordable housing. Tax Credits are awarded on
          several dates each year by the California Tax Credit Allocation Committee.
          (www.treasurer.ca.gov/CTCAC/)
     x    Federal Home Loan Bank (FHLB) Affordable Housing Program: Provides competitive
          grants and subsidized loans to create affordable rental and homeownership
          opportunities. (www.fhlbsf.com/ci/grant/ahp/)
     x    San Luis Obispo County Housing Trust Fund: This nonprofit organization has built a
          local trust fund using federal, state, and private loans and grants to make short term (up
          to 5 year) bridge loans to assist affordable housing projects throughout the County.
          While most of their funds are used to assist housing for low-, very low-, and extremely
          low income households, some of the funds in their portfolio may be used to assist
          moderate and “workforce” housing for households earning 80 to 160 percent of the Area
          (County) Median Income. (www.slochtf.org)
     x    Access to Housing and Economic Assistance for Development (AHEAD)
          Program: Recoverable grants from the Federal Home Loan Bank of San Francisco to
          support housing projects during the conception and early stages of development.
          (www.fhlbsf.com/community/grant/ahead.aspx)
     x    USDA Rural Development Section 504 Housing Repair and Rehabilitation
          Program: Loans and grants to repair and rehabilitate the homes of low income families
          and seniors. (www.rurdev.usda.gov/rd/pubs/pa1662.htm)
                                                   H-86

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
     x    USDA Rural Development Section 533 Housing Preservation Grant (HPG)
          Program: Grants to nonprofit and government agencies to fund housing rehabilitation
          programs for low income households. (www.rurdev.usda.gov/HAD-HPG_Grants.html)
     x    Homeownership Preservation Advance (HPA) Program: Funds from the Federal Home
          Loan Bank of San Francisco to restructure or refinance mortgage loans for eligible low-
          and moderate-income homeowners who are at risk of foreclosure.
          (www.fhlbsf.com/community/credit/hpa-profile.aspx)
     x    Community Investment Program (CIP): Funds from the Federal Home Loan Bank of
          San Francisco to finance first-time homebuyer programs, to create and maintain
          affordable housing, and to support other community economic development activities.
          (www.fhlbsf.com/community/credit/cip-profile.aspx)
     x    Weatherization Assistance Program: Grants from the California Department of
          Community Services and Development to improve the energy efficiency of homes
          occupied by low income households to reduce their heating and cooling costs.
          (www.csd.ca.gov/Services/ResidentialEnergyEfficiencyServices.aspx)
     x    Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP): Grants from the California
          Department of Community Services & Development to assist low income households
          with their energy bills and offset heating and/or cooling energy costs.
          (www.csd.ca.gov/Services/HelpPayingUtilityBills.aspx)
     x    Mobilehome Park Resident Ownership Program (MPROP): Loans from the California
          Department of Housing and Community Development for the purchase of mobile home
          parks by local governments, nonprofit corporations or the park residents.
          (www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/mprop/)
     x    California Self-Help Housing Program (CSHHP): Grants from the California
          Department of Housing and Community Development for the administrative costs of
          self-help or owner-builder housing projects. (www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/cshhp/)
     x    Predevelopment Loan Program (PDLP): Short-term loans from the California
          Department of Housing and Community Development for the construction,
          rehabilitation, conversion or preservation of affordable housing projects.
          (www.hcd.ca.gov/fa/pdlp/)
                                                  H-87
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan
Housing Element: 2014 Update
This page left blank intentionally.
                                       H-88
  City of El Paso de Robles
      General Plan 2003
       Land Use Element
                  Prepared for:
           City of El Paso de Robles
   Department of Community Development
               1000 Spring Street
         Paso Robles, California 93446
                    Contact:
    Community Development Department
     (805) 237-3970; planning@prcity.com
                  Prepared by:
           Rincon Consultants, Inc.
         1530 Monterey Street, Suite D
       San Luis Obispo, California 93401
         Adopted December 16, 2003;
   Amended as noted on the following pages.
 
 

This page left blank intentionally.
 
 

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                     Table of Adoption and Amendments to Land Use Element
 
                               City Council
           Date                                                           Action
                                Resolution
December 16, 2003                  03-232   Adoption of a comprehensive update of the General Plan
January 4, 2005                    05-004   General Plan Amendment 2004-001 consisting of the
                                            following 2 components:
                                            1.   Oak Park Specific Plan Area: Amended the Land Use
                                                 Map (Figures LU-3 and LU-6A) to modify the
                                                 boundaries of the Oak Park Specific Plan Area to be
                                                 coterminous with the Oak Park Public Housing Property.
                                            2.   Airport Influence Area (Component 2): Amended the
                                                 Land Use Element text and map (established Figure LU-
                                                 6X) to (a) re-establish the City’s Airport Noise Disclosure
                                                 Area, (b) to expand its boundaries to include properties
                                                 that had been recently annexed and were within the
                                                 City’s Sphere of Influence, and (c) to broaden the
                                                 definition of the designated area to include not only
                                                 “Noise Disclosure” but also “Influence” pursuant to the
                                                 Business and Professions Code requirements.
December 20, 2005                  05-249   General Plan Amendment 2005-001, to amend the Land Use
                                            Element text to acknowledge current land use information
                                            and recognize that the most recent build-out projections
                                            (based on persons per dwelling unit and other specified
                                            factors) would result in a City population in 2025 that would
                                            be consistent with the established General Plan policy of a
                                            population not-to-exceed 44,000 residents.
March 21, 2006                     06-034   General Plan Amendment 2006-001, which amended the
                                            Land Use Map (Figure LU-6) and Land Use Element text to:
                                            1.   Redesignate 28 acres located on the east end of Wisteria
                                                 Lane from Parks and Open Space (POS) and Agriculture
                                                 (AG) to Business Park (BP).
                                            2.   Redesignate 5 acres located on the southeast corner of
                                                 River Oaks Drive and Experimental Station Road from
                                                 Commercial Service (CS) to Residential, Multiple Family,
                                                 12 units per acre (RMF-12). Amend the text to revise the
                                                 description of the RMF-12 Land Use Category.
                                            3.   Add Office Overlay Designation to a parcel located on the
                                                 northeast corner of 14th and Olive Streets (405 – 14th St.).
October 3, 2006                    06-189   General Plan Amendment 2006-002, to amend the Land Use
                                            Map (Figure LU-6) to redesignate 40.33 acres of land located
                                            on the east side of Airport Road, about ¼ mile north of
                                            Highway 46 East from Agriculture (AG) to Parks and Open
                                            Space (POS).
May 1, 2007                        07-079   General Plan Amendment 2007-001 consisting of the
                                   07-081   following 2 components:
                                            A. To amend the Land Use Map (Figure LU-6) to
                                                 Redesignate 22 acres on the northeast corner of Buena
                                                 Vista and Experimental Station Roads from RSF-1 and
                                                 R/L Overlay to RMF-8. (The Resort/Lodging Overlay
                                                 was deleted).
                                            B. To amend the Land Use Element text to establish the
                                                 Uptown Specific Plan District and delete the Oak Park
                                                 Specific Plan District.
                                                  
                                               LU-i

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                     Table of Adoption and Amendments to Land Use Element
 
                               City Council
           Date                                                           Action
                                Resolution
September 18, 2007                 07-192   General Plan Amendment 2007-002, to amend the Land Use
                                            Map (Figure LU-6) to redesignate 13.4 acres of land located
                                            at 1450 Golden Hill Road from Residential, Single Family, 2
                                            units per acre (RSF-2) to Residential, Multiple Family, 12
                                            units per acre (RMF-12). Note: This approval was rescinded
                                            on December 4, 2007 via Resolution 07-228.
November 18, 2008                  08-168   General Plan Amendment 2007-003, to amend the Land Use
                                            Map (Figure LU-6) to redesignate 13.4 acres of land located
                                            at 1450 Golden Hill Road from Residential, Single Family, 2
                                            units per acre (RSF-2) to Residential, Multiple Family, 12
                                            units per acre (RMF-12).
March 17, 2009                     09-026   General Plan Amendment 2009-001, to amend the Land Use
                                            Map (Figure LU-6) to redesignate 76 acres of land located on
                                            the east side of Golden Hill Road, opposite Circle B Road,
                                            from Agriculture (AG) to Parks and Open Space (POS).
May 3, 2011                        11-051   General Plan Amendment 2011-001, which accompanied the
                                            adoption of the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan, and
                                            included the following components:
                                            a.   Amended the Land Use Element maps to:
                                                 (1) Add the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan
                                                      Overlay District
                                                 (2) Delete the Uptown Specific Plan Overlay District;
                                                 (3) Delete the Senior Housing Overlay District;
                                                 (4) Delete those portions of the Office Professional and
                                                      Mixed Use Overlays located within the Uptown
                                                      Specific Plan Overlay
                                                 (5) Reassign land use categories for some properties;
                                            b. Amended Land Use Element text to:
                                                 (1) Delete the reference to the Oak Park Specific Plan;
                                                 (2) Add a reference to the Uptown/Town Centre
                                                      Specific Plan;
                                                 (3) Add a limitation on the Uptown/Town Centre
                                                      Specific Plan to limit the collective build-out
                                                      potential to 989 dwelling units to ensure that the
                                                      overall citywide population does not exceed 44,000
                                                      by the year 2025;
                                                 (4) Add descriptions of the Downtown Commercial
                                                      (DC), Mixed Use, 8 Units per Acre (MU-8), and
                                                      Mixed Use, 12 Units per Acre (MU-12) land use
                                                      categories;
                                                 (5) Delete the description of the Senior Housing Overlay
                                                      District;
                                                 (6) Delete a note under the Commercial Service Land
                                                      Use Category pertaining to mixed use in the area
                                                      between Highway 101 and the Railroad, and
                                                      between 18th and 24th Streets;
                                                 (7) Make other minor typographical changes.
July 17, 2012                      12-114   General Plan Amendment 2012-001, to amend the Land Use
                                            Map (Figure LU-6) to Redesignate 22 acres on the northeast
                                            corner of Buena Vista and Experimental Station Roads from
                                            RMF-8 to Parks and Open Space (POS) with a
                                            Resort/Lodging (R/L) Overlay.
                                                  
                                              LU-ii

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                     Table of Adoption and Amendments to Land Use Element
 
                               City Council
           Date                                                          Action
                                Resolution
October 2, 2012                    12-163   General Plan Amendment 2012-002, to amend the Land Use
                                            Element text to:
                                            a. Incorporate a vacancy rate in the calculation of
                                                 population that will reside in the City at the time of
                                                 “build-out” of all dwelling units authorized by the Land
                                                 Use Element;
                                            b. Use an average household size calculated as the 30 year
                                                 average reported by the U.S. Census Bureau instead of the
                                                 average household size reported by the State Department
                                                 of Finance in its 2005 population estimate;
                                            c. Update text and tables that report the status of acreages of
                                                 areas for various land uses, potential numbers of dwelling
                                                 units, existing floor areas for commercial/industrial
                                                 development;
                                            d. Make several minor “clean up” updates throughout the
                                                 Land Use Element.
December 18, 2012                  12-185   General Plan Amendment 2012-003, to amend the Land Use
                                            Element text to:
                                            (a) Amend Action Item 2 (Quality of Life) implementing
                                                 Policy LU-2D, Neighborhoods to add designing streets
                                                 to integrate storm water management features.
                                            (b) Add Policy LU-2K implementing Goal LU-2 to manage
                                                 the natural landscape to preserve the natural beauty
                                                 and rural identity of the community, and Action Item 1
                                                 implementing the new policy to require new
                                                 development to mitigate its share of impacts from
                                                 storm water on the natural environment through
                                                 implementation of Low-Impact Development (LID)
                                                 storm water management features.
October 1, 2013                    13-140   General Plan Amendment 2013-001: Amend the Land Use
                                            Element as follows:
                                            a. Amend Figure LU-6 to remove the Chandler Ranch
                                                 Specific Plan Overlay Land Use Designation from two
                                                 adjacent properties (15 and 17 acres) located north side
                                                 of Union Road at the eastern boundary of the City;
                                            b. Amend Figure LU-6 to pre-designate a 1.4 acre parcel,
                                                 located on the western City boundary, south of Pacific
                                                 Avenue for Residential Single Family, 4 units per acre
                                                 (RSF-4) land use. Prezone 13-001 will establish R-1
                                                 zoning on the 1.4 acre parcel to match the existing
                                                 zoning of adjacent parcels within City limits;
                                            c. Amend Figure LU-1 to show the Sphere of Influence
                                                 Boundaries as updated by LAFCO on February 21,
                                                 2013.
December 3, 2013                   13-158   General Plan Amendment 2013-002: Amend the Land Use
                                            Element’s Land Use Map (Figure LU-6) to clarify land use
                                            designations for 60 lots in the historic downtown (between
                                            Vine Street and the UP Railroad and between 10th and 21st
                                            Streets), to more-accurately reflect the applicable zoning.
April 1, 2014                      14-034   General Plan Amendment 2014-001, to amend the text of the
                                            Land Use Element to include a population projection that
                                            anticipates build-out beyond 2045. Additionally, Table 1-E,
                                            which shows details about the population projection, was
                                            added to the Land Use Element Appendix.
                                                  
                                             LU-iii

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                     Table of Adoption and Amendments to Land Use Element
 
This page left blank intentionally.
                                                
                                             LU-iv

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                                   Table of Contents for Land Use Element
 
1.0 Introduction................................................................................................................................... LU-1
          Population Planning Threshold ........................................................................................... LU-1
          Population Projection ............................................................................................................ LU-1
          Projected Number of Dwelling Units .................................................................................. LU-1
          Vacancy Rate........................................................................................................................... LU-1
          Average Household Size ....................................................................................................... LU-2
          Build-Out Population ............................................................................................................ LU-2
          Commercial and Industrial ......... ...........................................................................................LU-2
2.0 Land Use Goals, Policies and Action Items .............................................................................. LU-3
3.0 Development Boundaries. ......................................................................................................... LU-14
          City Limits, Sphere of Influence, and Expansion Areas ................................................. LU-14
          Planning Impact Area.......................................................................................................... LU-14
4.0 Land Use Categories ................................................................................................................... LU-17
     Agricultural Land Use Designation ......................................................................................... LU-17
          Agriculture (AG) .................................................................................................................. LU-17
     Residential Land Use Designations ......................................................................................... LU-17
          Residential Rural (RR) ......................................................................................................... LU-17
          Residential Suburban (RS) .................................................................................................. LU-17
          Residential Single-Family (RSF-1, -2, -3, -4, and -6) ........................................................ LU-17
          Residential Multiple Family, Low Density (RMF-8, RMF-9) ......................................... LU-18
          Residential Multiple Family, Medium Density (RMF-12) .............................................. LU-18
          Residential Multiple Family, Medium-High Density (RMF-16) .................................. LU-19
          Residential Multiple Family, High Density (RMF-20) .................................................... LU-19
          Mobile Home Park/Subdivision (MH) ............................................................................. LU-19
     Commercial Land Use Designations ....................................................................................... LU-19
          Neighborhood Commercial (NC) Land Use Category ................................................... LU-19
          Office Professional (OP) Land Use Category ................................................................... LU-20
          Downtown Commercial (DC) Land Use Category ......................................................... LU-20
          Community Commercial (CC) Land Use Category ........................................................ LU-20
          Regional Commercial (RC) Land Use Category .............................................................. LU-20
          Commercial Service (CS) Land Use Category ................................................................. LU-20
     Mixed Use Land Use Designations .......................................................................................... LU-20
          Mixed Use, 8 Units per Acre (MU8) Land Use Category ............................................... LU-21
          Mixed Use, 12 Units per Acre (MU12) Land Use Category ........................................... LU-21
     Industrial and Business Park Land Use Designations .......................................................... LU-21
          Business Park (BP) Land Use Category ........................................................................... LU-21
          Industrial (M) Land Use Category.................................................................................... LU-21
     Public Facility and Open Space Designations ....................................................................... LU-22
           Public Facilities (PF) Land Use Category ........................................................................ LU-22
           Parks and Open Space (POS) Land Use Category ......................................................... LU-22
     Overlay Designations ................................................................................................................. LU-28
           Specific Plan (SP) ............................................................................................................... LU-28
           Airport (AP) ....................................................................................................................... LU-29
           Office Professional (OP) ................................................................................................... LU-29
           Mixed-Use (MU) ................................................................................................................ LU-29
           Resort/Lodging (R/L) ....................................................................................................... LU-30
                                                                         
                                                                   LU-v

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                                Table of Contents for Land Use Element
 
           Salinas River (SR) .............................................................................................................. LU-30
           Historic Preservation (HP) ............................................................................................... LU-30
           Senior Housing (SH) .......................................................................................................... LU-30
           Planned Development (PD) ............................................................................................. LU-30
           Flood Hazard (FH) ............................................................................................................ LU-31
           Airport Noise Disclosure/Airport Influence Area ........................................................ LU-31
Figures
Figure LU-1 City and Sphere Boundaries...................................................................................... LU-16
Figure LU-2 Land Use Changes Since the 1991 General Plan .................................................... LU-27
Figure LU-3 Specific Plan Overlay Areas ...................................................................................... LU-32
Figure LU-4 Other Overlay Areas .................................................................................................. LU-33
Figure LU-4A Historic Preservation & Office Professional Overlays ....................................... LU-34
Figure LU-5 Flood Hazard Areas .................................................................................................. LU-35
Figure LU-6 General Plan Land Use Map ..................................................................................... LU-36
Tables
Table LU-1A General Plan Development Potential ....................................................................... LU-3
Table LU-1B General Plan Development Potential ........................................................................ LU-3
Table LU-2 General Plan Update Land Use Distribution (acres) ................................................. LU-4
Table LU-3A Summary of Potential Residential Development.................................................... LU-5
Table LU-3B Population Projection .................................................................................................. LU-5
Table LU-4 General Plan Land Use Category Summary ............................................................. LU-23
                                                                     
                                                               LU-vi

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                                     LAND USE ELEMENT
1.0 Introduction
This Land Use Element provides for the opportunity for infill development within the City
limits and expansion of the City limits to incorporate potential annexation areas.
Since adoption of the Land Use Element in 2003, the City has completed annexation of the
Sphere and Expansion Areas shown on Figure LU-2. Following completion of the Olsen Ranch
and Beechwood Annexations in 2004 and the Linne Road (Our Town) Annexation in 2005, there
are 19.9 square miles (12,739 acres) within City Limits.
Population Planning Threshold
Resolution 03-232, by which the General Plan was comprehensively updated in December 2003,
established a population planning threshold of 44,000 persons. That population threshold was
calculated on the assumption that the sum of all existing dwelling units (in 2003) and the
maximum number of potential dwelling units authorized by the Land Use Element would be
occupied by an average of 2.7 persons per household (average household size reported for the
City in the 2000 U.S Census).
As discussed below, the population planning threshold remains at 44,000 persons. However, in
2012, the City Council approved adjustments to the underlying assumptions defining the
occupancy of dwelling units.
Population Projection
The General Plan sets a vision and supporting policy focused on expected development between 2003
and the plan’s 2025 horizon year. This projection is not a statement of policy that the City should or
will take actions to manage the rate of development to conform to the projection.
When the General Plan Update was adopted in December 2003, based on the pace of development
activity at that time, it was anticipated that residential build-out of the City, resulting in a population of
44,000, would occur by 2025. However, the national economic slowdown that began in 2007, coupled
with the history of periodic slowdowns over prior decades, has caused the City to consider that build-out
and an attendant population of 44,000 may take more than 20 additional years: to 2045 or longer, to
attain. Table LU-3B contains a population projection prepared in 2014 that takes into consideration the
periodic fluctuations in the economy as well as the anticipated availability of finished subdivided lots in
the various specific plan areas. Table 1-E in the Land Use Element Appendix provides greater detail for
the figures shown in Table LU-3B. It is important to note that the population projection in Table LU-3B
and Table 1-E in the Land Use Element Appendix is an estimate of population growth in response to the
expected pace of development.
Projected Number of Dwelling Units
A key component of determining the future population is to identify the numbers of existing
and potential dwelling units. Table LU-3 provides an accounting of these units.
Vacancy Rate
In 2012, the City acknowledged that, at any point in time, a percentage of built units will be
vacant, and that an appropriate vacancy rate is a hallmark of a healthy economy: helping
                                                   LU-1                      Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
provide access to housing and stabilize housing prices. According to the U.S. Census, between
1980 and 2010, the housing vacancy rate has averaged 6.22 percent. However, noting that the
vacancy rate fluctuates with the state of the economy, the City finds it prudent to adopt a more-
conservative vacancy rate of 5.0 percent.
Average Household Size
According to the U.S. Census, the household size has averaged 2.66 persons between 1980 and
2010. The General Plan now (2012) assumes that each dwelling unit will be occupied with an
average 2.66 persons.
Build-Out Population
At such time that the 16,818 units shown in Table LU-3 are built, it is assumed that 5.0% of them
will be vacant and that the other 95.0 percent will be occupied with an average of 2.66 persons,
yielding a population of 42,499.
The City Council may consider general plan amendments that increase the numbers of dwelling
units at build-out provided that the build-out population does not exceed the population
planning threshold of 44,000 persons.
Commercial and Industrial
Land designated for commercial and industrial development is projected to be more than
adequate to accommodate the demands associated with the planned for population growth.
There is sufficient commercially designated area within the City to accommodate a projected
2.90 million additional square feet of floor area through the Year 2025 (refer to Table LU-1B).
Industrially-designated land could accommodate up to 1.50 million additional square feet of
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003 floor space through the Year 2025. Much of the
industrial development is anticipated to be concentrated near the airport.
                                              LU-2                   Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
2.0 Land Use Goals, Policies and Action Items
GOAL LU-1: Land Uses. Strive to maintain a balanced community, where the majority of
residents can live, work, and shop.
     POLICY LU-1A: Land Use Categories. Provide an appropriate mix and diversity of land
     uses.
          Action Item 1. Amend/update the Zoning Ordinance to ensure that there is a Zoning
          District for each General Plan Land Use Category on Table LU-2.
          Action Item 2. Allow projects in the Mixed Use land use category and/or in Specific
          Plan areas to be developed with more than one land use.
                   Table LU-1A. General Plan Development Potential
      Land Use Category                                   Acreage                    Percent
      Commercial                                            1,271                     10.0%
      Business Park/Industrial                              1,721                     13.5%
      Other/Public Facilities                               1,947                     15.3%
      Agriculture & Open Space                              2,572                     20.0%
      Residential                                           5,228                     41.2%
      Total                                                12,739                     100%
                                Table LU-1B. General Plan Development Potential
        Land Use                  Existing                          Potential                               Total
      Residential                     11,711 DU                           5,107 DU                            16,818 DU
      Commercial                     4,044,000 sf                       2,896,000 sf                        6,940,000 sf
      Industrial                     2,093,000 sf                       1,498,000 sf                        3,591,000 sf
      Notes:
      1.   DU = Dwelling Unit; existing numbers of DU per December 31, 2011 Land Use Inventory; See Table LU-3 for details on
           potential DU
      2.   Actual full commercial and industrial buildout would be driven largely by market factors and other considerations
           beyond the control of the City.
                                                           LU-3                          Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                               Table LU-2. General Plan Land Use Distribution
                                   Land Use Category                               Acres          Percent
           Agriculture                                                                   814             7.3%
           Residential Categories
           Residential Rural (1 du/5 acres)                                                0              0.0%
           Residential Suburban (1 du/2.5 acres)                                         642              5.8%
           Residential - Single Family - 1 (1 du/acre)                                   419              3.8%
           Residential - Single Family - 2 (2 du/acre)                                   272              2.5%
           Residential - Single Family - 3 (3 du/acre)                                   772              7.0%
           Residential - Single Family - 4 (4 du/acre)                                 1,590            14.3%
           Residential - Single Family - 6 (6 du/acre)                                    18              0.2%
           Residential - Multiple Family - 8 (8 du/acre)                                 287              2.8%
           Residential - Multiple Family - 9 (9 du/acre)                                  17              0.2%
           Residential - Multiple Family - 12 (12 du/acre)                               178              1.6%
           Residential - Multiple Family - 16 (16 du/acre)                                 0              0.0%
           Residential - Multiple Family - 20 (20 du/acre)                                47              0.4%
           Mobile Home Park (5 du/acre)                                                   58              0.5%
           Residential Total                                                           4,300            39.0%
           Commercial Categories
           Neighborhood Commercial                                                        55              0.5%
           Office Professional                                                            29              0.3%
           Downtown Commercial                                                            41              0.4%
           Community Commercial                                                           97              0.9%
           Regional Commercial                                                           175              1.6%
           Commercial Service                                                            505              4.6%
           Commercial Total:                                                             902             8.1%
           Mixed Use Categories
           Mixed Use 8 (Commercial and Multi-Family - 8)                                  18              0.2%
           Mixed Use 12 (Commercial and Multi-Family - 12)                                37              0.3%
           Mixed Use Total:                                                               55             0.5%
           Industrial Categories
           Business Park                                                               1,676            15.1%
           Industry                                                                       52              0.5%
           Industrial Total:                                                           1,728            15.6%
           Other Categories
           Public Facilities                                                           1,654            14.9%
           Parks and Open Space                                                        1,634            14.5%
           Other Categories Total:                                                     3,288            29.5%
           TOTAL                                                                     11,087           100.0%
           Notes:
           1. Source: Land Use Inventory, updated to reflect General Plan Amendments through June 30.
              2011. All acreages are net (exclude dedicated rights-of-way for streets and highways).
           2. It is expected that the Chandler Ranch Area Specific Plan will include changes to some of the
              above acreage in order to attain the 1,439 dwelling units provided by the General Plan.
                                                             LU-4                            Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
             Table LU-3A. Summary of Potential Residential Development (Dwelling Units)
                                                                           Existing                 Potential                  Total
                Area/Land Use Categories                              Dwelling Units            Dwelling Units           Dwelling Units
 West Side (includes area south of 1st Street)
      Uptown/Town Centre (UTTC) Specific Plan *                                      2,202                       985                 3,187
      Outside of UTTC - Single Family Residential                                      702                       119                   821
      Outside of UTTC - Multi-Family Residential                                       319                        86                   405
      Outside of UTTC - Non-Residential Use                                              43                        0                    43
       Subtotal                                                                      3,266                   1,190                   4,456
 East Side
      Borkey Area Specific Plan - Single Family                                        396                        33                   429
      Borkey Area Specific Plan – Multi-Family                                         107                       193                   300
      Union/46 Specific Plan (SF)                                                      816                       134                   950
      Chandler Ranch Area Specific Plan - Single Family                                   1                   1,291                  1,292
      Chandler Ranch Area Specific Plan – Multi-Family                                   12                      135                   147
      Olsen Ranch Specific Plan – Single Family                                           4                      574                   578
      Olsen Ranch Specific Plan – Multi-Family                                            0                       95                    95
      Beechwood Area Specific Plan – Single Family                                        5                      469                   474
      Beechwood Area Specific Plan – Multi-Family                                         0                      200                   200
      Outside of Specific Plan Areas – Single Family                                 5,122                       117                 5,239
      Outside of Specific Plan Areas – Mobile Homes                                    310                         0                   310
      Outside of Specific Plan Areas – Multi-Family                                  1,587                       648                 2,235
      Non-Residential Use                                                                85                       28                   113
      Subtotal                                                                       8,445                   3,919                 12,362
 Total                                                                             11,711                    5,107                 16,818
 Source: City of Paso Robles Land Use Inventory - December 31, 2011
 *    UTTC: Existing units as of 12/31/11; potential units assumes 989 potential units minus 4 net units added since 01/01/10.
                                        Table LU-3B: Population Projection
                      Year                            Population 1                        Total Dwelling Units 2
                      2010                                 29,800 3                                  11,652
                      2012                                 30,200 4                                  11,711
                      2015                                 30,100 5                                  11,917
                      2020                                  32,300                                   12,775
                      2025                                  34,400                                   13,602
                      2030                                  37,700                                   14,933
                      2035                                  39,900                                   15,775
                      2040                                  41,900                                   16,586
                      2045                                  42,800                                   16,924
          Notes:
          1. All population figures are rounded to the nearest 100. Except for 2010 and 2012, population figures are
               estimates based on household size and vacancy rate in Section 1 of this Land Use Element.
          2. Numbers of dwelling units in 2010 and 2012 are based total numbers of existing units reported on
               City’s Land Use Inventory;
          3. Source: 2010 U.S. Census Bureau
          4. Source: 2012 State Department of Finance (DOF) E-5 Report (for January 1, 2012)
          5. Population “decrease” caused by application of the General Plan’s assumptions stated in Section 1 of
               this Land Use Element. The 2012 DOF population estimate reported 2.73 persons per household,
               which yielded a higher population estimate than projected in 2015.
                                                                 LU-5                          Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
     POLICY LU-1B: Airport Land Use Compatibility. As a general policy, new residential
     development is an undesirable land use within the Airport Influence Area.
          Action Item 1. Prohibit further subdivision of land within the Airport Land Use
          Review Area (AP Overlay Area), or changes to land use or zoning, in a manner that
          would accommodate additional dwelling units. Existing parcels would, however, be
          entitled to be occupied by existing or new residential dwelling in accordance with
          current General Plan and Zoning.
GOAL LU-2: Image/Identity. Maintain/enhance the City’s image/ identity.
     POLICY LU-2A: Citizen Participation. Foster citizen participation in the planning
     process.
     POLICY LU-2B: Visual Identity. Promote architectural and design excellence by
     imposing stringent design and construction standards for commercial, industrial, mixed-
     use, and multi-family projects.
          Action Item 1. Amend/Update the Zoning Ordinance to define standards.
          Encourage property-owners to upgrade existing buildings and sites to conform to
          these standards.
          Action Item 2. Adopt design standards to clearly articulate how important public
          views, gateways and landmarks (as shown on Figure CE-3) are to be maintained/
          enhanced. This is to include, but not be limited to:
             Enhancing views along highways, roads, streets, and rail corridors with
              landscaping, building setbacks, enhanced architecture and signage/monuments.
             Ensuring that residential building lots are of sufficient size to preserve the
              topographic and aesthetic features of the landscape.
          Action Item 3. Require utilities to be placed underground in new development
          projects, except for those circumstances where this requirement is not reasonably
          related to the specific project. Voltage lines of 44 KV or greater are excluded from
          this undergrounding requirement.
          Action Item 4. Continue to enhance the downtown as a priority.
          Action Item 5. Require new development to mitigate its share of the impacts to the
          natural and built environment as feasible and appropriate.
     POLICY LU-2C: Local Heritage. Preserve/enhance downtown and the historic Vine
     Street neighborhood through adherence to established guidelines.
          Action Item 1. Establish a Vine Street Historic Overlay District and adopt design
          guidelines.
                                                LU-6               Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
          Action Item 2. Review new development projects for consistency with the
          Downtown design guidelines and the Vine Street neighborhood guidelines.
     POLICY LU-2D: Neighborhoods. Strive to maintain and create livable, vibrant
     neighborhoods and districts with:
           Attractive streetscapes,
           A pedestrian friendly setting,
           Coordinated site design, architecture, and amenities,
           Adequate public and private spaces; and,
           A recognizable and high quality design aesthetic.
          Action Item 1 (Accessory Structures). Review/Revise the Zoning Ordinance, as
          necessary, to address the size, use and appearance of accessory structures to ensure
          neighborhood compatibility.
          Action Item 2 (Quality of Life). Preserve health and safety, and strengthen the
          integrity of distinct and identifiable neighborhoods and districts, by protecting local
          streets from cut through traffic, speeding, parking intrusion, and traffic congestion
          and by implementing traffic calming measures.
          a. Maintain/enhance traffic flow of arterial streets bordering residential
              neighborhoods, and develop neighborhood traffic management plans where
              deemed appropriate.
          b. Provide well designed streets that provide for multiple benefits including public
              safety, mobility and storm water management.              Integrate storm water
              management design features in an aesthetically pleasing manner to; intercept
              pollutants in storm water, recharge ground water, reduce storm water volume
              and velocity on streets that drain to the Salinas River, Huer Huero Creek, and
              other smaller tributaries for purposes of protecting and preserving riparian
              habitats and enhancing water resources.
          Action Item 3 (Traffic Calming). Develop safety and traffic calming measures to be
          incorporated into the design of streets to ensure that they are compatible with the
          character of the residential neighborhood and other districts with pedestrian activity.
          These measures are to include, but not be limited to: narrow lanes, landscaped
          parkways, traffic circles, textured crosswalks, angled parking, and/or other
          measures.
          Action Item 4 (Safety/Security). Review and update, as necessary, the City’s
          Building Security & Construction Standards for new development projects to
          address:
             Exterior lighting,
             Surveillance devices,
             Illuminated street numbering,
             Locking devices for doors,
                                                 LU-7             Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
             Pedestrian safety devices,
             City Security Plan requirements, and
             City requirements/standards to incorporate considerations related to safety and
              defensibility into project design and site layout.
          Action Item 5 (Light/Glare – New Development). Require all new lighting to be
          shielded and directed downward in such a manner as to not create off-site glare or
          adversely impact adjacent properties. The style, location and height of the lighting
          fixtures shall be submitted with the building plans and shall be subject to approval
          by the Development Review Committee prior to issuance of building or grading
          permits, as appropriate.
          Action Item 6 (Light/Glare – Existing Development). Continue to enforce the
          General Performance Standards for All Uses (Section 21.21.040 of the City’s Zoning
          Ordinance) specifies that: “No direct glare, whether produced by floodlight, high-
          temperature processes such as combustion or welding or other processes, so as to be
          visible from any boundary line of the property on which the same is produced shall
          be permitted. Sky-reflected glare from the building or portions thereof shall be so
          controlled by reasonable means as are practical to the end that said sky-reflected
          glare will not inconvenience or annoy persons or interfere with the use and
          enjoyment of property in and about the area where it occurs.
POLICY LU- 2E: “Purple Belt”(Open Space/Conservation Areas Around the City). Create a
distinct “Purple Belt” surrounding the City by taking actions to retain the rural, open space,
and agricultural areas.
     Action Item 1. Coordinate with the County and private organizations to identify
     boundaries of and obtain support for a “purple-belt” that buffers the eventual edge of
     the City through the preservation of existing, and encouragement of future agriculture
     and open space.
     Action Item 2. As feasible, acquire development rights/easements within the
     designated purple belt area. Use these development rights/easements to limit land uses
     within the designated purple belt to agricultural and/or open space.
     Action Item 3. Take steps to ensure that the County retains surrounding lands in very
     low-density rural residential, open space (including natural resource), and agricultural
     uses. Oppose the creation of new parcels within the County.
     Action Item 4. Implement strategies that help preserve or protect agriculture beyond
     the City limits, including:
          Establishment of agricultural buffer easements, berms and/or vegetative screening,
           on property proposed for urban development as a condition of approval of
           discretionary development applications.
          Implement the City’s adopted “right-to-farm” ordinance.
          Participation in the Williamson Act and other farmland preservation programs.
                                                 LU-8             Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
     Action Item 5. Require disclosure agreements for new non-agricultural development
     within 500 feet of an existing agricultural use. Such disclosure agreements should
     describe potential nuisances (e.g., dust, noise, pesticide spraying, etc.) associated with
     normal agricultural operations.
POLICY LU- 2F: Planning Impact Area (PIA): Maintain and periodically update a Planning
Impact Area (PIA) to indicate the maximum potential geographical boundaries to which the
City may grow in the foreseeable future (within the 2003-2025 planning period and beyond),
or areas within which development patterns would have an immediate impact upon the
City, and identify land use categories that would be assigned if unincorporated land were
annexed.
     Action Item 1: Evaluate annexation requests for conformance with adopted General
     Plan goals, policies and action items (including the requirement that financing
     mechanisms or alternative measures be put into effect in order to ensure fiscal
     neutrality), as well as public infrastructure and service plans.
     Action Item 2: Continue to review and comment on planning efforts and development
     projects being considered by the County within the City’s Planning Impact Area.
POLICY LU- 2G: Specific Plans. Require for large, vacant and/or underutilized areas, as
well as for areas with special planning needs, as follows (refer to Figure LU-3):
      Areas outside of and southeast of the 2003 City limits, within Subarea “D” (proposed
          Annexation Areas between Linne Road and Creston Road). Two specific plans,
          which include:
      Olsen Ranch Specific Plan
      Beechwood Area Specific Plan
      Chandler Ranch Area Specific Plan
      Oak Park Area Specific Plan
      Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan
      Other areas as established by the City Council
Limitations on Chandler Ranch Area Specific Plan, Olsen Ranch Specific Plan, Beechwood Area and
Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plans.
The following shows the maximum number of dwelling units that can be accommodated
within each of the specific plans. These numbers may be reduced, depending on
topographic, environmental, or other development constraints:
         Chandler Ranch Area Specific Plan:                       1,439 dwellings
         Olsen Ranch Specific Plan:                                  673 dwellings
         Beechwood Area Specific Plan:                               674 dwellings
         Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan                            989 dwellings
Within the scope of a specific plan, the Planning Commission and City Council have the
authority to:
                                                LU-9               Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
 Provide flexibility in terms of:
      Distribution of densities within the geographic area covered
      Parcel sizes and location (including clustering to retain unique site features)
      Development Standards and other Zoning Ordinance requirements
      Allowable land uses by providing an opportunity for mixed use provisions (e.g.
          neighborhood serving commercial land uses) within the overall residential densities
          anticipated in the General Plan. This flexibility includes the ability to provide for
          multi-family land uses as long as the total dwelling unit count is within the scope of
          the General Plan designation for the geographic area under consideration.
 Address community-wide issues on a comprehensive basis, including:
      Fiscal impacts
      Infrastructure phasing and financing
      Parks and Trails
      Project Amenities
      Coordinated Architecture
          Action Item 1. Encourage establishment of Specific Plans for other areas where it
          would be appropriate to:
          a) Retain unique site features.
          b) Insure a cohesive development pattern for the area (A Specific Plan could
              establish site planning, design and architectural parameters that could integrate
              the uses of the different parcels in the area).
          c) Lend themselves to long-term development and infrastructure phasing;
          d) Allow for flexibility in site planning in order to encourage creative and higher
              quality design and to ensure compatibility with surrounding land uses.
          Action Item 2. As part of the environmental review of new Specific Plans, require
          preparation of fire station analysis identifying staffing requirements, station location,
          and response times.
     POLICY LU- 2H: Downtown. Continue to revitalize the historic Downtown. Focus
     efforts on developing Downtown Paso Robles as the specialty retail, government, office,
     cultural, conference, and entertainment center of the City and North County region.
          Action Item 1. Continue requiring new projects to implement the adopted
          Downtown Design Guidelines and to adhere to the development standards of the
          Zoning Ordinance.
          Action Item 2. Promote a vibrant Downtown using the following methods:
     
             Implement the City’s Economic Development Strategy.
             Continue to support Main Street and Chamber of Commerce efforts to use
              media, publications and technology to encourage retailers and entrepreneurs to
              locate and build in downtown.
             Encourage Main Street to recruit specialty stores to the Downtown
                                                LU-10                Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
             Promote special events in the downtown developed by the City, Farmer's
              Market, Main Street, Chamber of Commerce and other community groups.
             Accommodate and encourage special festivals and events, and public art in the
              Downtown area.
     POLICY LU-2I: Infill. Encourage infill development as a means of accommodating
     growth, while preserving open space areas, reducing vehicle miles traveled, and
     enhancing livability/quality of life. Infill includes:
     1. Mixed use development in the Downtown and/or in areas within walking distance
          to transit, employment centers, and commercial services where the environmental
          impacts of the development would be minimized;
     2. Residential infill in/near established neighborhoods;
     3. Increased densities on sites which can accommodate the increases without having an
          adverse effect on adjacent properties;
     4. Targeted residential infill to help address the needs of Cuesta College students and
          employees, City and school district employees, seniors, lower income households
          and other special needs groups; and rehabilitation of older apartment complexes.
          Action Item 1. Amend the Zoning Ordinance to allow mixed-use projects in the
          Downtown and other suitable locations (near transit, multi-modal transportation
          facilities, commercial services, and/or employment centers).
          Action Item 2. Prior to or concurrent with consideration of any mixed use projects,
          stringent design and construction standards shall be established.
     POLICY LU-2J: Public Art. Art is in public places is an essential element of the
     Community's quality of life, contributing to what makes Paso Robles a special place to
     live, work and shop.
          Action Item 1. Public and private development projects shall be required to
          contribute toward the establishment and maintenance of art in public places, based
          on a formula and process to be established by the City Council.
     POLICY LU-2K: Support environmental responsibility. Manage the natural landscape
     to preserve the natural beauty and rural identity of the community, which enhances
     ecological functions and maintains environmental and public health.
          Action Item 1. Require new development, either on public or private property, to
          mitigate its share of impacts from storm water on the natural environment through
          implementation of Low-Impact Development (LID) storm water management
          features.
                                               LU-11               Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
GOAL LU-4: Public Services and Facilities. Maintain/improve the quality of life enjoyed
by residents.
     POLICY LU-4A: Service Levels. Strive to ensure that City services and facilities are
     maintained at current levels and/or adopted standards, and are funded as revenues
     become available. These standards are summarized as follows:
      Police                Maintain a ratio of 0.5 non-sworn personnel per 1,000 population.
                            Maintain a ratio of 1.4 to 1.6 sworn personnel per 1,000 population.
      Emergency             Strive to achieve a 4 minute response to 90% of the calls for service.
      Services              Maintain a ratio of 0.8 to 1.3 Firefighters per 1,000 population.
      Public Works          Public facilities to be designed to meet the current and planned land
      (Water, Sewer,        uses, provisions to be made for continued operation, maintenance,
      Storm Drainage,
      Solid Waste)
                            and upgrades as necessary.
      Library               Maintain 0.5 square feet per capita of library facilities.
          Action Item 1. Direct City revenues toward continuing to fund the public services
          and on-going maintenance/operation of public facilities and utilities provided by
          the City (water, sewer, storm drains, police, emergency services, library, recreational
          services, and solid waste).
          Action Item 2. Require new development in annexation areas and/or specific plan
          areas to establish funding mechanisms to pay for the construction, maintenance, and
          operation of required City services and facilities on an on-going basis: (1) at current
          levels; or (2) per adopted City standards, as well as in compliance with state and
          federal mandates; and/or (3) as deemed necessary during the environmental review
          and/or the fiscal impact review process.
          Action Item 3. Require a fiscal impact analysis for new development in annexation
          areas and/or specific plan areas and condition projects accordingly so as to ensure
          that they will be fiscally neutral and not result in a net loss for the City.
          Action Item 4. As part of implementation of the General Plan Update:
             Review/refine the existing Growth Management Plan to address Emergency
              service needs on a periodic basis.
             Revise/update the City’s Master Plans of Water, Sewer, Storm Drainage, and
              Solid Waste and City standards and specifications for public facilities.
             Update the Capital Improvement Program so that it is in conformance with the
              revised Master Plans.
             Investigate expansion of branch libraries to serve outlying areas and adding new
              outreach programs, including a book mobile.
             Implement planned City library expansion into the 2nd floor of the existing
              library and develop City hall relocation plans, as feasible.
             Maintain the Youth Arts Center satellite library.
                                                  LU-12                Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
     POLICY LU-4B: Support the public school districts’ efforts to ensure that new
     development mitigates its impacts to public schools, particularly in avoiding
     overcrowding conditions. The following programs should be implemented unless the
     City Council finds that specific economic, social, environmental or other considerations
     make infeasible implementation of the program or aspect of the program in a particular
     situation.
          Action Item 1. Enable the collection of those impact fees for development of capital
          facilities for public schools that are permitted by State Law to be applied to the
          issuance of building permits.
          Action Item 2. Investigate and implement, if feasible, means to eliminate shortfalls
          that may result from the insufficiency of those impact fees to fund the acquisition of
          sites and construction of public schools. Such means may include, but would not be
          limited to, the following:
          1. Conditioning legislative actions such as        specific plans and rezones upon
              payment of supplemental fees, or making        dedications of land in lieu of fees;
              arrangements should be investigated to          enable such fees to be paid or
              dedications to be made at either the time of   building permit issuance or prior to
              issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy.
          2. Formation of Community Facilities (Mello-Roos) Districts or equivalent tools
              which include funding for acquisition of sites for and construction of public
              schools.
          Action Item 3. Support the school districts’ request that public school sites be located
          in accordance with the following standards:
          1. Elementary Schools (grades K-5) need 10 acres of relatively flat or gently rolling
              land located in the center of an area with approximately 590 students, on a
              collector street and preferably not on an arterial street;
          2. Middle Schools (grades 6-8) need 20 acres of relatively flat or gently rolling land
              located in the center of an area with approximately 900 student, on either a
              collector or an arterial street;
          3. High Schools (grades 9-12) need 40 acres of relatively flat or gently rolling land
              located in the center of an area with approximately 2,250 students and on an
              arterial street.
          Action Item 4. Refer development applications to the Paso Robles Union School
          District, Paso Robles Joint Union High School District, and Templeton Unified
          School Districts for comments and information. Seek to minimize traffic and
          circulation problems in the vicinity of school sites.
          Action Item 5. Facilitate the provision of schools by continuing to work closely with
          the school districts during the site selection and development process. For example,
          when development proposals are submitted for large projects triggering needs for
                                               LU-13                 Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
          additional schools, the districts should determine which parcels would be
          appropriate school sites, and specify appropriate location, accessibility and land use
          compatibility standards for school site selection.
3.0 Development Boundaries
City Limits, Sphere of Influence, and Expansion Areas
Following completion of the Olsen Ranch and Beechwood Annexations in 2004 and the
Linne Road (Our Town) Annexation in 2005, there are 19.9 square miles (12,739 acres)
within City Limits.
The City’s existing Sphere of Influence (SOI) was established by the Local Agency
Formation Commission (LAFCO) of the County of San Luis Obispo. The LAFCO-designated
SOI for Paso Robles identifies the probable corporate boundaries and service area for the
City for a 20-year period. Per state law, the expansion of the City’s corporate boundaries
into its SOI cannot occur until LAFCO approves an application for annexation. The existing
City boundary and its SOI are shown on Figure LU-1. The SOI currently includes nine
subareas around the City; the combined area of these subareas is 465 acres.
The Local Government Reorganization Act was amended in 2000 to address LAFCO’s
purpose, pursuant to AB 2838. The goals of “preserving open space and prime agricultural
lands” and “efficiently providing government services” were added to the existing goals of
discouraging urban sprawl and encouraging the orderly formation of local agencies.
Specifically, Section 56300 of the Government Code was amended to:
    State that goals to discourage urban sprawl, preserve open space and agriculture and
     provide efficient governmental services may sometimes compete with the need for
     orderly development.
    State that providing housing is an important factor in promoting orderly development.
    Add a preference to accommodate growth within or through the expansion of local
     agencies that can “best accommodate” services and housing for all incomes in “the most
     efficient manner feasible.”
    Promote multi-purpose governments, especially in urban areas, but recognizing the
     critical role of limited purpose agencies, especially in rural communities.
    Add a preference that service responsibility be allocated to governmental agencies that
     can “best provide government services.”
Planning Impact Area
As part of a 1991 Land Use Element update, the City established the maximum potential
geographical boundaries to which the City could grow in the foreseeable future, as well as
areas within which development could impact the City. These geographical boundaries are
called the City’s Planning Impact Area. The City has no jurisdictional authority over areas
within the Planning Impact Area that are outside of the City limits. In addition, any
potential expansion of the City or its Sphere of Influence to include portions of the Planning
                                              LU-14                  Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
Impact Area currently outside its Sphere of Influence would require LAFCO consideration
and approval. It should be noted that a Planning Impact Area is not recognized under state
law, and thus does not require LAFCO approval to be established by the City.
As shown on Figure LU-1, the City’s Planning Impact Area is expanded to the northwest to
form a more logical boundary than what was included in the 1991 Land Use Element. Land
use designations within each subarea are shown in Figures LU-6. Note that the land use
designations shown outside the City’s proposed expansion areas are intended to facilitate
long-range planning coordination efforts between the City and the County.
                                            LU-15             Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                                            LU-16 Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
4.0 Land Use Categories
There are 26 land use categories and 9 special study overlay categories. The purpose of the
Land Use Categories and the Land Use Map are to provide designations to guide the
general distribution, location and extent of the various types of land uses in the City.
Agricultural Land Use Category
Agriculture (AG)
Purposes:
      To allow and protect the operation of agricultural uses;
      To provide open space;
      To provide a viable land use in areas impacted by airport operations.
Residential Land Use Categories
There are 13 residential land use categories under the General Plan, which address a range
of housing types and allowed densities.
Residential Rural (RR) Land Use Category
Purposes:
      To provide a transition/buffer zone between urban and semi-urban land uses and
           viable agricultural uses;
      To provide an area, at the edge of the City, for relatively large lot residential
           development, at a maximum of 1 dwelling unit per 5 acres.
Residential Suburban (RS) Land Use Category
Purpose: To provide semi-rural single-family residential neighborhoods, at a maximum of
1 dwelling unit per 2.5 acres.
Residential Single-Family (RSF-1, -2, -3, -4, and -6) Land Use Category
Purpose: To provide urban single-family residential neighborhoods with a range between 1
and 6 dwelling units per gross acre (prior to dedication for streets). In order to attain an
orderly land use pattern, some areas will have density caps of 1, 2, 3, 4, or 6 units per gross
acre. Such areas are indicated on the General Plan Land Use Map as RSF-1, RSF-2, RSF-3,
RSF-4, and RSF-6, respectively.
                                             LU-17                Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
Residential Multiple Family, Low Density (RMF-8, RMF-9) Land Use Category
Purposes:
     • To provide multiple family residential neighborhoods at relatively low densities,
           typically consisting of buildings with 2 to 3 dwelling units, at densities up to 8 or 9
           dwelling units per acre;
     • To permit clustered and/or attached housing production in environmentally
           sensitive locations;
     • To permit multi-family development without giving the impression of a high
           density environment;
     • To meet the needs of persons seeking rental housing units, at various price levels;
     • To provide housing in close proximity to schools, shopping, and other services,
           including public transit;
     • To provide a transition zone between single-family residential neighborhoods and
           higher-intensity land uses.
Net lot area does not include the following:
     (1) The full right-of-way for interior and adjacent streets;
     (2) Areas with slopes exceeding 35 percent;
     (3) Oak woodlands (e.g., north-facing slopes with dense oak growth);
     (4) Areas within the 100 year flood zone as determined by the City Engineer;
     (5) Areas occupied by significant resources (e.g., archaeological or historical) that may
           be identified as a result of environmental review.
Residential Multiple Family, Medium Density (RMF-12) Land Use Category
Purposes:
     • To provide multiple family residential neighborhoods consisting of buildings with
           four or more dwelling units at densities up to 12 dwelling units per acre.
     • To provide multi-family residential neighborhoods consisting of buildings with less
           than four dwelling units (including single-family detached units) when the
           following criteria can be met:
           a. provide an innovative site and building design that promotes architectural and
               design excellence;
           b. provide a density as close to 12 dwelling units per acre as possible;
           c. provide multi-family type design features such as common outdoor areas,
               courtyards and recreation areas;
     • To provide multi-family development on sites that can accommodate increased
           density;
     • To meet the needs of persons seeking rental housing units, at various price levels;
     • To provide housing in close proximity to schools, shopping, and other services,
           including public transit;
     • To provide a transition zone between single-family residential neighborhoods and
           higher-traffic areas.
                                                LU-18              Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
Residential Multiple Family, Medium-High Density (RMF-16) Land Use Category
Purposes:
     • To provide multiple family residential neighborhoods consisting of buildings with
           four or more dwelling units on sites that are 2 acres or larger in area, allowing up to
           16 dwelling units per acre;
     • To meet the needs of persons seeking rental housing units, at various price levels;
     • To provide housing in close proximity to schools, shopping, and other services,
           including public transit.
Residential Multiple Family, High Density (RMF-20) Land Use Category
Purposes:
      To provide multiple family residential neighborhoods consisting of buildings with
           four or more dwelling units on sites that are 2 acres or larger in area, allowing up to
           20 dwelling units per acre.
      To provide the highest permissible density, located where such density can be
           accommodated through sensitive site and building design;
      To meet the needs of persons seeking rental housing units, at various price levels;
      To provide housing in close proximity to schools, shopping, and other services,
           including public transit;
      To provide a transition zone between single-family residential neighborhoods and
           higher-intensity land uses.
Mobile Home Park/Subdivision (MH) Land Use Category
Purpose: To provide areas for the development of mobile home parks and subdivisions, at a
maximum intensity of 5 dwelling units per acre.
Commercial Land Use Categories
There are six commercial categories, which typically accommodate commercial
development, but can under some circumstances allow residential or industrial uses. Areas
along highways, arterials and the downtown core are reserved for a more intensive mixture
of uses. Uses that tend to not be aesthetically appealing, such as mini-storages, should be
placed away from viewsheds and gateway areas to the City.
Neighborhood Commercial (NC) Land Use Category
Purpose: To provide for the convenience shopping needs of the surrounding neighborhood.
                                              LU-19                 Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
Office Professional (OP) Land Use Category
Purpose: To provide areas to serve the City’s needs for professional office space.
Note: The OP designated site at the northeast corner of Creston and Rolling Hills Roads shall be
developed in such a manner that any drive approach into Creston Road shall permit only right turns
into and out of the site.
Downtown Commercial (DC) Land Use Category
Purpose: To provide a land use category for the historic downtown, which is to serve as a
center for entertainment, culture, the arts, civic facilities and events, education, community,
regional, and visitor-serving retail, and offices. In order to enhance the economic vibrancy
of the downtown, priority for ground floor space is to be given to uses that generate a
substantial amount of pedestrian traffic, such as retail, restaurants, theatres, wine-tasting,
and services such as banks, realty offices, and personal services. Offices that do not
generate pedestrian traffic and residential uses may be limited to occupying upper floors.
Community Commercial (CC) Land Use Category
Purpose: To provide a land use category for commercial centers that serve the City as a
whole, such as the historic downtown and designated shopping centers.
Regional Commercial (RC) Land Use Category
Purpose: To provide for the retail shopping needs of the City and region.
Commercial Service (CS) Land Use Category
Purpose: To provide areas for highway-related, commercial services, and light industrial
uses.
Mixed Use Land Use Categories
Two mixed use land use categories are established to accommodate multi-family residential
and light commercial uses both within the same district and on the same property within
such districts.
                                             LU-20                 Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
Mixed Use, 8 Units per Acre (MU8) Land Use Category
Purpose: Applied within the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan Area to allow a mix of
multi-family residential at 8 units per acre and limited commercial uses such as offices,
personal services, and neighborhood markets.
Mixed Use, 12 Units per Acre (MU12) Land Use Category
Purpose: Applied within the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan Area to allow a mix of
multi-family residential at 12 units per acre and limited commercial uses such as offices,
personal services, neighborhood markets, banks, retail shops, and restaurants.
Industrial and Business Park Land Use Categories
The Industrial land use category has been developed to encourage the continued viability of
existing industrial development while providing encouragement for new industry to locate
in the City. In addition, a Business Park (BP) category is proposed to accommodate campus-
like light industrial development.
Business Park (BP) Land Use Category
Purpose: To provide areas for clean and attractive businesses and industries in which all
activities are conducted indoors (some limited outdoor storage and/or activities may be
permitted via approval of a conditional use permit and if completely screened). Where
appropriate, compatible convenience and highway commercial land uses may be located in
the Business Park category.
The Business Park category is established in the following areas:
      Airport and surrounding areas;
      Commerce Way;
      Ramada Drive, north of Highway 46 West.
Note: Within the Business Park category, nonconforming industrial land uses may be permitted to
expand with City Council approval via Planned Development or its equivalent and/or Conditional
Use Permit.
Industrial (M) Land Use Category
Purpose: To provide areas for general industrial uses that involve outdoor activities.
The Industrial category is established for the following areas:
          North River Road;
          24th – 28th Streets (West of Union Pacific Railroad);
          Ramada Drive, south of Highway 46 West.
                                               LU-21             Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
Public Facility and Open Space Categories
The Open Space designation is used on land where the conservation of resources is the
primary concern. The Public Facility designation is established for public lands, typically
where utilities, civic or institutional functions are found.
Public Facilities (PF) Land Use Category
     Purpose: To provide a land use category for facilities owned and operated by public
     agencies (City, County, State, and local districts). Public school sites are included within
     this category.
Parks and Open Space (POS) Land Use Category
     Purpose: To provide a category for public and private properties that are to be used
     only for open space and recreation.
Table LU-4 summarizes each basic land use category, uses in the category, allowable land
uses in the category, and the associated development density. For mapping purposes, the
area within the City Limits and Planning Impact Area are divided into subareas in order to
show land use designations in greater detail and fit into the General Plan format. These
subarea maps are in Figure LU-6.
                                               LU-22               Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                       Table LU-4. General Plan Land Use Category Summary
                                                                   Typical Uses and
             Category
                                                          Development Intensity/Density1
Land Use Categories
Agriculture (AG)                     Single-family residential and agricultural uses. Two dwelling units per 20
                                     acres (0.1 unit/acre).
Residential Rural (RR)               Single family residential and accessory uses, as well as agricultural uses,
                                     churches, and schools. Maximum 1 dwelling unit per 5 acres.
Residential Suburban (RS)            Single family residential and accessory uses, as well as limited agricultural
                                     uses (crop production, limited animal raising), churches, and schools. Up to
                                     1 unit/2.5 acres.
Residential Single Family (RSF-1)    Single family residential with accessory uses, as well as churches, schools,
                                     and limited commercial recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis clubs,
                                     resort hotels, and equestrian facilities. Maximum 1 dwelling unit per acre.
Residential Single Family (RSF-2)    Single family residential with accessory uses, as well as churches, schools,
                                     and limited commercial recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis clubs,
                                     resort hotels, and equestrian facilities. Maximum 2 dwelling units per acre.
Residential Single Family (RSF-3)    Single family residential with accessory uses, as well as churches, schools,
                                     and limited commercial recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis clubs,
                                     resort hotels, and equestrian facilities. Maximum 3 dwelling units per acre.
Residential Single Family (RSF-4)    Single family residential with accessory uses, as well as churches, schools,
                                     and limited commercial recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis clubs,
                                     resort hotels, and equestrian facilities. Maximum 4 dwelling units per acre.
Residential Single Family (RSF-6)    Single family residential with accessory uses, as well as churches, schools,
                                     and limited commercial recreational uses such as golf courses, tennis clubs,
                                     hotels, and equestrian facilities. Maximum 6 dwelling units per acre.
Residential Multi-Family Low         Single-family or multi-family residential with accessory uses, churches and
Density (RMF-8)                      schools. Up to 8 units/acre allowed.
Residential Multi-Family Low-        Single-family or multi-family residential with accessory uses, churches, and
Medium Density (RMF-9)               schools. Maximum 9 units/acre allowed.
Residential Multi-Family Medium      Single-family or multi-family residential with accessory uses, churches and
Density (RMF-12)                     schools. Maximum 12 units/acre allowed.
Residential Multi-Family Medium-     Single-family or multi-family residential with accessory uses, churches, and
High Density (RMF-16)                schools. Maximum 16 units/acre allowed.
Residential Multi-Family High        Single-family or multi-family residential with accessory uses, churches, and
Density (RMF-20)                     schools. Maximum 20 units/acre allowed.
Mobile Home Park/Subdivision         Mobile home parks and subdivisions. Maximum 5 units/acre.
(MHP)
Neighborhood Commercial (NC)         Convenience shopping and personal services. (General offices only if
                                     located within multi-tenant centers designed for neighborhood retail use,
                                     and limited numbers of dwelling units to enhance security and to reduce
                                     vehicle miles traveled).
Office Professional (OP)             Professional offices, medical clinics and laboratories, and retail and services
                                     that support professional offices, as well as limited numbers of dwelling
                                     units to enhance security and to reduce vehicle miles traveled.
                                                     LU-23                     Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                       Table LU-4. General Plan Land Use Category Summary
                                                                    Typical Uses and
             Category
                                                           Development Intensity/Density1
Mixed Use, 8 Units per Acre          Applied within the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan Area to allow a mix
(MU8)                                of multi-family residential at 8 units per acre and limited commercial uses
                                     such as offices, personal services, and neighborhood markets.
Mixed Use, 12 Units per Acre         Applied within the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan Area to allow a mix
(MU12)                               of multi-family residential at 12 units per acre and limited commercial uses
                                     such as offices, personal services, neighborhood markets, banks, retail
                                     shops, and restaurants.
Downtown Commercial (DC)             The historic downtown area, which is to serve as a center for entertainment
                                     (restaurants, wine-tasting, theaters, art galleries) and retail, such as
                                     department stores and specialty shops, that serves the City-wide, regional,
                                     and visitor shopping needs, which are to be given priority for ground floor
                                     space. Limited amounts of services such as banks, realty offices, and
                                     personal services may occupy ground floor space. In general, offices and
                                     residential uses may be limited to occupying upper floors.
Community Commercial (CC)            Commercial centers that serve the City as a whole: food markets,
                                     department stores, variety stores, drug stores, banks, offices, clinics,
                                     specialty retail, personal services establishments, and similar uses. In the
                                     Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan Area, residential uses may occupy
                                     upper floors and rear portions of buildings. Elsewhere in the City, limited
                                     numbers of dwelling units may be combined with commercial uses on the
                                     same lot to enhance security and to reduce vehicle miles traveled.
Regional Commercial (RC)             Retail and service uses that serve the region as a whole, such as general
                                     merchandise, department stores, clothing, office supplies and stationary,
                                     autos and recreational vehicles, and electronic items, gasoline service
                                     stations, as well as limited numbers of dwelling units to enhance security
                                     and to reduce vehicle miles traveled. Certain land uses such as restaurants,
                                     hotels and motels may be considered only if they will not have an adverse
                                     impact on downtown revitalization efforts.
Commercial Service (CS)              Areas for highway-related, commercial services, and light industrial uses.
                                     Auto sales, rental and repair, restaurants, motels, building and landscaping
                                     materials sales, large appliance sales and repair, equipment rental,
                                     contracted services, light manufacturing and assembly, as well as limited
                                     numbers of dwelling units to enhance security and to reduce vehicle miles
                                     traveled.
Business Park (BP)                   Areas for clean and attractive businesses and industries in which all
                                     activities are conducted indoors (some limited outdoor storage and/or
                                     activities may be permitted via approval of a conditional use permit and if
                                     completely screened). Manufacturing, fabrication, assembly, research and
                                     development, industrial services, warehousing, wholesale distribution, and
                                     convenience commercial uses, particularly those that support industrial uses
                                     (e.g., copy/blueprint services, coffee shops, convenience markets, gasoline
                                     sales).
Industrial (M)                       Areas for general industrial uses that involve outdoor activities.
                                     Manufacturing and fabrication, industrial services, outside storage, auto
                                     repair, warehousing, and wholesale distribution.
Public Facilities (PF)               Facilities owned and operated by public agencies (City, County, State, and
                                     local districts). Hospitals, community centers, government offices, schools,
                                     cemeteries, public service facilities, and parks.
                                                      LU-24                    Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                      Table LU-4. General Plan Land Use Category Summary
                                                                     Typical Uses and
             Category
                                                           Development Intensity/Density1
Parks and Open Space (POS)           Public and private properties that are to be used only for open space and
                                     recreation. Parks, City-owned land in the Salinas River and along creeks and
                                     steep, wooded hillsides, golf courses, hotels and motels in close proximity to
                                     golf courses, and commercial recreation.
Overlay Districts (as shown in Figures LU-3 and LU-4)
Specific Plan (SP)                   Development subject to Specific Plan requirements, to be prepared in
                                     accordance with State law. Applied to the following areas shown in Figure
                                     LU-3:
                                         Borkey Specific Plan area bordering State HWY 46 to the north and the
                                          Salinas River;
                                         Union/46 Specific Plan area bounded by Union Road and State HWY
                                          46 between North River Road and Prospect Avenue;
                                         Chandler Ranch Specific Plan area located east of Golden Hill Road,
                                          south of Union Road and north of the intersection of Sherwood Road
                                          and Fontana Road;
                                         Olsen Ranch Specific Plan, located south of Linne Road, west of Hanson
                                          Road, north of Meadowlark Road, and east of the 2003 city limit
                                         Beechwood Area Specific Plan, located north of Creston Road, east of
                                          Beechwood Drive, south of Meadowlark Road, and west of the PG&E
                                          right of way.
                                         Oak Park Area Specific Plan, located on properties east of Park Street to
                                          the Railroad that are north of 28th Street north until the CS boundary
                                          line north of 34th Street.
Airport (AP)                         Development subject to special review based on inclusion within Airport
                                     Land Use Plan. Applies to all properties within the adopted Airport Land
                                     Use Plan area.
Flood Hazard (FH)                    Development subject to special requirements due to flood hazards mapped
                                     by FEMA.
Office Professional (OP)             Office professional development allowed pursuant to Commercial Land Use
                                     policies.
Resort/Lodging (RL)                  Allows resorts, lodging and related ancillary land uses without providing
                                     the broader range of land uses associated with a Commercial or Industrial
                                     General Plan designation. Can be applied on any property.
Mixed Use (MU)                       High Density Multi-Family Residential uses (up to 20 units per acre)
                                     allowed pursuant to Multi-Family Residential and Commercial Land Use
                                     policies, as applicable. With the General Plan Update, this new overlay
                                     category would be established as provided under General Plan Multi-
                                     Family Residential Land Use Policies. Under this General Plan Update, this
                                     overlay would be applied to the area located on the southeast quadrant of
                                     Niblick and South River Roads, which is designated for Regional
                                     Commercial (RC) use and other designated locations. With this overlay
                                     district, properties could be developed with multi-family residential uses,
                                     and multifamily residential units could be established on second stories
                                     above existing commercial or office uses.
                                                     LU-25                     Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                          Table LU-4. General Plan Land Use Category Summary
                                                                            Typical Uses and
              Category
                                                                  Development Intensity/Density1
Salinas River (SR)                          Development subject to special review for standards related to conservation,
                                            access and recreational opportunities along the Salinas River corridor.
                                            Standards would be developed to address conservation, access and
                                            recreational opportunities along this corridor.
Historic Preservation (HP)                  Development subject to special review for consistency with historic
                                            preservation standards. This overlay category is applied to the district
                                            bordered by Chestnut Street, Oak Street, 8th Street and 21st Street, inclusive
                                            of both sides of these boundary streets. Standards would be developed to
                                            address preservation of historic structures within this area.
Planned Development (PD)                    To provide for innovation and flexibility in the design of residential,
                                            commercial and industrial developments. Approval of a planned
                                            development can allow modification of certain development standards if it
                                            results in better design or greater public benefit. Would apply to all areas
                                            designated for residential, commercial, and industrial land use and does not
                                            require a “PD” overlay to be established for each property.
1    The City may establish lower maximum densities, on an individual site basis, based on environmental constraints, hillside
     development ordinance and discretionary review requirements (e.g., subdivision maps and Planned Developments, or
     their equivalents). The table indicates typical land development that could be accommodated under a particular
     designation in the absence of an established physical or policy constraint. Specifically allowed uses would be established
     through the Zoning
                                                             LU-26                       Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                                            LU-27 Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
Overlay Designations
Overlay Designations are established in combination with basic land use categories in order
to achieve certain land use objectives. The location of the Specific Plan Overlay District is
shown in Figure LU-3 and other overlay districts are shown on Figure LU-4.
Specific Plan (SP)
          Purpose: This overlay designation is established where infrastructure needs, land
          use patterns, or other substantial land use related issues indicate a need to require
          the preparation and adoption of a Specific Plan, as defined by California
          Government Code sections 65450 et seq. In such instances, the City may require
          completion of a specific plan prior to approval of a subdivision or development plan
          for any property located within the Specific Plan category. The City Council will
          determine the method of funding for a specific plan on a case by case basis.
Within specific plan areas, a fee schedule may be established to provide adequate funding
for on- and off-site public facilities and improvements of benefit to properties within the
designation specific plan areas. Such fees are above and beyond any property-specific or
Citywide property taxes, fees, charges, or assessments.
Although the Specific Plan overlay does not itself modify land uses, the adoption of a
specific plan pursuant to this overlay category, and consistent with the underlying basic
land use categories, can have the effect of modifying underlying zoning districts and their
regulations.
         Borkey Specific Plan. In total, the Specific Plan area includes approximately 650
          acres, bordering State Route 46 to the north and the Salinas River.
         Union/46 Specific Plan. A Specific Plan for a 527-acre area bounded by Union Road
          and State Route 46 between North River Road and Prospect Avenue.
         Chandler Ranch Area Specific Plan. This area includes a total of 837 acres planned
          for up to 1,439 units (subject to limitations shown in Policy LU-2G), located east of
          Golden Hill Road, south of Union Road and north of the intersection of Sherwood
          Road and Fontana Road. It also includes the Our Town area, which is outside the
          2003 City limits, but within the City’s Sphere of Influence.
         Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan. This area includes a total of 1,100 acres between
          1st and 38th Streets and between the Salinas River and the properties fronting onto
          the west side of Vine Street. This specific plan addresses redevelopment and infill
          development of the historic core of the City.
         Olsen Ranch Specific Plan. A specific plan would be required that includes areas
          outside the January 2004 City limits, encompassing Areas S2 and E3, which are
          generally east of the future extension of Airport Road, and south of Linne Road. This
          area includes about 241 acres, 18 of which are within a PG and E right of way. The
                                               LU-28                Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
          plan would envision up to 673 dwelling units (subject to limitations shown in Policy
          LU-2G).
          At least 95 of these dwellings must be developed at a density consistent with the
          RMF-20 designation. The specific plan process will be used to determine the actual
          distribution of land uses and parcel sizes.
         Beechwood Area Specific Plan. A specific plan would be required that includes areas
          outside the January 2004 City limits, encompassing Areas S1, E1 and E2, which are
          generally west of the future extension of Airport Road, north of Creston Road, east
          of Beechwood Drive, and south of Meadowlark Road. This area includes about 236
          acres, 24 of which are within a PG and E right of way. The plan would envision up to
          674 dwelling units (subject to limitations shown in Policy LU-2G). At least 200 of
          these dwellings must be developed at a density consistent with the RMF-20
          designation. The specific plan process will be used to determine the actual
          distribution of land uses and parcel sizes.
Airport (AP)
          Purpose: This overlay category is established over all property included within the
          Airport Land Use Plan adopted by the County Airport Land Use Commission.
          Development within an AP Overlay area is subject to special review based on the
          recommendation of the Airport Land Use Plan.
          Portions of the Airport Influence Area covered by the Airport Land Use Plan are
          envisioned as the City’s opportunity for future industrial development, particularly
          business parks and industry associated with the potential future expansion of the
          Paso Robles Municipal Airport. As a result of safety and noise constraints,
          residential land uses beyond current entitlements are considered to be incompatible
          land uses (see Airport Land Use Plan for further information).
Office Professional (OP)
          Purpose: This overlay category is established to retain and provide for residential
          uses as the primary use in accordance with the base residential district, but to act as
          a transitional district which could accommodate mixed office and residential uses.
Mixed-Use (MU)
          Purpose: This overlay category is established to allow for a mix of residential and
          commercial uses. The overlay category is intended to provide for additional housing
          opportunities and to provide housing, jobs, and services in close proximity to one
          another.
          Residential development may be approved consistent with the highest density
          multifamily land use designation. This designation applies in the southeast quadrant
                                               LU-29              Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
          of Niblick and South River Roads and would be subject to design standards that will
          be formulated as a separate document.
Resort/Lodging (R/L)
          Purpose: The Resort/Lodging (R/L) overlay is intended to provide a means through
          which the city can consider and selectively provide appropriate locations for resort
          hotels, motels, bed and breakfast inns, and similar forms of visitor-serving lodging
          (along with related accessory/ancillary land uses). This overlay would assist the city
          in achieving the goal in the adopted economic development strategy to develop El
          Paso de Robles into an “end destination” tourist attraction by encouraging
          consideration of appropriate locations for resorts, lodging and related/ancillary land
          uses (without providing the broader range of permitted and conditionally permitted
          land uses and the accompanying neighborhood and environmental impacts that are
          associated with a commercial or industrial general plan or zoning designation). The
          R/L land use overlay can be established on any property.
Salinas River (SR)
          Purpose: This overlay category is established to ensure that development along the
          Salinas River corridor addresses conservation, access, and recreational opportunities.
          Development within this overlay is subject to special review for standards related to
          conservation, access and recreational opportunities along the Salinas River corridor.
          A Salinas Corridor Plan will be developed as a separate program.
Historic Preservation (HP)
          Purpose: This overlay category is established to address preservation of historic
          structures. This overlay applies to development within the district bordered by
          Chestnut Street, Oak Street, 8th Street and 21st Street, inclusive of both sides of these
          boundary streets. Development in this area is subject to special review for
          consistency with historic preservation guidelines.
Senior Housing (SH)
          Purpose: This overlay category is established to provide for the development of
          senior housing with specific design criteria. The Senior Housing Overlay applies to
          the area south of Hwy 101, west of the Railroad, north of 24th Street, and east of Oak
          Street.
Planned Development (PD)
          Purpose: The Planned Development Overlay is intended to encourage development
          which is sensitive to the natural topography of the site, maintains and enhances
          significant natural resources, encourages creative and higher quality development
          design through allowed flexibility in project design while providing for essential
          development standards, and to ensure quality of overall project design, architectural
                                               LU-30                 Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
          treatment, and appropriate use of color and materials. It shall be the City’s policy to
          permit the provisions of the PD overlay to apply to properties City-wide, whether or
          not they have a PD Zoning Overlay explicitly designated on the City’s Zoning Maps.
Flood Hazard (FH)
          Purpose: This overlay category is established to promote the public health, safety,
          and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
          conditions in specific areas. The overlay areas are established over all lands
          identified by the most up to date Flood Insurance Rate and Flood Boundary and
          Floodway Maps (Currently the most up to date map is dated December 16, 1981,
          prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency [FEMA]).
Airport Noise Disclosure / Airport Influence Area:
The City Council’s adopted Vision Statement for the Paso Robles Municipal Airport calls for
the facility to serve as a “Regional Airport”. Continued expansion of airport operations can
be expected to include generation of aircraft related noise, vibration, or odors.
Within close proximity of the Airport the City can restrict land uses to insure compatibility
with current and future airport operations. For areas further away from the Airport, noise
and other impacts will still be perceived. Although the level of impacts is not anticipated to
be significant in terms of environmental impact, the presence of aircraft noise and related
impacts could well be a source of annoyance to property owners.
Based on the relationship of take-off patterns, the current and continued use of the Paso
Robles Municipal Airport by certain types of aircraft, and the real potential for various types
of aircraft including but not limited to those with jet engines, and uncertainty regarding the
permanence of existing flight patterns, aircraft noise and other impacts are anticipated to
have continuing and potentially increasing influence on land uses within the current and
future boundaries of the City of Paso Robles.
In order to help insure compatibility of the Paso Robles Municipal Airport with future land
uses that might be impacted by aircraft impacts, it is the policy of the City Council to insure
maximum reasonable public disclosure of the Airport. With that goal in mind, as a condition
of new discretionary land use and development approvals the City will include a
requirement calling for a recorded “Notice of Airport in Vicinity and Airport Operations
Plans” to alert future property owners of the City’s plans to continue to expand operations
at the Paso Robles Municipal Airport. The notice requirement would apply to all properties
within the current and future boundaries of the City of Paso Robles east of Highway 101,
including but not limited to those illustrated in Figure 7 of the Land Use Element of the
General Plan. The purpose and intent of this notice is to comply with the “Notice of Airport
in Vicinity” called for in State Business and Professions Code Section 11010 et seq.
                                             LU-31                Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                                            LU-32 Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                                            LU-33 Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                                            LU-34 Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                                            LU-35 Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
Figures LU-6A through LU-6X, which constitute the Land Use Map, are maintained on the
City’s website: www.prcity.com on the following page:
   www.prcity.com/government/departments/commdev/planning/land-use-maps.asp.
Note: Figures LU-6A through LU-6K, which show base and overlay land use categories for
properties within City Limits, have been consolidated into a single electronic map, which is
noted on the above linked web page as “Figure LU-6”. Selecting the “Figure LU-6” link will
take readers to an index map from which they can select maps for subareas of the City.
                                            LU-36              Revised March 2014 per GPA 2014-001

City of El Paso de Robles
     General Plan 2003
         Noise Element
                Prepared for:
         City of El Paso de Robles
 Department of Community Development
             1000 Spring Street
       Paso Robles, California 93446
                   Contact:
Bob Lata, Community Development Director
               (805) 237-3970
                 Prepared by:
          Rincon Consultants, Inc.
       1530 Monterey Street, Suite D
     San Luis Obispo, California 93401
        Adopted December 16, 2003
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Noise Element
                                          NOISE ELEMENT
1.0 Goals, Policies and Action Items...................................................................................................N-1
2.0 Quantification of Noise Environment ..........................................................................................N-3
          Sensitive Receptors ...................................................................................................................N-5
     Sources of Noise in the Paso Robles Planning Area ...................................................................N-5
          Roadway Noise .........................................................................................................................N-5
          Railroad Operations................................................................................................................N-24
          Airport Operations .................................................................................................................N-26
          Commercial and Industrial Operations ...............................................................................N-26
          Agricultural Operations .........................................................................................................N-31
          Construction Noise .................................................................................................................N-31
Figures
     Figure N-1       Noise Compatibility Matrix .................................................................................N-4
     Figure N-2a      Existing Noise Contours, Northwest..................................................................N-7
     Figure N-2b      Existing Noise Contours, Southwest ..................................................................N-9
     Figure N-2c      Existing Noise Contours, Southeast..................................................................N-11
     Figure N-2d      Existing Noise Contours, Northeast .................................................................N-13
     Figure N-3a      Future Noise Contours, Northwest ..................................................................N-15
     Figure N-3b      Future Noise Contours, Southwest...................................................................N-17
     Figure N-3c      Future Noise Contours, Northeast....................................................................N-19
     Figure N-3d      Future Noise Contours, Southeast ....................................................................N-21
     Figure N-4       Existing Aircraft Noise Contours ......................................................................N-27
     Figure N-5       Future Aircraft Noise Contours.........................................................................N-29
Tables
     Table N-1        Existing (2003) Traffic Noise Levels....................................................................N-6
     Table N-2        Future (2025) Traffic Noise Levels ....................................................................N-23
     Table N-3        Existing (2003) Approximate Distance to Railroad Noise Contours............N-25
     Table N-4        Future (2025) Approximate Distance to Railroad Noise Contours ..............N-26
     Table N-5        Maximum Allowable Noise Exposure-Stationary Noise Sources ................N-32
                                                                N-i
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Noise Element
                                        NOISE ELEMENT
1.0 Goals, Policies, And Action Items
The goal of the Noise Element is to protect City residents from unacceptable exposure to noise,
including noise from the following sources: airport operations, vehicular traffic, rail operations,
industrial uses, and other point sources.
GOAL N-1: Minimize exposure to noise and generation of noise.
     POLICY N-1A: Noise Minimization. New development shall be designed to comply with
     the maximum, allowable Noise Exposures of 65 dB CNEL for outdoor activities (except for
     parks); and 45 dB CNEL for indoor activities.
     Noise measurement (dB Ldn or CNEL) is calculated using a daily average that takes into
     account the time of day the noise occurs. Sounds occurring at night are weighted more
     heavily.
          Action Item 1. Revise/update the noise performance standards as needed to be
          consistent with the Noise Element’s Goals, policies, and standards.
          Action Item 2. The City will periodically review and update the Noise Element to
          ensure that noise exposure information and specific policies are consistent with
          changing conditions within the City and with noise control regulations or policies
          enacted after the adoption of this element.
          Action Item 3. The City shall make the Acoustical Design Manual available to the
          public so that they can incorporate noise reduction measures into private projects
          consistent with the goals and policies of this Noise Element.
          Action Item 4. Incorporate appropriate noise attenuation features in the design of all
          new arterial streets.
          Action Item 5. Where feasible, require installation of noise barriers along arterial rights-
          of-way. To be effective, such barriers should have a solid continuous surface without
          any holes; it should be relatively tall enough to shield, or hide, the entire roadway when
          viewed from the nearest side of development.
          Action Item 6. Develop procedures to finance and facilitate construction of sound walls
          and other noise mitigation measures where the City Council determines they are needed
          along corridors.
          Action Item 7. When mitigation must be applied to satisfy City noise standards, the
          following priorities for mitigation shall be observed, where feasible:
                  First: Use of setbacks and/or open space separation;
                                                   N-1

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Noise Element
                  Second: Site layout/orientation/shielding of noise- sensitive uses with non-
                  noise-sensitive uses;
                  Third: Structural measures: acoustical treatment of buildings and noise barriers
                  constructed of concrete, wood or materials other than earth;
                  Fourth: Construction of earthen berms or soundwalls.
          Action Item 8. For new development of residential units mitigation shall proceed as
          described in Table N-6 as included in the Noise Element Technical Appendix. Where an
          acoustical analysis prepared by a noise expert is called for, the report of said analysis
          should be submitted prior to approval of a subdivision map, parcel map, conditional use
          permit, or development plan for apartments, so that decision makers can determine if
          Noise Element policies and standards are being properly implemented.
          Action Item 9. For new development of residential units where outdoor activity areas of
          a site are impacted with noise exceeding 65 dbA, the Development Review Committee
          may require installation of effective noise barriers.
          Action Item 10. For new development of residential units where mitigation measures
          are necessary to reduce interior noise levels to 45 dBA, the Building Official shall require
          incorporation of those measures listed in the Acoustic Design Manual (Volume III) for
          the appropriate amount of noise reduction.
          Action Item 11. For non-residential noise-sensitive uses, mitigation may proceed in a
          manner similar to that described in Table N-6 as included in the Noise Element
          Technical Appendix. Where an acoustical analysis prepared by a noise expert is called
          for, the report of said analysis should be submitted prior to approval of a subdivision
          map, parcel map, conditional use permit, or development plan so that decision makers
          can determine if Noise Element policies and standards are being properly implemented.
          Action Item 12. If the Community Development Director or his/her designee
          determines, from substantial evidence based on analysis, that a proposed new noise-
          sensitive land use may be exposed to noise levels that exceed City noise standards,
          notwithstanding the noise contour information in this Noise Element, an acoustical
          analysis meeting the requirements in Table N-7 of the Noise Element Appendix may be
          required.
          Action Item 13. Permit new development only where the noise level due to existing
          stationary noise sources will not exceed the noise level standards of Table N-5 or where
          noise mitigation measures have been incorporated into the design of the development to
          reduce noise exposure to or below the levels specified in Table N-5.
          Action Item 14. Where a new stationary noise source is proposed to be developed or an
          existing stationary noise source is proposed to be expanded, mitigation of noise levels
          that exceed those listed in Table N-5 shall be required. This program does not apply to
          noise levels associated with agricultural operations.
          Action Item 15. The City shall develop and employ procedures to ensure that noise
          mitigation measures required pursuant to an acoustical analysis or as specified in the
                                                  N-2
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Noise Element
          Noise Element are implemented in the development review and building permit
          processes.
          Action Item 16. Wherever feasible, maintain open space to provide attenuation zones
          between noise sources and receivers.
          Action Item 17.         The following measures shall be incorporated into contract
          specifications to reduce the impact of construction noise.
          •   All construction equipment shall have properly maintained sound-control devices.
              No equipment shall have an unmuffled exhaust.
          •   Contractors shall implement appropriate additional noise mitigation measures
              including, but not limited to, changing the location of stationary construction
              equipment, shutting off idling equipment, rescheduling construction activity,
              notifying adjacent residents in advance of construction work, or installing acoustic
              barriers around stationary construction noise sources.
     POLICY N-1B: Airport Noise. Minimize exposure to airport noise through implementation
     of the Airport Land Use Plan noise policies and programs.
          Action Item 1. Implement the provisions of the Airport Land Use Plan.
          Action Item 2. Within areas impacted by noise from aircraft operations, which includes
          all land subject to the adopted Airport Land Use Plan, avigation easements shall be
          required whenever feasible.
2.0 Quantification of Noise Environment
Figure N-1 presents the California Department of Health, Office of Noise Control, noise
compatibility guidelines for various land uses. The compatibility table illustrates the ranges of
community noise exposure in terms of what is “normally acceptable,” “conditionally
acceptable,” “normally unacceptable,” and “clearly unacceptable.” For the most sensitive uses
such as single family residential, 60 dBA Ldn or CNEL is the maximum normally acceptable
exterior level and 70 dBA Ldn or CNEL is the conditionally acceptable range. These guidelines
are included in the City of Paso Robles Noise Element and are used to assess whether or not
transportation noise can potentially pose a conflict with land development.
By adopting this Noise Element, the City sets its own transportation source noise standards for
outdoor activity areas and interior spaces. The maximum allowable noise exposure for outdoor
activity is 65 dBA Ldn and 45 dBA Ldn in interior spaces for residential, hotel and motel,
hospital and nursing home, theater, auditorium, meeting hall, office building, school, and
library uses. The exterior standard is comparable to the 65 dBA Leq, which is used by the
California Department of Transportation (CalTrans) and the Federal Highway Administration.
A discussion of noise measurement is included in the Noise Element Appendix as well as
strategies for noise attenuation and mitigation.
                                                  N-3

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Noise Element
                                                             COMMUNITY NOISE EXPOSURE
          LAND USE CATEGORY                                          Ldn or CNEL, dBA
                                                       55         60         65          70         75         80       85
          RESIDENTIAL - LOW DENSITY
          SINGLE FAMILY, DUPLEX,
          MOBILE HOMES
          RESIDENTIAL - MULTI-FAMILY
          TRANSIENT LODGING - MOTELS,
          HOTELS
          SCHOOLS, LIBRARIES,
          CHURCHES, HOSPITALS,
          NURSING HOMES
          AUDITORIUMS, CONCERT
          HALLS, AMPHITHEATRES
          SPORTS ARENA, OUTDOOR
          SPECTATOR SPORTS
          PLAYGROUNDS,
          NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS
          GOLF COURSES, RIDING
          STABLES, WATER RECREATION,
          CEMETERIES
          OFFICE BUILDINGS, BUSINESS
          COMMERCIAL AND
          PROFESSIONAL
          INDUSTRIAL, MANUFACTURING,
          UTILITIES, AGRICULTURE
          NORMALLY ACCEPTABLE                                        NORMALLY UNACCEPTABLE
          Specified land use is satisfactory, based                  New construction or development should
          upon the assumption that any buildings                     generally be discouraged. If new construction
          involved are of normal conventional                        or development does proceed, a detailed analysis
          construction, without any special noise                    of the noise reduction requirements must be
          insulation requirements.                                   made and needed noise insulation features
                                                                     included in the design
          CONDITIONALLY ACCEPTABLE                                   CLEARLY UNACCEPTABLE
          New construction or development should                     New construction or development should
          be undertaken only after a detailed analysis               generally not be undertaken.
          of the noise reduction requirements is made
          and needed noise insulation features included
          in the design. Conventional construction, but
          with closed windows and fresh air supply
          systems or air conditioning will normally
          suffice.
          Source: Guidelines for the Preparation and Content of Noise Elements of the General Plan,
          California Office of Planning and Research, 1998.
                                            Noise Compatibility Index                                              Figure N-1
                                                                                                     City of El Paso de Robles
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Noise Element
Sensitive Receptors
Noise exposure goals for various types of land uses reflect the varying noise sensitivities
associated with those uses. Residences, hospitals, schools, guest lodging, libraries, and parks
are most sensitive to noise intrusion and therefore have more stringent noise exposure targets
than manufacturing or agricultural uses that are not subject to impacts such as sleep
disturbance. Noise sensitive residential areas are located throughout the community.
Sources of Noise in the Paso Robles Planning Area
Roadway Noise
Roadway traffic is the primary source of noise in the City and Planning Area. Highway 101 and
State Route (SR) 46 carry by far the most traffic through the area, and are consequently the major
noise contributors. The existing (2003) 65 dBA Ldn contour from Highway 101 ranges from 264 to
494 feet from centerline, while the existing 65 dBA Ldn contour from SR 46 East ranges from 166 to
202 feet from centerline. Table N-1 shows data relative to the existing roadway traffic noise for
major streets and highways expressed as the distance to CNEL contour from centerline of the
roadway. These contours are expressed graphically in Figure N-2.
The only other roadways in the City and Planning Area that currently carry sufficient traffic to
produce audible noise at a substantial distance include: 24th Street, 13th Street, Airport Road, Buena
Vista Drive, Charolais Road, Creston Road, Golden Hill Road, Nacimiento Lake Drive, Niblick
Road, Sherwood Road, South River Road, Spring Street and Union Road. The existing 60 dBA Ldn
contour for these roads typically ranges from 50 to 160 feet, and less where there are intervening
structures, vegetation and/or topography. Airport Road, Buena Vista Drive, Charolais Road, Dry
Creek Road, Linne Road, Nickerson Drive, North River Road, Pine Street, Rolling Hills Road,
Ramada Drive, Rambouillet Road, Theater Drive, and Vine Street carry moderate traffic (1,000-
5,000 ADT), but not sufficient to produce far-reaching noise contours. The noise model predicts
that the 60 dBA Ldn contour would be less than 100 feet from the center of those roadways under
existing and future conditions.
Table N-2 illustrates the roadway noise increases that are anticipated to occur as a result of
General Plan buildout to the year 2025. Future noise contours for Highway 101, SR 46 East, and
the railroad in the City of Paso Robles are shown in Figure N-3.
The future (year 2025) 60 dBA Ldn contour from Highway 101 ranges from 842 to 1,418 feet from
centerline, while the future 60 dBA Ldn contour from Highway 46 East ranges from 485 to 634 feet
from centerline. However, these distances are likely less than modeled, because of attenuation
effects of topography, vegetation, and structures.
Highway 101. As shown in Table N-2 and Figure N-3, noise levels at the exterior of existing,
unobstructed (i.e., without sound walls or other intervening structures, vegetation, or
topography) residences near the Highway 101 would be expected to
                                                 N-5
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Noise Element
                                Table N-1. Existing (2003) Traffic Noise Levels
                                                                  Traffic  Distance to CNEL Contour from
                           Roadway Segment                        (ADT)           Centerline (feet)
                                                                            70 dB       65 dB       60 dB
 Highway 101
   South City Limits to Highway 46 West                            41,000    212         457         985
   Highway 46 West to Spring Street South                          46,000    229         494        1,064
   Spring Street South to 13th Street                              31,000    176         379         818
   13th Street to Highway 46 East                                  27,000    161         346         746
   Highway 46 East to Spring Street North                          20,300    133         286         617
   Spring Street North to North City Limits                        19,500    123         264         569
 Highway 46 East
   Highway 101 to Union Road                                       20,000     94         202         434
   Union Road to Airport Road                                      18,000     87         188         405
   Airport Road to Dry Creek Road/Jardine Road                     15,000     77         166         359
 City Roadways
   24th Street (Spring Street to Highway 101)                      15,570    RW           54         117
   13th Street (Spring Street to Riverside Avenue)                  9,500    RW           34          84
   13th Street (Riverside Avenue to South River Road)              15,820    RW           55         118
   Airport Road ( Highway 46 East to Dry Creek Road)                4,400    RW           49         106
   Charolais Road ( South River Road to Rambouillet Road)           3,710    RW           41          95
   Charolais Road (Rambouillet Road to Creston Road)                2,060    RW          RW           64
   Creston Road (South River Road to Golden Hill Road)             14,830     25          69         148
   Creston Road (Golden Hill Road to Niblick Road)                 13,320    RW           64         137
   Creston Road (Niblick Road to Charolais Road)                    8,680    RW          47          103
   Creston Road (Charolais Road to East City Limits)                2,990    RW          RW           51
   Golden Hill Road (Creston Road to Rolling Hills Road)            6,790    RW           66         142
   Golden Hill Road (Rolling Hills Road to Union Road)              7,800     27          72         155
   Golden Hill Road (Union Road to Highway 46 East)                 6,800    RW           66         142
   Nacimiento Lake Drive (West City Limits to 24th Street)          5,680    RW           45         100
   Niblick Road (Spring Street to South River Road)                19,710     34         83          179
   Niblick Road (South River Road to Melody Drive)                 16,210     28          73         157
   Niblick Road (Melody Drive to Creston Road)                     16,210     28         73          157
   Sherwood Road (Creston Road to Fontana Road)                     6,680    RW           36          87
   South River Road (South City Limits to Charolais Road)           2,940    RW          RW           64
   South River Road (Charolais Road to Niblick Road)                8,610    RW           61         132
   South River Road (Niblick Road to Navajo Road)                   5,900    RW           46         103
   South River Road (Navajo Road to Creston Road)                   5,900    RW          46          103
   Spring Street (1st Street to 13th Street)                       15,800     27         71          154
   Spring Street (13th Street to 24th Street)                      15,430     26         70          152
   Spring Street (24th Street to 36th Street)                      11,150    RW           57         122
  Union Road (North River Road to Walnut Drive)                     4,330    RW          RW           65
  Union Road (Walnut Drive to Golden Hill Road)                     2,930    RW          RW           50
  Union Road (Golden Hill Road to Highway 46 East)                  5,600    RW           30          77
  Union Road (Highway 46 East to Experimental Station Road)         1,710    RW          RW           29
  Buena Vista Dr. (Highway 46 East to Experimental Station Road)    3,220    RW           36          86
  Buena Vista Dr. (Experimental Station Road to North City          3,000    RW          33          82
     Limits)
RW: Noise contour falls within roadway right-of-way.
Source: Traffic volumes from Omni-Means (July 2003).
                                                        N-6
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Noise Element
                                 Table N-2. Future (2025) Traffic Noise Levels
                                                                    Traffic Distance to CNEL Contour from
                           Roadway Segment
                                                                    (ADT)          Centerline (feet)
                                                                             70 dB       65 dB       60 dB
Highway 101
    South City Limits to Highway 46 West                            70,800    305         658        1418
    Highway 46 West to Spring Street South                          61,800    279         601        1295
    Spring Street South to 13th Street                              38,200    226         487        1,048
    13th Street to Highway 46 East                                  47,100    233         502        1081
    Highway 46 East to Spring Street North                          34,700    190         409         881
    Spring Street North to North City Limits                        32,400    181         391         842
Highway 46 East
    Highway 101 to Union Road                                       35,300    137         294         634
    Union Road to Airport Road                                      33,900    133         287         617
    Airport Road to Dry Creek Road/Jardine Road                     23,600    104         225         485
City Roadways
    24th Street (Spring Street to Highway 101)                      17,500    RW           59         126
    Airport Road (S.R. 46 East to Dry Creek Road)                    9,800     34          84         181
    Airport Road (Union Road to S.R. 46 East)                       28,200     79         170         366
    Airport Road (Linne Road to Union Road)                         20,200     63         136         293
    Charolais Road (South River Road to Rambouillet Road)            7,400     26          70         150
    Charolais Road (Ramboullet Road to Creston Road)                 3,500    RW           39          91
    13th Street (Spring Street to Riverside Avenue)                 22,400     26          69         149
    13th Street (Riverside Avenue to South River Road)              28,000     32          80         173
    Creston Road (South River Road to Golden Hill Road)             15,200     26          70         150
    Creston Road (Golden Hill Road to Niblick Road)                 22,900     39          92         197
    Creston Road (Niblick Road to Charolais Road)                   10,600    RW           55         118
    Creston Road (Charolais Road to East City Limits)                5,000    RW           27          72
    Golden Hill Road (Creston Road to Rolling Hills Road)            6,900    RW           66         143
    Golden Hill Road (Rolling Hills Road to Union Road)              6,400    RW           63         136
    Golden Hill Road (Union Road to Highway 46 East)                 9,900     35          84         182
    Nacimiento Lake Drive (West City Limits to 24th Street)         11,000     27          72         155
    Niblick Road (Spring Street to South River Road)                25,300     43          98         211
    Niblick Road (South River Road to Rambouillet Road)             27,600     47         104         223
    Niblick Road (Rambouillet Road to Creston Road)                 27,000     46         102         220
    Sherwood Road (Creston Road to Fontana Road)                    20,600     35          85         184
    South River Road (South City Limits to Charolais Road)           4,900    RW           39          91
    South River Road (Charolais Road to Niblick Road)               18,500     46         102         220
    South River Road (Niblick Road to Navajo Road)                  10,200    RW           61         131
    South River Road (Navajo Road to Creston Road)                   8,600    RW           64         138
    Spring Street (1st Street to 13th Street)                       17,300     30          76         164
    Spring Street (13th Street to 24th Street)                      23,200     40          92         199
    Spring Street (24th Street to 36th Street)                      14,400    RW           67         145
   Union Road (North River Road to Walnut Drive)                     5,100    RW           28          72
   Union Road (Walnut Drive to Golden Hill Road)                     3,000    RW          RW           51
   Union Road (Golden Hill Road to Highway 46 East)                  4,000    RW          RW           62
   Union Road (Highway 46 East to East City Limits)                  5,700    RW           31          78
   Buena Vista Dr. (Highway 46 East to Experimental Station Road)   14,200     50         107         231
   Buena Vista Dr. (Experimental Station Road to North City Limits)  8,800     31          78         168
RW: Noise contour falls within roadway right-of-way.
Source: Traffic volumes from Omni-Means (July 2003).
experience noise levels in excess of 65 dBA Ldn. These levels are beyond the normally
acceptable and conditionally acceptable exterior noise levels for residential land uses.
                                                        N-23
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Noise Element
Development associated with full buildout of the General Plan would result in the 65 dBA
contour extending outward from the centerline of the freeway in the range of between 391 and
658 feet a difference of 127 to 164 feet beyond the existing 65 dBA contour.
At buildout, noise levels exceeding 65 dBA Ldn would be experienced within 601 feet of the
centerline of Highway 101 in the segment north of SR 46 West, assuming no attenuation for
topography, vegetation, or physical barriers, such as walls, berms or buildings.             Future
residential development located in the vicinity of the highway would be exposed to interior and
exterior noise levels that exceed City standards.
State Route 46 East. ADT volumes would also increase along SR 46 East as a result of General
Plan buildout. The existing 65 dBA contour for this corridor lies between 166 and 202 feet from
the roadway centerline.
Currently, there are limited residential uses located adjacent to SR 46 East between Highway
101 and Dry Creek Road. Some of the uses, particularly in the portion west of Buena Vista
Drive, are shielded from roadway noise by the road cut within which the highway is
constructed east of the Salinas River. This topographic feature attenuates exterior noise levels to
adjacent land uses along this segment.
City Arterials. A total of 34 arterial roadway segments were modeled based on existing and
future trip projections. Of these, only two are predicted to generate a 65 dBA noise contour
entirely within the right of way. The result is that the expected traffic on 32 roadway segments
projects this noise level onto adjacent property. To the extent that these are noise-sensitive land
uses, these land uses may experience noise levels exceeding City standards.
In all cases, projected trip increases as a result of General Plan Update buildout would result in
the extension of the 65 dBA contour outward for the 2025 modeled year. Therefore, noise levels
can be expected to increase along all of the City’s arterial roadways.
Railroad Operations
The Union Pacific Railroad (UPRR) operates one rail line through the City. The UPRR corridor
runs in a generally north-south direction through the City, on the east side of Highway 101
from the southern City boundary north to approximately the northbound Highway 101 Spring
Street exit, and on the west side of Highway 101 from the northbound Spring Street exit to the
southbound Highway 101 Spring Street exit, where it crosses back to the east side of Highway
101 to the northern City boundary.
UPRR officials could not release the precise number of daily trains that travel through the City,
but it is estimated that about four freight and two passenger trains is typical. One of the freight
trains generally passes through the Planning Area at night, between the hours of 10:00 PM and
7:00 AM.
It is anticipated that freight and passenger train use could expand during the planning horizon
timeframe. The use of the corridor for rail traffic causes high noise levels intermittently as
trains pass through the City. In addition, warning whistles from trains and warning arms at at-
                                                 N-24

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Noise Element
grade street crossings cause a degree of nuisance noise unique to rail activity. Freight trains can
be louder than passenger trains because they typically use more engines and are longer. At this
time it is not known how many trains would be operating on the UPRR corridor in the future.
A variety of railroad operating conditions occur in the planning area due to the presence of
grade crossings, curves, grades, and congested areas. For this reason, speeds and the use of the
warning horn vary considerably from location to location.
Noise measurements were conducted on this rail line to determine the contribution of freight
and passenger rail operations to the noise environment. The goal of the noise measurements
was to determine the typical sound exposure levels (SEL), accounting for travel speed, warning
horns, locomotive noise, and other factors contributing to noise
generation. The average SEL for the observed freight trains was 98-101 dB at a distance of 100
feet from the track centerline; for the passenger trains, the average SEL was 93-104 dB. Based
on this information, the calculated existing noise contour distances from each rail line are
shown in Table N-3. At approximately 50 feet from the tracks, SEL values were approximately
110 dB for freight trains and 87-106 dB for passenger trains.
           Table N-3. Existing (2003) Approximate Distance to Railroad Noise Contours
                                               Ldn, at      Distance to Ldn contour (feet)
                         Train Source         100 feet       70           65           60
                   Union Pacific (freight)       61.6         -            -            -
                   Amtrak (passenger)            59.9         -            -            -
                   Combined Ldn                  61.6        28           59          128
To determine the distance to noise contours, it is necessary to calculate the Ldn for typical rail
operations. This is accomplished by using the recorded SEL values and the known number of
trains. The Ldn may be calculated as follows:
          Ldn = SEL + 10logN – 49.4 dB, where
          •   SEL is the mean SEL of the event,
          •   N is the sum of the number of day and evening trains per day plus 10 times the number of
              nighttime (10:00 PM to 7:00 AM) trains per day, and
          •   49.4 is ten times the logarithm of the number of seconds per day.
Operational data for future conditions was estimated to include eight freight trains and four
passenger trains per day. It was estimated that 50% of the freight trains and one of the
passenger trains would pass through the planning area during nighttime hours. This would be
considered a worst-case estimate of future railroad operations. Based on this information, the
calculated noise contour distances from each rail line are shown in Table N-4. The mean SEL
values at 100 feet used for the calculations for areas away from grade crossings and horn usage
were 94.5 dB for passenger trains and 99.7 dB for freight trains. For areas within 1,000 feet of
grade crossings where horns are likely to be used, mean SEL values used for calculations were
100.4 dB for passenger trains and 101.7 dB for freight trains.
                                                      N-25

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Noise Element
            Table N-4: Future (2025) Approximate Distance to Railroad Noise Contours
                                            Ldn, at     Distance to Ldn contour (feet)
                        Train Source        100 feet     70           65           60
                   Union Pacific (freight)    67.1        -            -            -
                   Amtrak (passenger)         56.6        -            -            -
                   Combined Ldn               67.1       64          138          297
Airport Operations
The Paso Robles Municipal Airport is a public use airport located in the northeastern portion of
the Planning Area, off Airport Road, north of Highway 46 East. Noise contours associated with
airport operations were developed as part of the 2003 Noise Element of the General Plan. Noise
level data from previous studies were utilized to illustrate areas near the airport where aircraft
noise levels potentially exceed the noise level standard established by state law. Figure N-4
illustrates the current noise contours based on projected increases in aircraft use. This map has
been used for land use planning purposes to illustrate where noise from aircraft operations can
be expected. This map will be revised as part of the pending Airport Master Plan update.
The Airport Land Use Plan indicates that the number of operations at the Paso Robles Municipal
Airport is expected to increase. The City has, however, been active in using land use controls to
address potential conflicts from airport activities and noise-sensitive land uses. For example, lands
around the airport have been restricted from residential and substantial retail land use
development. As a result, aircraft noise has not been a major issue in the City and Planning Area.
Figure N-5 shows the proposed airport noise contours.
The General Plan continues this land use control technique. The general traffic pattern zone is
northeast to southwest, over the agricultural and grazing lands to the northeast, and over
industrial park-designated lands to the southwest. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
ordinance requires that aircraft maintain an altitude of at least 1,500 feet above sea level when
approaching or departing the City. It should be noted that the General Plan Update does not
change any land use designations in the Airport Planning Area to residential use.
Commercial and Industrial Operations
Commercial and industrial operations can be substantial sources of noise, depending on the
specific type of use and hours of operation. Stationary noise sources of concern typically include
generators, pumps, air compressors, outdoor speakers, motors, heavy equipment and similar
machinery. These are often associated with trucking companies, tire shops, auto mechanic shops,
metal shops, shopping centers, drive-up windows, car washes, loading docks, athletic fields, and
electric generating stations.
                                                   N-26
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Noise Element
Existing or planned commercial/industrial operations may result in noise impacts when they
are adjacent to noise sensitive land uses. Noise generation within an industrial or commercial
facility or in close proximity to many types of agricultural equipment is controlled indirectly by
Federal and State employee health and safety regulations (e.g., OSHA and Cal-OSHA), but
exterior noise emissions from such operations nevertheless have the potential to exceed locally
acceptable standards and nearby noise-sensitive land uses. Typical commercial and industrial
noise sources include loading dock operations, parking lot activity, on-site equipment
(including heating and air conditioning), and heavy truck idling. Currently, potential
stationary noise impacts in the City are most common near the following locations:
     •    The Commerce Industrial Park, located on Commerce Way and south of Sherwood Road. This
          industrial area includes various manufacturing plants.
     •    The North River Road Area. Businesses in this area include a concrete “redi-mix” plant, auto
          body shop, grading and paving company, and several other industrial uses.
     •    The area near San Luis Tank, located near 26th Street and east of Spring Street. The facility
          manufactures oil and water storage tanks. Principal noise sources associated with the plant are
          the cutting, grinding and welding of sheet metal.
     •    The Union/Golden Hill Road Area. This area includes a welding operation and other industrial
          uses.
     •    The northern portions of the City nearest to Camp Roberts, which is located approximately 8
          miles north of the City, along Highway 101. Camp Roberts is a training site for the California
          Army National Guard. Noise sources associated with the facility include ground-based sources
          such as artillery, demolitions, and small arms fire, and from fixed and rotary-wing aircraft
          (helicopters).
Agricultural Operations
Agricultural operations produce noise associated with the following equipment: wind
machines, cotton gins, diesel engines, aerial application aircrafts (crop dusters), cotton pickers,
bird frightening devices, and tractors. Many of these noise sources lie outside the City and are
related to seasonal operations. While these sources may periodically affect City residents they
are usually outside the City’s jurisdiction to enforce noise ordinances. Packing operations,
including refrigeration trucks, and movement of farm equipment are sources of noise that have
the potential to affect sensitive receptors in the City, but are not a constant source of noise.
Construction Noise
In general, the grading phase of project construction tends to create the highest noise levels
because of the operation of heavy equipment. Noise levels associated with heavy equipment
typically range between 75–95 dBA at 50 feet from the source (EPA, 1971). Continuous
operation of this equipment during a nine-hour workday can cause high noise levels above the
present ambient levels.
Where new development is proposed in a location that may be affected by existing stationary
noise sources. Noise at the proposed location shall not exceed the noise level standards of Table
N-5 or where noise mitigation measures have been incorporated into the design of the
development to reduce noise exposure to or below the levels specified in Table N-5. These
standards do not apply to noise sources agricultural operations.
                                                    N-31

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Noise Element
                                                         Table N-5.
                 Maximum Allowable Noise Exposure-Stationary Noise Sources1
                                                                    Daytime                           Nighttime
                                                              (7 a.m. to 10 a.m.)                 (10 p.m. to 7 a.m.)
Hourly L, dB2                                                          50                                 45
Maximum level, dB2                                                     70                                 65
Maximum level, dB-Impulsive Noise3                                     65                                 60
1 As  determined at the property line of the receiving land use. When determining the effectiveness of noise
   mitigation measures, the standards may be applied on the receptor side of noise barriers or other property
   line noise mitigation measures.
2 Sound level measurements shall be made with slow meter response.
3  Sound level measurements shall be made with fast meter response.
NOTE: "Slow" and "fast" meter responses are switch settings on noise meters. The slow setting dampens impulsive
   fluctuations to give an average noise level; the fast setting allows recordation of impulsive noises.
                                                                  N-32
City of El Paso de Robles
     General Plan 2003
   Open Space Element
                Prepared for:
         City of El Paso de Robles
 Department of Community Development
             1000 Spring Street
       Paso Robles, California 93446
                   Contact:
Bob Lata, Community Development Director
               (805) 237-3970
                 Prepared by:
          Rincon Consultants, Inc.
       1530 Monterey Street, Suite D
     San Luis Obispo, California 93401
        Adopted December 16, 2003
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
                                              OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
1.0 Goals, Policies and Action Items.................................................................................................OS-1
2.0 Open Space Issues.........................................................................................................................OS-2
     Agriculture .....................................................................................................................................OS-2
     Soils..................................................................................................................................................OS-3
     Purple Belt ......................................................................................................................................OS-3
     Natural Resources .........................................................................................................................OS-7
     Land Use Conflicts ........................................................................................................................OS-7
Figures
     Figure OS-1            Important Farmlands ..........................................................................................OS-5
Tables
     Table OS-1             Soils and Agricultural Capability......................................................................OS-7
                                                                            OS-i
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
                                  OPEN SPACE ELEMENT
Conservation of open space within and around Paso Robles will contribute to the City’s quality
of life. Paso Robles is characterized by its agricultural and naturally scenic setting that provides
economic and recreational opportunities. Agricultural lands supply a great source of income to
business and employees in the Paso Robles area.            Recreational land is also an important
amenity of the planning area, and the City will preserve land for recreational activities, and
encourage private recreational developments and other uses beneficial for the residents of the
planning area. Scenic land is a prized asset to Paso Robles and will remain one of the principal
attractions for residents and visitors of the City.
1.0 Goals, Policies, And Action Items
GOAL OS-1: Preserve/expand the amount and quality of open space in and around Paso
Robles.
     POLICY OS-1A: Open Space/Purple Belt. Develop an open space plan/program for
     establishing an open space/ purple belt (agricultural preserve area) surrounding the City.
          Action Item 1. This plan/program is to address the following:
          •   Open space acquisition
          •   Acquisition priorities
          •   Maintenance and Monitoring of City-owned open space areas
          Action Item 2. Reserve easements for public access, preferably trail access, to large units
          of public land.
          Action Item 3. Develop strategies for pursuing federal, state, and private funding for
          the Open Space/Purple Belt plan/program.
          Action Item 4. Review development projects to ensure they complement the natural
          environment and agricultural lands, as applicable, in their location and design.
          Action Item 5. Investigate and implement, if feasible, the transfer of development rights
          from open space lands to other lands and dedication of conservation easements where
          appropriate.
          Action Item 6. Strive to establish an agricultural buffer between publicly-accessible
          open spaces and bordering agricultural lands.
          Action Item 7. Coordinate the City’s Open Space/Purple Belt plan/program with
          neighboring communities, the County of San Luis Obispo, and non-profit agencies.
                                                 OS-1

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
          Action Item 8. Investigate and implement as appropriate and feasible with San Luis
          Obispo County, establishment of permanent agricultural and open space areas that
          buffer communities from continuous urbanization and promote efficient growth
          patterns.
          Action Item 9: Take steps to ensure that the County retains surrounding lands in very
          low-density rural residential, open space (including natural resource), and agricultural
          uses. Oppose the creation of new parcels within the County.
          Action Item 10:       Implement strategies that help preserve or protect agriculture,
          including:
          •   Establishment of agricultural buffer easements, berms and/or vegetative screening,
              on property proposed for urban development as a condition of approval of
              discretionary development applications.
          •    Implement the City’s adopted “right-to-farm” ordinance.
          •   Participation in the Williamson Act and other farmland preservation programs.
          Action Item 11. Require disclosure agreements for new non-agricultural development
          within 500 feet of an existing agricultural use. Such disclosure agreements should
          describe potential nuisances (e.g., dust, noise, pesticide spraying, etc.) associated with
          normal agricultural operations.
2.0 Open Space Issues
Three types of open space identified in and near Paso Robles are:
     •    Agriculture;
     •    Natural Resources; and,
     •    Recreation Areas.
Each of these open space resources are discussed separately. Recreation areas are addressed in
the Parks & Recreation Element.
Agriculture
The majority of the agricultural soils in Paso Robles had historically been used for cultivated
crops and rangeland. Cultivated crops in the planning area include dry farmed grain hay,
barley, oats, safflower and wheat. Orchard crops include apples, walnuts, pistachios, and
almonds.
Over the past 20 years, croplands in Paso Robles have been increasingly converted from dry
grain crops and pasture to wine grape vineyards. Wine grapes now dominate the agricultural
landscape both within the City and in adjacent areas. These wine grapes are both dry farmed
and irrigated.
                                                OS-2

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
Agricultural uses within the City limits are concentrated north of Highway 46 East and north of
the City’s Airport. These agricultural lands contribute to the rural setting surrounding Paso
Robles and provide a transition between urban development and the surrounding areas.
Soils
Prime soils in the City include Lockwood shaley loam, Hanford and Greenfield gravelly sandy
loam, Arbuckle fine sandy loam, and Cropley Clay, when irrigated (refer to Table OS-1). Soils
within the City are generally well to moderately-drained soils with a surface layer of coarse
sandy loam to shaley loam west of the Salinas River, ranging to clay loam east of the River. The
soils in this unit were formed in alluvium derived from mixed rock on terraces. Soils in the
eastern portion of the City are considered to be moderate-to-poorly drained. The frost-free
season for the City is about 200 days. Figure OS-1 illustrates Important Farmland within the
City and existing and proposed Sphere of Influence areas. Soils and agricultural compatibility
are listed below in Table OS-1.
According to the California Department of Conservation, San Luis Obispo County lost
approximately 260 acres of agricultural land during the 1996-1998 mapping period. Additionally,
the County committed 725 acres of agricultural land to non-agricultural use during this period.
Since the California Department of Conservation’s 1988-1990 mapping cycle, approximately 8,365
acres of agricultural land in the County have been placed in non-agricultural use. However, the
net loss of agricultural land in the County has been partially offset by the conversion of 163 acres
of urban land to cropland and grazing land, with many acres of new vineyards planted in the
Paso Robles area.
The Chandler Ranch area has been historically utilized for grazing and dry land farming. This
area is currently vacant and is characterized by rolling hill terrain with a major north-south
trending ridgeline in the central portion of the site.
Overall, there are currently 1,067 acres of land currently designated Agriculture within exiting
City limits, comprising approximately 9 percent of the City’s total land designation area. No
lands designated for Agriculture by the City would be converted to other uses under the 2003
Open Space Element.
Purple Belt
In the Paso Robles area and the County as a whole, the vineyard industry has experienced growth
over the past 20 years. In 1997, San Luis Obispo County became the fourth largest premium
coastal vineyard area in California, after Sonoma, Napa, and Monterey Counties. In 1977, the
total planted winegrape acreage in the County was approximately 4,000 acres. Currently, in the
Paso Robles area alone, approximately 17,500 acres are planted with winegrapes (Paso Robles
Vintners and Growers Association, 2001), with approximately 13,000 acres bearing (Don Curlee,
Western Agricultural Publishing Company, Grapegrower Magazine, 2000). Of this acreage,
approximately 6,100 acres are planted with Cabernet Sauvignon grapes, approximately 2,900
acres are planted with Merlot grapes, and approximately 2,300 acres are planted with
Chardonnay grapes. More than 35 different varieties of winegrape are grown in the Paso Robles
area.
                                                OS-3

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
The Open Space Element does not, at this time, establish the boundaries of the belt, but instead
establishes a policy to study and determine the boundaries of a Purple Belt (wine grape belt)
and a process through which the City could purchase development rights in the Purple Belt
area. The boundaries of a Purple Belt (wine grape and other agriculture belt) is intended to
ensure protection of vineyard and other AG resources, open space, and to prevent expansion
and sprawl of urban development. It is intended to preserve the County’s sense of rural
character by preserving open space corridors between existing communities. Open space can
also serve the function of a buffer between conflicting land uses and allow clustering of
residential uses within the planning area with density incentives for setting aside lands for open
space.
                                              OS-4

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
Natural Resources
Natural Resources within the planning area include groundwater and surface water
resources, biological resources, visual resources, cultural resources, and mineral
resources. These resources and goals and policies that address these resources are
discussed in the Conservation Element. Open space for flood plain purposes is
addressed in the Land Use Element, and open space for public health and safety related
to earthquake fault zones, and unstable soil areas are addressed in the Safety Element.
Land Use Conflicts
Residents living adjacent to agricultural lands often cite odor nuisance impacts, noise from
farm equipment, vehicle conflicts, dust and pesticide spraying as land use conflicts.
Conflicts between farm vehicles and high-speed automobiles used by residents on adjacent
roadways can lead to accidents. Pesticide spraying can result in health hazards, while odor
and noise are nuisances that can affect the enjoyment of private dwellings. Increased dust
from soils and farm equipment can be both a nuisance and a health hazard.
                                 Table OS-1: Soils and Agricultural Capability
                Soil Name and Number                                              Agricultural Capability Subclass
Linne-Calodo Complex                                              Class IVe-1 (15) Irrigated
(152, 153, 154)                                                   Class IVe-1 (15) Nonirrigated
Lockwood Shaley Loam                                              Class IIe-4 (14) Irrigated
(158)                                                             Class IVe-4 (14) Nonirrigated
Hanford and Greenfield Gravelly Sandy Loam                        Class IIe-4 (14) Irrigated
(150)                                                             Class IVe-4 (14) Nonnirrigated
Metz-Tujunga Complex (167)                                        Class IVw-4 (14) Nonirrigated
Xerofluvents (Riverwash) (212)                                    Class VIIIw (14) Nonirrigated
Metz Loamy Sand (166)                                             Class IIIs-4 (14) Irrigated
                                                                  Class IVs-4 (14) Nonirrigated
Arbuckle Fine Sandy Loam (100)                                    Class I (14) Irrigated
                                                                  Class IVc-1 (14) Nonirrigated
Cropley Clay (132)                                                Class IIs-5 (14) Irrigated
                                                                  Class IVs-5 (14) Nonirrigated
Class I soils have few limitations that restrict their use.
Class II soils have moderate limitations that reduce the choice of plants or that require special conservation practices or both.
Class III soils have severe limitations that reduce the choice of plants or that require special conservation practices or both.
Class IV soils have very severe limitations that reduce the choice of plants or that require very careful management or both.
Class VIII soils and landforms have limitations that nearly preclude their use for commercial crop production.
Capability subclass letters describe the main limitations for soil types, as follows:
“c”: Too cold or too dry; “e”: Erosion; “s”: shallow, droughty or stony; “w”: water interference.
Soil types with a Land Resource Area designation of (14) occur in the Central California Coastal Valleys; soils with a designation of
(15) occur in the Central California Coastal Range.
Source: NRCS, Soil Survey of San Luis Obispo County, California, Paso Robles Area (1983).
The placement of residential development adjacent to farmland can also have several
negative impacts on farm operations. Direct physical impacts include vandalism to farm
equipment or fencing, and theft of fruits and vegetables. Soil compaction from trespassers
or equestrians can also damage crop potential. These can result in indirect economic
impacts. Decreased air quality from adjacent urban development can also result in impacts
to farmland.
                                                                   OS-7

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
Placement of residences adjacent to cultivated agriculture can also have economic impacts
to growers. Increased regulations and liability insurance to protect the farmer from
adjacent urban uses cost time and money. Some farmers sensitive to nearby residences
voluntarily limit their hours of operation and do not intensively use the portions of their
property closest to urban uses, in effect establishing informal buffer zones on their own
property. This has the effect of lowering crop yields, which can potentially affect the long-
term economic viability of the agricultural operation. These types of economic impacts
could ultimately cause the loss of agricultural production due to cessation of operations if
the economic impacts become severe enough. The City’s has a right to farm ordinance to
assist in the protection of on-going agricultural operation from nuisance lawsuits.
Conflicts between agriculture and other land uses can be minimized by protecting the
rights of farmers, increasing communication and education between farmers and adjacent
property owners, and maintaining buffers between potentially conflicting uses. Policies are
included in this Open Space Element and the Land Use Element to minimize land use
conflicts.
                                            OS-8

  City of El Paso de Robles
       General Plan 2003
Parks and Recreation Element
                  Prepared for:
           City of El Paso de Robles
   Department of Community Development
               1000 Spring Street
         Paso Robles, California 93446
                     Contact:
  Bob Lata, Community Development Director
                 (805) 237-3970
                   Prepared by:
            Rincon Consultants, Inc.
         1530 Monterey Street, Suite D
       San Luis Obispo, California 93401
          Adopted December 16, 2003
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Parks and Recreation Element
                     PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
1.0 Goals, Policies and Action Items................................................................................................. PR-1
2.0 Recreation Issues ........................................................................................................................... PR-3
Tables
     Table PR-1       Park and Recreation Facility Improvements ................................................... PR-1
                                                                  PR-i
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Parks and Recreation Element
                      PARKS AND RECREATION ELEMENT
1.0 Goals, Policies and Action Items
The development and management of parks and recreational facilities are addressed in this
Element.
As population, disposable income and leisure time increases so does the demand for parks and
recreation facilities. Trends which have an impact on parks and recreation planning include:
     •    Changes in demographic characteristics, such as population growth, shifts in age
          distribution, increases in disposable income and improved mobility;
     •    Changes in recreation trends, such as growth or decline in participation in particular
          activities;
     •    Changes in emphasis on providing facilities to serve special groups of persons including
          the aged or handicapped;
     •    Changes in governmental funding;
Changes in land use development patterns, leading to higher densities in many areas and
resulting in a smaller proportion of the total population having access to private open space.
GOAL PR-1: Optimize the use and development of parks and recreation facilities to serve the
existing and projected population.
     POLICY PR-1A. Park and Recreation Facilities.           Strive to achieve a 7-acres per 1,000
     population parkland standard.
          Action Item 1. Periodically assess usage of park facilities, and identify physical changes
          needed to accommodate anticipated land use patterns.
          Action Item 2. Implement improvements at existing parks, including completion of
          recreation facilities.
          Action Item 3. Allow activities and land uses near park areas that are compatible with
          the setting of a park.
          Action Item 4. Cooperate with other agencies, including the County, Paso Robles
          Unified School District and Cuesta College, in park funding and joint use of park
          facilities.
          Action Item 5. Require specific plans to include parks as appropriate.
     POLICY PR-1B: Master Plan. Develop a Master Park, Recreational Facility, & Trails Plan
     addressing Citywide needs and financing for development, maintenance, and operation
     through the year 2025.
                                                  PR-1

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Parks and Recreation Element
          Action Item 1. Complete a needs assessment to identify and prioritize Park and
          Recreation Facility improvements.              Consideration is to be given to the following
          improvements:
                         Table PR-1. Park and Recreation Facility Improvements
         EXISTING IDENTIFIED PARK AND FACILITY NEEDS
         10-acre park north of 24th Street. This should include ballfields, which may replace that at
         Pioneer Park, and may be located between Spring Street and the Railroad.
         Aquatic center, preferably covered, probably a joint venture between the City, school district,
         and Cuesta College. Most likely to be located at Cuesta College.
         10-acre park near the Borkey area
         Chandler Ranch Area Specific Plan:. park in conjunction with any new school site
         7-10 acre park in Union/46 Specific Plan area
         OTHER NEEDED IMPROVEMENTS
         Recreation Facilities
         Youth Center
         Neighborhood Center (on east side)
         Nature Center, with large contiguous open space area
         Enhance crossing of Riverside Avenue to allow for connectivity between fairgrounds and
         parking lot east of Riverside Avenue
         Public Equestrian staging area
         General Recreation Services
         Parks
         No Pocket Parks needed, only larger facilities
         The redevelopment of Oak Park Public Housing should include provision of a park to serve
         the recreational needs of the neighborhood
         Develop a neighborhood park in conjunction with the First 5 Early School Readiness and
         Family Center on the northeast corner of Oak and 36th Streets
         Redevelop Robbins Field as envisioned in the Uptown/Town Centre Specific Plan, provided
         that a replacement ballfield of similar size and amenities is first developed in a location that is
         easily accessible to West Side residents.
         Conversion of Marie Bauer Elementary School Site to a public park that provides educational
         facilities to the community.
         Bikeways and Trails
         Bikeways as indicated in the City’s Bikeway Plan
         Trail near railroad within 4th Street Specific Plan
         Make trail connections between parks facilities citywide
         Pursue De Anza Trail along Salinas River
         Salinas River trail on either side of the river between Robert Rader (13th Street) and Veteran’s
         Memorial (Niblick Road) bridges
         Chandler Ranch Area Specific Plan trail system
         Complete the Class I pathway from Creston Road along South River Road
         Plans/Programs
         Pursue Public Art in Parks Program (development should fund public art in parks)
         Implement Master Plan of Bikeways
         Develop Multi-Purpose Trail Plan
         Expand Bikeway trails map to include pedestrian trails
                                                       PR-2                           Rev 05/11 per GPA 2011-001

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Parks and Recreation Element
          Action Item 2 (Funding). Seek State, Federal and local grants, and individual, private
          and corporate support, to improve City parks and recreation services.
          •   Finance those aspects of the Master Plan not funded through grants, fees or land
              dedications through such approaches as: general obligation bonds; revenue bonds;
              Mello Roos Community Facility District bonds; assessments in existing or new
              special districts; and general fund tax increase.
          •   Update as necessary the Park Development Fee to implement the Master Plan
              requirements as it relates to the responsibility of developers.
          •   Continue to promote the use of volunteers and community groups for the provision
              of recreation programs, services, operation and maintenance and development of
              parks.
          •   Consider use of special districts, such as benefit-maintenance districts, to provide for
              parkland, maintenance and recreation facilities and programming.
          •   As part of the budget process, review system-wide operational and maintenance
              costs compared to fiscal resources; review new facilities as to their long-term impact
              on maintenance capabilities.
          •   Actively pursue concession and self-managed operations and fee increases if
              determined to be fiscally appropriate.
          Action Item 3. Investigate and implement, if feasible, acquisition of land, in fee or in
          easement, within the floodplains of the Salinas River and the Huerhuero Creek for the
          development of a park, equestrian paths or other public active and passive recreational
          uses. In the interim, require irrevocable (perpetual) offers of dedication for land
          adjacent to the Salinas River and Huerhuero Creek as a condition of approval of
          discretionary development applications. These irrevocable offers will not be accepted
          until said investigation has been completed and a decision has been made to acquire
          floodplain lands.
          Action Item 4 (Salinas River Corridor). Create and adopt a Salinas River Corridor Plan
          to address such issues as recreation, conservation, use, public access, and educational
          outreach. The plan would apply to the Salinas River Overlay area shown on the General
          Plan Land Use Map indicated in the General Plan Land Use Element.
          •   Cooperate with neighboring public agencies to establish the DeAnza Trail along the
              Salinas River as a link in a regional trail system.
          •   Cooperate with organizations and volunteers dedicated to the preservation of
              natural areas within the corridor.
2.0 Recreation Issues
The Parks and Recreation Element Appendix contains an inventory of existing parks and
recreation facilities as well as a discussion of the values of parks and recreation opportunities in
the vicinity of Paso Robles.
                                                   PR-3

City of El Paso de Robles
    General Plan 2003
        Safety Element
                Prepared for:
         City of El Paso de Robles
 Department of Community Development
             1000 Spring Street
       Paso Robles, California 93446
                  Contact:
  Community Development Department
   (805) 237-3970; planning@prcity.com
                Prepared by:
         Rincon Consultants, Inc.
       1530 Monterey Street, Suite D
     San Luis Obispo, California 93401
       Adopted December 16, 2003;
 Amended as noted on the following pages.
This page left blank intentionally
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                       Table of Adoption and Amendments for Safety Element
                               City Council
           Date                                                       Action
                                Resolution
December 16, 2003                  03-232     Adoption of a comprehensive update of the General Plan
November 19, 2014                  14-150     General Plan Amendment 2014-003
                                                S-i
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Land Use Element
                                          Table of Contents for Safety Element
1.0     Goals, Policies and Action Items ............................................................................................. S-1
2.0     Safety Issues ............................................................................................................................. S-3
          2.1 Critical Facilities ............................................................................................................ S-4
          2.2 Seismic and Geologic Hazards ...................................................................................... S-4
          2.3 Flood Hazard.................................................................................................................. S-5
          2.4 Fire Hazard .................................................................................................................... S-9
Figures
Figure S-1      Critical Facilities ......................................................................................................... S-10
Figure S-2      Regional Faults ........................................................................................................... S-11
Figure S-3      Liquefaction Risk ........................................................................................................ S-12
Figure S-4      Landslide Risk............................................................................................................. S-13
Figure S-5      Flood Insurance Rate Map .......................................................................................... S-14
Figure S-6a     DWR Awareness Floodplain (Northwest Quadrant) .................................................. S-15
Figure S-6b     DWR Awareness Floodplain (Northeast Quadrant).................................................... S-16
Figure S-6c     DWR Awareness Floodplain Southwest Quadrant) .................................................... S-17
Figure S-6d     DWR Awareness Floodplain (Southeast Quadrant).................................................... S-18
Figure S-7      Salinas Dam Failure Inundation .................................................................................. S-19
Figure S-8      Fire Severity Zones, Local and State Responsibility Areas ........................................ S-20
Tables
Table S-1       Estimated Regional Maximum Credible Earthquake Events ...................................... S-5
Table S-2       Vulnerable Population and Residential Buildings to 100-Year
                and 500-Year Floodplain Events................................................................................. S-7
                                                                         S-ii
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
                                       SAFETY ELEMENT
The Safety Element establishes goals, policies and action items to protect the community from
risks associated with fires, flood, geologic hazards and other phenomena that put lives and
property at risk. Technical supporting data can be found both in the Safety Element Technical
Appendix and the portions of the San Luis Obispo County Safety Element that pertain to the
Paso Robles area.
1.0 Goals, Policies, and Action Items
GOAL S-1: Minimize exposure to natural and manmade hazards.
POLICY S-1A: Hazard Education. Continue to inform the public about hazards, hazard
avoidance, and disaster response.
     Action Item 1. Distribute informational handouts.
     Action Item 2. Support volunteer training aimed at assisting police, fire, and civil defense
     personnel during and after a major earthquake, fire, or flood.
     Action Item 3. Support/sponsor exhibits and presentations in secondary schools.
     Action Item 4. Support the Department of Emergency Services’ Weed Abatement Program
     to remove all combustible vegetation from yards or larger land parcels to reduce fire hazard.
POLICY S-1B: Disaster Response. Review/Update the community-wide Multi-Hazard
Emergency Response Plan on a periodic basis.
     ♦    Addresses heavy search and rescue, major medical response, hazardous material
          response, interim morgue, emergency shelter, traffic and utility impacts, and debris
          removal and disposal; and
     ♦    Identifies procedures for access, traffic control, emergency evacuations, and security of
          damaged areas.
     Action Item 1. Maintain Mutual and Automatic Aid Agreements with regional fire
     prevention and law enforcement agencies.
     Action Item 2. Review/Update the Emergency Services Growth Management Plan on a
     periodic basis.
     Action Item 3. Incorporate fire and crime prevention measures in the design and
     construction of new development via the following:
          a. Seek Fire and Police Department comments on development applications;
          b. Adopt the latest version of the Uniform Building and Fire Codes and related
              building safety codes;
                                                   S-1              Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
          c. Implement the Building Security Ordinance;
          d. Incorporate concepts of “defensible space” (these concepts stress the importance of
              physical design and surveillance as techniques to deter crime) in reviewing
              development projects.
     Action Item 4. Coordinate with emergency services to evaluate the potential vulnerability of
     wildfire hazards including accumulation of fuels (such as brush, etc.), and implement
     measures consistent with the Draft Local Hazard Mitigation Plan to reduce the risk from fire
     hazards.
POLICY S-1C: Hazardous Exposure Minimization. Minimize hazards to people and property
caused by fire, crime, and related services.
    Action Item 1. Police Service Standards. Maintain a ratio of 0.5 non-sworn police personnel per
    1,000 population and a ratio of 1.4 to 1.6 sworn police personnel per 1,000 population.
    Action Item 2. Emergency Services Standards. Maintain a ratio of 0.8 to 1.3 Firefighters per
    1,000 population.
    Action Item 3. As part of the environmental review of new Specific Plans, require
    preparation of fire station analysis identifying staffing requirements, station location, and
    response times.
POLICY S-1D: Structural Safety. Rely on the City’s planning and building permit review
process to ensure that existing and proposed structures are adequately designed, and to reduce
susceptibility to damage from fire, flooding, and geologic hazards.
     Action Item 1. Review and update, as necessary, the City’s Building Security &
     Construction Standards for new development projects to address:
     • Exterior Lighting;
     • Surveillance devices;
     • Illuminated street numbering;
     • Locking devices for doors;
     • Pedestrian safety devices;
     • City Security Plan requirements; and
     • City requirements/standards to incorporate considerations related to safety and
          defensibility into project design and site layout.
     Action Item 2. Maintain a current survey of unreinforced masonry and other hazardous
     structures.
     Action Item 3. Require structures identified as being located in hazardous areas to be
     brought into conformance with acceptable levels of risk.
     Action Item 4. Discourage the locating of critical facilities within identified hazard areas.
                                                   S-2               Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
     Action Item 5. For development proposed in high or medium wildland fire hazard areas,
     require an investigation of the development’s vulnerability to fire and its potential as a
     source of ignition, and implementation of measures to reduce fire hazard risks to acceptable
     levels.
     Action Item 6. Prohibit construction within seismic and geologic hazards areas, including:
     areas directly astride known active or potentially active faults or fault zones; areas in high
     landslide risk areas without site-specific slope stability investigations; and areas of potential
     liquefaction without site-specific analysis of liquefaction potential.
     Action Item 7. In reviewing development proposals for future water impoundments,
     require an evaluation of potential inundation areas and design of the dam to withstand
     earthquakes.
     Action Item 8. Locate, when feasible, new essential public facilities outside of high fire risk
     areas, or identify construction or other methods to minimize damage if these facilities are
     located in a “state responsibility area,” or very high fire hazard severity zone.
POLICY S-1E: Hazardous Materials. The City shall comply with Government code
requirements regarding the use, storage, and transportation of hazardous materials.
     Action Item 1. The City shall continue to require applicant declarations pursuant to
     Government code section 65.820.2.
     Action Item 2. The City shall provide required notices to the County Environmental Health
     Department.
     Action Item 3. Continue implementation of existing programs; add new ones as required.
POLICY S-1F: EMF Exposure. State or Federal electric or magnetic exposure levels and
setbacks, if established, are to be followed.
     Action Item 1. In the absence of State of Federal exposure standards, no residential
     structures or residential yards, schools, active parks, or recreational facilities are to be built
     within the utility corridor right-of-way. In addition, the following setback guidelines
     adopted by the California Department of Health Services shall be adhered to: 100 feet from
     100-110 kV lines; 150 feet from 220-230 kV lines; and 250 feet from 345 kV lines.
POLICY S-1G: Maintain the structural and operational integrity of essential public facilities
during flooding by taking safe guards such as locating new facilities outside of flood zones or
areas subject to localized flooding, and audit existing facilities in these areas to determine if
building upgrades should be considered to reduce the potential for future flooding.
2.0 Safety Issues
The residents of the City of Paso Robles are subject to a variety of natural and human-caused
hazards. Natural hazards are processes such as earthquakes, landslides, flooding, and wildfires.
                                                   S-3               Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
These natural processes have played an essential role in shaping the topography and landscape
of the City of Paso Robles, and become “hazards” when they disrupt or otherwise affect the
lives and property of people. Human-caused hazards often occur as a result of modern activities
and technologies. These potential hazards can include the use of hazardous materials, and
buildings that may be unsafe during a strong earthquake.
This section inventories and assesses the major hazards confronting Paso Robles, including
seismic and geologic hazards, wildland and urban fires, flooding, and hazardous materials
incidents.
2.1 Critical Facilities
Critical facilities are those that must remain operational after an emergency event, in order for
the community to respond effectively. Examples of critical facilities include hospitals, fire
stations, electrical power plants, and community facilities. Schools are often important staging
and evacuation areas. There are relatively few critical facilities in Paso Robles; the nearest
hospitals, for example, are in Templeton and San Luis Obispo. Figure S-1 shows the location of
critical facilities in Paso Robles.
2.2 Seismic & Geologic Hazards
This section contains a preliminary indication of the degree of potential risk associated with
regional faulting. Potential hazards such as groundshaking, liquefaction, lurch cracking and
lateral spreading, landslides, erosion, expansive soils, wildland and urban fires, flooding,
hazardous materials, airport operations, electromagnetic fields, radon gas, and high-voltage
transmission lines are discussed in the Safety Element Appendix. The assessment contained in
the Safety Element and Appendix should be used as a general guide to indicate when further
study may be needed.
Regional Faulting
San Luis Obispo County contains several fault traces and has been subject to intense warping,
folding and faulting. While most of the faults within the County have not been active in recent
geologic times, movement may occur along one or several of these minor faults, and
movements along the major principal faults traversing the County, including the San Andreas
and Nacimiento Faults. The structural trend in the area is northwest to southeast, controlled
mainly by the San Andreas Fault (EIP, 1984). Numerous fault traces have been detected in the
area, but most have not been active in recent geologic time (San Luis Obispo County, 1980).
Active faults are those along which there has been movement within the last 11,000 years;
“proven” active faults have had movement within the last 300 years. Figure S-2 shows the
locations of faults in the region.
The Paso Robles area is exposed to seismic hazards from movement along several regional
faults. The identified active fault zones in this area are the San Andreas, Nacimiento, Rinconada,
and “Offshore Faults,” although the classification of the Rinconada Fault as active has been
much disputed (Quad Consultants, 1980). Historically, most of the earthquakes detected in Paso
Robles have originated from movement along the San Andreas Fault, which lies approximately
                                                  S-4               Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
23 miles northeast of the City, near the Town of Cholame (Quad Consultants, 1980). In the Paso
Robles Area, the San Andreas Fault is identified as the primary source of potential ground
shaking (Envicom, 1975). Magnitudes as high as 6.5 have been recorded twice in the past from
movement along the San Andreas. The major “active” fault zones in the area are shown in Table
S-1.
                                Table S-1. Estimated Regional Maximum
                                        Credible Earthquake Events
                                 Fault Zone                Magnitude (Richter)
                                San Andreas                      8.0-8.5
                                Nacimiento                       7.0-7.5
                                 Rinconada                       6.5-7.0
                      Source: San Luis Obispo County, 1980
The Jolon Fault and the Rinconada Fault transect the southwestern portion of the City, but
converge to form one fault or fault zone near Mountain Springs Road. To the northwest of
Mountain Springs Road, the location of the Jolon Fault is based on mapping by Durham (1970).
Its projection through the City and on the east side of the River is based on the alignment of
warm, sulfur springs.
Regional data regarding the activity of the Rinconada and Jolon Faults indicate that these faults
may have been active as recently as the late Pleistocene in the vicinity of Paso Robles, and as
recently as late as Pleistocene near Santa Margarita. However, there is no evidence that either
fault has moved during the Holocene (last 11,000 years approximately). While the Rinconada
and Jolon Faults are not considered active with respect to fault rupture, they may be the sites of
moderate seismic activity.
The Offshore Fault is seismically active, but available marine geophysical data indicate that
future surface rupture is improbable along this fault.
2.3 Flood Hazard
This section contains information regarding flood hazards for the City of Paso Robles. The
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) defines flooding as, the rising and overflow
of a body of water, submerging of two or more acres of normally dry land that is not normally
covered by water (FEMA Definitions). Potential hazards for Paso Robles include riverine
flooding, also known as overbank flooding due to excessive rainfall, and localized flooding.
Localized flooding may occur outside of recognized drainage channels or delineated
floodplains due to a combination of locally heavy precipitation, increased surface runoff, and
inadequate facilities for drainage and stormwater conveyance (LHMP, page 4-13). The Paso
Robles area is subject to flood hazards from the Huerhuero Creek, Dry Creek, the Salinas River
floodplains, and their tributaries. This has the potential to occur in events where runoff is too
great for the system, or the storm water system is disrupted by vegetation or other debris
causing excess water to remain on the surface.
                                                      S-5             Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
Flood Hazard Zones
The City of Paso Robles participates in the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
National Flood Insurance Program, and consults with the Department of Water Resources
(DWR) Division of Flood Management, for support in obtaining the most current floodplain
mapping information. This information includes Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) that
identify regulated flood hazard zones, which are then used to assign risk and insurance rates
for homeowners and businesses.
Non-regulatory maps published by DWR containing floodplain information include,
Awareness Floodplain Maps, Best Available Maps (BAM), Levee Flood Protection Zone (LFPZ)
maps, and the Central Valley Floodplain Evaluation and Delineation (CVFED) maps. Only
FIRMs and DWR Awareness Floodplain maps have been prepared for the area of the City of
Paso Robles (FEMA 2012; DWR 2012).
Flood Insurance Rate Maps
Flood hazard zones are defined as an area subject to flooding that is delineated as either a
special hazard area or an area of moderate or minimal hazard according to the FIRMs issued by
FEMA. This designation, however, does not imply that areas outside the flood hazard zones or
uses permitted within flood hazard zones will be free from flooding or flood damage.
The 2012 FIRMs for San Luis Obispo County identify two floodplain zones in Paso Robles for
100-year and 500-year flood events:
     •    Zone A: 1 percent annual chance of flood hazard area. This area includes the floodplains
          of Huerhuero Creek, Dry Creek, and the Salinas River.
     •    Zone B: 0.2 percent annual chance of flood hazard area. Floodplain boundaries for the
          500-year flood include the northwest area of the City to the west of the Salinas River and
          east of the Salinas River between Creston Road to the south and Union Road to the
          north.
As shown in Figure S-5, the FIRMs highlight 100-year and 500-year floodplain boundaries for
identified flood hazards. Within the City limits, 1.50 square miles are in the 100-year floodplain
with an additional 4.08 square mile area within the 500-year floodplain.
Table S-2 identifies the number of existing residential buildings and vulnerable residents subject
to 100-year and 500-year floodplains. A complete list of critical facilities found to be located in
flood hazard zones can be found in Section 5, Table 5-6. Exposure Analysis – Critical Facilities
Flood in the Paso Robles Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP).
                                                 S-6                Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
                     Table S-2 Vulnerable Population and Residential Buildings
                                 to 100-year and 500-year Floodplain Events
                  Hazard Area               Population Count          Residential Building Count
              500-Year Floodplain                   18,061                        6,912
              100-Year Floodplain                    496                           188
               Paso Robles, Draft Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP), 2014
Communities, insurance agencies, and others use FIRMs to identify properties and buildings in
flood insurance risk areas (DWR 2014). Local officials use the FIRMs to administer floodplain
management regulations and to mitigate potential flood damage (DWR 2014).
DWR Awareness Floodplain Mapping
The intent of the Awareness Floodplain Mapping project is to identify all pertinent flood hazard
areas (by 2015) that are not mapped under the FEMA National Flood Insurance Program
(NFIP). This also provides the community and residents an additional tool in understanding
potential flood hazards currently not mapped as a regulated floodplain (DWR 2014). The DWR
Awareness Floodplain maps present 100-year flood hazard areas using approximate assessment
procedures. These floodplains are shown as “flood prone” areas without specific depths. As
displayed in Figures S-6a through S-6d, one area within Paso Robles is designated under the
Awareness Floodplain Mapping project: the northern end of Paso Robles, specifically areas of
the Paso Robles Municipal Airport.
DWR Best Available Maps (BAMs)
DWR BAMs provide 100-year and 200-year floodplains located within the City of Paso Robles.
The development of these maps is based on best available information from FEMA FIRMs and
DWR Awareness Floodplain maps. The intent is to identify potential flood hazards that may
warrant further study and consideration in land use decision making (DWR 2014). There are no
delineated 200-year floodplains for the City of Paso Robles.
DWR Levee Flood Protection Zones (LFPZs)
LFPZs estimate the maximum area that may be inundated if a project levy fails when water
surface elevation is at the top of a project levee (DWR 2011). There are no levees within the City
of Paso Robles, therefore there are no LFPZs within the City (DWR 2011).
DWR Central Valley Floodplain Evaluation and Delineation (CVFED) Maps
DWR CVFED maps represent 100-year and 200-year floodplains for the Central Valley State-
Federal Project Levees within the Sacramento-San Joaquin Valley watershed (SSJV). Since Paso
Robles is not located within the SSJV watershed, CVFED Maps are not designated for the City.
                                                           S-7               Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
Flood Control Projects
The Paso Robles Downtown Watershed Management Plan (DWMP) identifies areas within the
City’s downtown core that experience flooding during moderate to large storm events. The goal
of the DWMP is to utilize a watershed planning approach to manage runoff and address
existing drainage issues by reducing localized flooding and improving water quality of storm
water runoff prior to discharge to the Salinas River or its tributaries.
Regional storm water management projects will be combined with Capital Improvement
Projects (CIP) within the DWMP to effectively and efficiently manage storm water. The list of
projects included in the DWMP incorporate environmental concerns utilizing “Green
Infrastructure” as exemplified through the 21st Street Green Street project, completed in 2013.
Streets identified in the DWMP for Green Street upgrades include: 1) 15th Street south of Oak
Street; 2) 7th Street south of Oak Street; and 3) 8th Street south of Oak Street.
Dam Inundation
Dam failure involves unintended releases or surges of impounded water resulting in
downstream flooding. The water released from dam failure results in the potential for human
causalities, economic loss, service disruption, and environmental damage. While dam failure
may involve the total collapse of a dam, this is not always the case as damaged spillways,
overtopping from excessive rainfall, or other complications, including the unintended
consequences from normal operations, can result in hazardous situations. Due to the lack of
advance warning, failures from natural events, such as earthquakes, or landslides, may be
particularly severe.
The Salinas Dam is located approximately 21 miles southeast of the town of Santa Margarita in
San Luis Obispo County. The dam can currently store up to 23,843-acre feet of water. The
failure of the Salinas Dam would flood an area of 1.07 square miles along the Salinas River
within the Paso Robles City limits as seen in Figure S-7. The depth of flooding due to the failure
of this dam is unknown. There have been no recorded dam failures affecting Paso Robles.
Regulatory Agencies
The City of Paso Robles is responsible for flood protection and management within the City
boundaries. The Local Hazard Mitigation Plan (LHMP) outlines agencies and technical
resources available for emergency services in the event of a natural or manmade disaster. There
are no other public agencies responsible for flood protection in Paso Robles.
Under the Flood Control and Coastal Emergency Act, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
(USACE) provides disaster preparedness and response services and advanced planning
measures designed to reduce the amount of damage caused by an impending disaster. USACE
responds to natural and man-made disasters through the mobilization of personnel and other
resources across the country.
In any disaster, USACE top priorities are:
     • Support immediate lifesaving and life safety emergency response;
                                                   S-8                Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
     •    Sustain lives with critical commodities, temporary emergency power and other needs;
     •    Initiate recovery efforts by assessing and restoring critical infrastructure.
2.4 Fire Hazard
The California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CAL FIRE) maps areas of significant
fire hazards in the state. These areas are identified based on weather, topography, fuels, and
other factors. Fire hazards are greatest in areas with steep slopes, volatile vegetation, and windy
conditions. Information pertaining to historic records of wildfires for the City can be found in
the LHMP, Section 4.3.11.
Figure S-8 shows fire hazard severity zones for the City. CAL FIRE’s Fire Severity Zone Maps
highlight 6.40 square miles (33.0 percent) of City limits located within the high fire hazard
severity area (and includes 8,660 people, 3,383 residential structures, and 16 critical facilities)
while an additional 3.59 square miles (18.5 percent) of the City limits is located within moderate
fire hazard severity area (and includes 4,475 people, 1,754 residential buildings, and 22 critical
facilities). Land adjacent to the City limits and some land located within the City’s Sphere of
Influence are designated with a fire hazard severity zone of High in the State Responsibility
Area (SRA).
A list of the general locations and distribution of existing uses of land in high fire hazard
severity zones and in state responsibility areas, including structures, roads, utilities, and
essential public facilities can be found in the City’s LHMP, Section 5, Table 5-11.
The City of Paso Robles is responsible for fire protection and management within the City
boundaries. The LHMP outlines agencies and technical resources available for emergency
services in the event of a natural or manmade disaster. The City’s Emergency Services Growth
Management Plan (2000) includes an evaluation of fire and emergency services and a series of
options to meet projected needs in 2020.
After careful review of existing San Luis Obispo County Fire Hazard Severity Zone Mapping, as
supplied by CAL FIRE, the City has determined neither state responsibility areas nor very high
fire hazard severity zones exist within incorporated areas as required by SB 1241.
                                                   S-9                Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Safety Element
   0   0.25 0.5     1.0
                        Miles
                                                                           Legend
                                                                                  Highways        Schools
                                                                                  Streety         Fire Stations
                                                                                  Streams         City Hall
                                                                                  Railroad
                                                                                  City Limits
                                            Critical Facilities                                Figure S-1
                                                   S-10         Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Safety Element
                                                                                      LEGEND
                                                                                   N
                                                                                 W     E
                                                                                   S
                                                                                0'        50,000'       100,000'
Source: County of San Luis Obispo Safety Element, December 1999 Regional Faults                                    Figure S-2
                                                                                                      City of El Paso de Robles
                                                                     S-11            Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Safety Element
                                                  re              ek
                                       Huerhuero C
      Mustard C
               reek
                                                                 State Highway 46
                                                                                                                                          Dry
                                                                                                                                                Cre
                                                                                                                                                      ek
                                  way 101
                           United States High
                                                                  Cres
                                                                         ton
                                                                               Rd
                                                Niblick Rd
                                                                                                                           er
                                                                                                                         Hu
                                                                                                                                ero
                                                                                                                             hu
                                                                                                                                      k
                                                                                                                                    ee
                                                                                                                                 Cr
                         Sa
                          lin
                                          as
                                                R
                                                iver
                                                             Source: San Luis Obispo County for the National Resource Conservation Service, July 1999.
Legend                                                                                                           Projection: Lambert Conformal Conic.
     CIty Limits
      Major Roads                                                                                                ±       0                       1 Miles
     Roads
     Streams
     High Liquefaction Risk
     Moderate Liquefaction Risk
     Low Liquefaction Risk
                                                              Liquefaction Risk                                                           Figure S-3
                                                                                                                  City of El Paso de Robles
                                                                                    S-12                Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Safety Element
                                                                  reek
                                                      Huerhuero C
                   Mustard C
                            reek
                                                                                                                               Dry Creek
                                                                            State Highway 46
                                                 way 101
                                          United States High
                                                                            Cres
                                                                                ton
                                                                                      Rd
                                                               Niblick Rd
                                                                                                                             er
                                                                                                                           Hu
                                                                                                                                 er o
                                                                                                                              hu
                                                                                                                                       k
                                                                                                                                     ee
                                                                                                                                  Cr
                                        Sa
                                          lin
                                                         as
                                                               R
                                                                iv
                                                                 er
                                         Source: San Luis Obispo County for the National Resource Conservation Service, July 1999.
                                                                                             Projection: Lambert Conformal Conic.
                                                                                               ±
Legend                                                                                             0              1                2 Miles
     CIty Limits           Landslide Risk
      Major Roads                  High Potential
     Roads                         Moderate Potential
     Streams                       Low Potential
                                                               Landslide Risk                                              Figure S-4
                                                                                                           City of El Paso de Robles
                                                                            S-13                   Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003

City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
                                            S-14 Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
                                            S-15 Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
                                            S-16 Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
                                            S-17 Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
                                            S-18 Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
                                            S-19 Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003
City of El Paso de Robles General Plan 2003
Open Space Element
                                            S-20 Revised November 2014 via GPA 2014-003
