CITY OF SAN JUAN CAPISTRANO
2014-2021 HOUSING ELEMENT
                                 SEPTEMBER
ADOPTED JANUARY 21, 2014/REVISED JULY 2017 19, 2017
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Introduction…………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………………….2
Needs Assessment ………………………………………………………………………………………………...........................................8
Constraints to the Provision of Housing…………………………………………………………………………………………………………40
Housing Resources………………………………………………………………………………………………..........................................56
Evaluation of Previous Housing Element Programs…………………………………………………………………………………………65
Housing Plan……………………………………………………………………………………………….....................................................77
Appendix 1: Sites Inventory Table
Appendix 2: HCD Correspondence
NOTE:
First round of edits
Second round of edits
Third round of edits
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                     ii

INTRODUCTIO
INTRODUCTION
CITY PROFILE
The charming community of San Juan Capistrano is situated in the southwestern part of Orange County. It is the
seventh smallest city in Orange County in population size. The City’s setting provides a quaint Southern California
coastal community feeling. The City’s location, just off the Interstate 5 and nestled slightly off the coast between
San Clemente and Dana Point, makes it easily accessible for residents and visitors.
Although the City was officially incorporated in 1961, San Juan Capistrano has a rich and unique history that stems
back to the late 1700s. The Mission San Juan Capistrano was founded in 1776. It is believed to be the oldest church
in California and the birthplace of Orange County. Since its incorporation, the community has grown from about
10,000 residents in 1974 to over 34,593 in the 2010 census.
Located in the southwestern portion of Orange County, the City of San Juan Capistrano is characterized by a variety
of landscapes ranging from rolling hills, steep mesa bluffs, and urban areas that run the gamut from rural estate
parcels to the core areas of commercial and higher density housing. The City is transected by Interstate 5 and
Trabuco Creek running north to south and San Juan Creek running from east to west, somewhat paralleling the
Ortega Highway. It is adjacent to San Clemente on the south, Dana Point and Laguna Nigel on the west, and
Mission Viejo on the north and large unincorporated areas to the east.
KEY ISSUES AND OPPORTUNITIES
As a result of the initial needs assessment and input received during the drafting of the Housing Element, two
interrelated factors were identified as among the key issues and opportunities upon which the update to the
Housing        Element      could      focus:      (1)    the     issue    of     housing       affordability;   and
(2) the issue of the amount of land available for residential development. These two issues are regional in nature
but are compounded in San Juan Capistrano by the City’s location in an expensive housing market that prevails
through Orange County and by amount of land that has been developed within the City.
The amount of land available for residential development is more challenging in San Juan Capistrano than many
other areas in the County. The City has limited vacant land suitable for residential development. It is a relatively
well defined geographic area, and finding sites suitable for residential development, especially higher density, is
difficult. This shortage when combined with a favorable economy and the “market attractiveness” of San Juan
Capistrano has produced historically high land costs. This issue is compounded by the perception that, due to this
lack of vacant available land, that the City is becoming “built out”.
The perception of being “built out” often overlooks the reality of the private market redevelopment processes that
continuously act upon selected land uses throughout the City (e. g., older commercial centers). A number of
unique opportunities exist within the City to capitalize on these processes and proactively manage such change so
that it provides strong vibrant neighborhood centers.
The first key opportunity that offers the City a significant advantage as it prepares its housing strategies involves
the potential to better utilize the City’s available land, both vacant and already developed. Through a more
proactive planning and design approach to development, the City can encourage infill and revitalization
opportunities that yield affordable housing.
The second key opportunity involves the provision of affordable housing units. The City’s existing housing
programs provide important resources for more affordable housing. Based on the assessment of the effectiveness
of these programs, some modifications and additions may be necessary to increase their scope and impact. This
review suggests a number of potential activities that involve the participation of private developers, such as
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                 2

density bonuses, accessory units, inclusionary zoning, infill development and others. As part of the assessment of
the effectiveness of its current programs, the City looked closer at some key programs to determine the extent
that the City can address its housing challenges.
The third key opportunity that the City should capitalize upon is the potential role that affordable housing
developers (both private for profit and non-profit companies) can play in assisting the City to meet its affordable
housing objectives. The City could become a catalyst for collaborative efforts with developers who specialize in
affordable housing. During the past few years, these agencies have gained additional experience and capabilities,
especially in Orange County, that could be a valuable resource for the City. Their expertise and experience could be
used to complement limited City resources to deliver affordable housing products that would be a community
asset as well as addressing housing needs.
HOUSING ELEMENT SCOPE AND CONTENT
The Housing Element for the City of San Juan Capistrano is a required element of the City’s General Plan. It covers
the time period of October 15, 2013 through October 15, 2021. The submittal date for this round of revisions is
October 15, 2013. The planning period for the City’s Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA), or its identified
housing need as assigned by the Southern California Association of Governments, differs from the Housing
Element Planning period. The RHNA planning period is January 1, 2014 to October 31, 2021. As such this Housing
Element is referred to as the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
The California Legislature has identified the attainment of a decent home and suitable living environment for every
Californian as the state’s main housing goal. Recognizing the important part that local planning programs play in
pursuit of this goal, the Legislature has mandated that all cities and counties prepare a Housing Element as part of
their comprehensive general plans. Section 65581 of the California Government Code reflects the legislative intent
for mandating that each city and county prepare a Housing Element:
     ·   To assure that counties and cities recognize their responsibilities in contributing to the attainment of the
         State housing goal.
     ·   To assure that counties and cities will prepare and implement housing elements which, along with federal
         and State programs, will move toward attainment of the state housing goals.
     ·   To recognize that each locality is best capable of determining what efforts are required by it to contribute
         to the attainment of the State housing goal, provided such a determination is compatible with the State
         housing goal and regional housing needs.
     ·   To ensure that each local government cooperates with other local governments in order to address
         regional housing needs.
Unlike the other elements of the General Plan, state law explicitly requires that the Housing Element be updated
on an eight-year cycle, linked to the Regional Transportation Plan (Government Code § 65588). The City’s Housing
Element was last adopted on October 19, 2010. The City’s previous Housing Element update was drafted and
submitted to the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD) for its finding of compliance.
That document was certified and provided a solid starting point for this update. The goals and policies of the 2014-
2021 Housing Element carry forward much from the previous element, with refinements and new programs where
necessary, to address changed circumstances and new state laws. The housing development strategy and housing
programs reflect the City’s experiences gained from previous efforts in the improvement, preservation, and
development of affordable housing. Nonetheless, the City’s near built-out status, in accordance with the General
Plan, continues to affect the City’s ability to accommodate the housing needs of all economic segments of the
community.
The Housing Element consists of the following major components:
     ·   An introduction of the purpose and organization of the Housing Element
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                 3

     ·   An analysis of the City’s demographic and housing characteristics and trends
     ·   A review of potential market, governmental, and environmental constraints to meeting the City’s
         identified housing needs
     ·   An evaluation of land, administrative, and financial resources available to address the housing goals
     ·   A review of past accomplishments under the previous Housing Element
     ·   A Housing Plan to address the identified housing needs, including housing goals, policies, and programs
In response to updated Housing Element law, this Housing Element addresses SB 812 that requires the housing
element to assess the housing needs of developmentally disabled persons. SB 244 requires cities and counties,
prior to adoption of the Housing Element, to address the infrastructure needs of disadvantaged unincorporated
communities outside the city’s limits but within the city’s planning area. Based on the data from the California
Department of Water Resources, no such conditions exist in San Juan Capistrano’s planning area.
GENERAL PLAN CONSISTENCY
The City’s General Plan contains goals and policies for urban development, community design, housing, natural
hazards, economic development, and public services and facilities. The content of this Housing Element is
consistent with the goals and policies of all elements of the General Plan. The City’s general plan contains six
elements that respond to the State’s requirements: Land Use, Housing, Circulation, Safety, Conservation and Open
space (combining these two required elements) and Noise. The General plan also contains six optional elements:
Cultural Resources, Community Design, Growth Management, Parks and Recreation, Public Services and Utilities,
and Floodplain Management.
The Land Use Element sets forth the amount and type of residential development permitted under the General
Plan, thereby affecting housing opportunity in the City. In addition, the Land Use Element contains policies
directed at maintaining the existing housing stock, as well as ensuring the quantity and quality of new residential
development. The Circulation Element contains policies to minimize roadway traffic into residential
neighborhoods. The Safety Element sets forth policies to ensure the safety of the City's housing stock through such
measures as code enforcement, and mitigation of environmental hazard as a condition to development. The
Conservation and Open Space Element establishes development standards to minimize the impact of residential
development on sensitive resources, such as hillside areas, ecological habitat, and scenic view sheds. The Noise
Element sets forth policies to minimize the level of noise in residential neighborhoods.
The Optional elements also bear a relationship with the Housing Element. Cultural Resources establishes
development standards to minimize the impact of residential development on cultural resources; the Community
Design Element insures the quality and review of residential development; the Growth Management Element
outlines the City’s policies toward residential growth and development; the Parks and Recreation Element
establishes development standards to insure adequate park and recreation facilities for existing and future
residential development; the Public Services Element establishes development standards to insure the availability
of such services to existing and future residential development; and the Floodplain Management Element
establishes flood plain development standards to minimize the impact of flood plains on residential development.
The content of this Housing Element is consistent with, and supported by, the goals and policies of all Elements of
the General Plan. Table 2 below identifies the other General Plan Elements that support the major goals addressed
in the Housing Element. When an element in the General Plan is amended, the Housing Element will be reviewed
and modified if necessary to ensure continued consistency among the various elements. Specifically, new State law
requires that the Safety and Conservation Elements include an analysis and policies regarding flood hazard and
management information upon revisions to the Housing Element. The City will ensure that updates to these
Elements achieve internal consistency with the Housing Element. Through the City’s annual General Plan
implementation review process, the City will ensure internal consistency among the various elements of the
General Plan.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                               4

PUBLIC PARTICIPATION
The City posted public notices at City Hall and on the City’s web site, advertised in the local newspaper, and held
the meetings at City Hall during the evening in order to use a thorough noticing process and to provide the
opportunity for as many residents as possible to participate. The hearings were scheduled to involve the public at
three key stages: drafting, authorization and approval. Comments received at the public hearings have been
considered and incorporated into the updated plan in many places.
The City held a workshop with housing stakeholders including developers and low income housing advocates on
November 13, 2013 to discuss the draft Housing Elements. Notices of the workshop were sent to low income
housing advocates and non-profit organizations who traditionally represent the hard to reach segments of the
population. Two of these representatives participated at the workshop; the Regional Center of Orange County
representative provided up-to-date statistics regarding their assistance to San Juan Capistrano residents and
language they would like to see regarding development disability, Families Forward provided input regarding their
program and how they would like to participate with the City in the Future. The Housing Element was revised in
order to better respond to the concerns raised at the workshop. All the originations which received direct notices
for the workshop are listed below.
     ·    The Kennedy Commission                                ·    NAI Capital
     ·    Orange County Association of Realtors                 ·    Sandag
     ·    Orange County Housing Providers                       ·    South County Community Outreach
     ·    BIA/OC-GAC                                            ·    RE/MAX Real Estate Services
     ·    Collette's Children's Home                            ·    CDC
     ·    Habitat for Humanity Orange County                    ·    Orange County Community Housing
     ·    iHOPE                                                 ·    OC Partnership to End Homelessness
     ·    Orange County Housing Authority                       ·    Regional Center of Orange County
     ·    Fair Housing Foundation                               ·    Mission Hospital
     ·    Mary Erickson Community Housing                       ·    Camino Health Care Center
     ·    Housing With Heart, Inc.                              ·    Family Assistance Ministries
     ·    Laura's House                                         ·    Friendship Shelter
     ·    Families Forward                                      ·    CSP, Inc-Homeless Youth Shelter
     ·    Dayle McIntosh Services for the Disabled              ·    Mr. Michael McLaughlin, Consultant
     ·    Orange County Housing Opportunities Collaborative
     ·    S. Orange County Alliance for Housing Our Community
The City held two noticed public hearings before the Planning Commission and City Council. These notices also
were sent to low income housing advocates and non-profit organizations who traditionally represent the hard to
reach segments of the population. Representatives participated in the public hearings and the Housing Element
draft was revised to include comments and recommendations provided by the lower income housing advocates
and representatives. As part of the 2016 update to the Housing Element Sites Inventory, the City held three more
public hearings. On May 5, 2015, the City Council approved the initiation of the General Plan Amendment to
amend the zoning and General Plan Land Use Designation for the new Housing Element site and to update the
Housing Element sites inventory. On February 9, 2016, the Planning Commission reviewed the proposed change to
the City Hall site and the sites inventory update, and recommended to the City Council that the changes be
adopted. At the May 3, 2016 City Council hearing, the Council adopted the change to the zoning and General Plan
Land Use Designation for the City Hall site, as well as the update to the Housing Element sites inventory. Pursuant
to Title 9, Land Use Code, Section 9-2.302(f), Notification Procedures of the City’s Municipal Code, public hearing
notices for all three meetings were published in the Capistrano Valley News at least 10 days prior to the hearing
and were posted at three public locations. Additionally, property owners within 300 feet of City Hall were provided
notification of the hearings.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                               5

The City will hold one additional hearing for the final adoption of the update. Along with the notification required
for this hearing by California’s and the City’s codes, the City will mail notices to nonprofit organizations and
stakeholders in Orange County, including those listed above, who have expressed interest in affordable housing
issues in San Juan Capistrano.
Consistent with Government Code §65352.3 (SB 18), the City also notified the appropriate tribes (on the contact
list maintained by the Native American Heritage Commission) of the opportunity to conduct consultations for the
purpose of preserving, or mitigating impacts to, cultural places located on land within the local government’s
jurisdiction that is affected by the proposed plan adoption or amendment. Contacted tribes had 90 days from the
date on which they receive notification to request consultation. None of the tribes requested consultation.
The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) requires environmental review on many government activities
including the development of programs and plans that may have an effect on the environment. Concurrent with
the development of the update to the Housing Element, an environmental Initial Study was conducted in
accordance with the provisions of CEQA, which concluded that adoption of the revised plan would not result in
significant impacts to the environment. A Notice of Negative Declaration was circulated for a 30-day public
comment period (November 2013).
The Kennedy Commission submitted comments in letter form prior to the hearings. A copy of the letter is included
as Appendix 2. The their letter, the Kennedy Commission encouraged the City to encourage and facilitate the
development of affordable housing for extremely low, very low, and low income families as well as those with
special needs.
In the Housing Plan, Many policies and programs are included to encourage and facilitate housing for lower income
households and those with special needs. Specific mechanisms for development and funding of affordable housing
are identified (such as Inclusionary Housing and In-Lieu Fees) as are a list of the major public financing programs
currently available (Program 5). Program 5 also indicates that the City will work with developers to provide
technical regulatory and financial assistance in developing affordable housing. Through the Housing Element
Annual Progress Report requirements the City will be able to monitor and evaluate its progress in addressing the
community’s housing needs and modify or redirect its resources to most efficiently do so.
The Commission also asked for additional detail on affordable housing construction during the previous planning
period. That information has been folded into the Evaluation of Previous Housing Element Programs chapter of this
Housing Element.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                6

NEEDS ASSESSMEN
NEEDS ASSESSMENT
This section of the Housing Element discusses the major components of housing need in San Juan Capistrano. The
major components of need are the City’s population, household, land use, economic, and housing stock
characteristics. Each of the components are presented in a County context, and, where relevant, in the context of
other south Orange County cities. This needs assessment will be important to the identification of the appropriate
goals, policies, and programs for the City to implement during the 2014-2021 Housing Element cycle.
HOUSING DEMAND CHARACTERISTICS
Population Characteristics
Orange County’s population is growing. Between 1970 and 2010, Orange County’s population doubled; the
population grew from 1,420,386 to 3,010,232. This growth has resulted in a substantial amount of agricultural land
being converted to housing, commercial, and industrial development. Additionally, various communities, like Dana
Point, Mission Viejo, Laguna Niguel, Laguna Hills, Rancho Santa Margarita, and Lake Forest, have been
incorporated and are now cities.
During that same time period, the City of San Juan Capistrano experienced tremendous growth. The City was
incorporated in 1961 and the 1970 Census listed its population as 3,779 people. The population grew to be over
nine times that size (915%) to 34,593 residents by 2010. This enormous growth is due to increases in housing stock
and, like the County, its transition from an agrarian community to a residential community
The Orange County’s population grew by almost six percent between 2000 and 2010 (3,010,232). Figure 1 shows
the population growth between 2000 and 2010 for San Juan Capistrano, other similar southern Orange County
cities, and the entire County. As shown in Figure 1, the City of San Juan Capistrano grew by just over two percent
between 2000 (33,826) and 2010 (34,593).
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                              8

                                                               Figure 1
                                                  Percent Change in Population
                             South Orange County Cities and Orange County, 2000 – 2010
      Source: E-4 Population Estimates for Cities, Counties, and the State, 2001–2010, with 2000 & 2010 Census Counts
Projected Population
While both Orange County and the City of San Juan Capistrano are expected to experience more growth during the
next 30 years, future growth will be significantly lower than past growth. Figure 2 compares projected population
growth in the City of San Juan Capistrano to nearby southern Orange County cities and the County as a whole.
Between 2008 and 2035, Orange County is expected to grow by 14.5 percent, a gain of 432,000 new residents.
According to the forecasts made by SCAG for the Southern California region, San Juan Capistrano is forecasted to
grow by 9.9 percent during that same time period, which would be a gain of 3,400 new residents.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                   9

                                                               Figure 2
                                               Projected Change in Population
                              South Orange County Cities and Orange County, 2008 – 2035
              Source: SCAG. 2012 RTP Growth Forecast: City Projections.
Age Characteristics
A community’s age distribution often shapes its housing demand because different age groups prefer different
types of housing. Traditionally, both the young adult population (20 to 34 year olds) and the elderly (65 years and
older) favor apartments, low to moderate cost condominiums, and smaller single family units. Persons between
the ages of 35 to 65 years old often prefer moderate to high cost apartments and condominiums and larger single
family units because they tend to have higher incomes and larger households.
San Juan Capistrano’s older population is increasing. The median age in 2010 was 39.8 years old compared with
36.4 in 2000 and 34.9 in 1990. This increase of median age is consistent with County, State, and national trends
and can be attributed to the aging of the “baby boom” generation.
The City’s population is slightly older than the County’s. San Juan Capistrano’s median age in 2010 was higher than
the County’s (36.4 years). Figure 3 compares age distribution in San Juan Capistrano to that of Orange County. The
City’s older population is evident by a higher proportion of residents over the age of 60 years old. The City and the
County have a similar proportion of residents under the age of 18, 24.4 percent and 24.1 percent respectively. The
County has a slightly higher percentage of residents between the ages of 18 to 34 years old (23.9%) than San Juan
Capistrano (19.5%), and a similar share between the ages of 35 to 59 years old, 40.1 percent and 40.2 percent
respectively.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                10

                                                         Figure 3
                                                    Age Distribution
                                    San Juan Capistrano and Orange County, 2010
              Source: Census 2010.
Race/Ethnicity Characteristics
Race/ethnicity information is important to an analysis of housing demand, because race/ethnicity tends to
correlate with characteristics like family size, location choices, and mobility. It also can be associated with income
levels, as shown in. In Orange County, non-White populations tend to have a higher incidence of poverty.
San Juan Capistrano has a smaller non-White population than Orange County as a whole. Figure 4 compares
race/ethnicity of San Juan Capistrano to Orange County. Over two-thirds of the City’s population is White similar to
Orange County’s 74.9 percent for Orange County. A third of San Juan Capistrano’s residents are Hispanic (38.7%),
which is similar to the County’s proportion (34.1%). Almost three percent of the City’s residents are Asian
compared with 18.4 percent for the County. The City’s remaining five percent are another race/ethnicity.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                  11

                                                    Figure 4
                                                 Race/Ethnicity
                                  San Juan Capistrano and Orange County, 2010
           Source: Census 2010.
Households
Households are defined as all persons who occupy a housing unit. Many household characteristics may contribute
to the need for housing, some of which are described in this section: projected households, household size, and
household income.
In 2010, there were 11,481 households in San Juan Capistrano, which represents one percent of Orange County’s
total households. The number of households in the City increased 29 percent from 1990 (8,890).
While the number of households in the City is expected to continue growing in the future, it is anticipated that the
growth will be smaller than previous decades. SCAG predicts that San Juan Capistrano will add about 1,000 new
households between 2008 and 2020, an increase of 8.7 percent. The County’s total number of households in
expected to grow by 14 percent during that same time (Figure 5). The City will continue to account for about one
percent of the County’s total households.
The Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) projects a need for 638 housing units for the Housing Element
time frame. Of these totals, 252 are low income: 147 very low and 104 low income. Thus, the needs are 147 very
low income, 104 low income, 120 moderate income, and 267 above moderate income), totaling 638 units.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                               12

                                                      Figure 5
                                    Projected Change in Number of Households
                               San Juan Capistrano and Orange County, 2008-2020
Household Size
Household size is a significant factor in housing demand. The average household size can be an indicator of an
area’s population. For example, a large average household size may indicate a population with a lot of family
households, while a small average household size may indicate either “empty nest” households or young adult
households. Thus, analyzing average household size in conjunction with other demographics is useful for
estimating housing needs. The average household size in Orange County averages 2.99 persons. San Juan
Capistrano has an average household size of 2.99 persons, which is a small decrease from 2000 (3.06 persons per
household).
Table 1 compares San Juan Capistrano’s average household size to other south Orange County cities and the
County. San Juan Capistrano has a higher average person per household than the other cities. It matches the
County’s average.
                                                      Table 1
                                           Average Persons Per Household
                              South Orange County Cities and Orange County, 2010
                                                                    Persons Per
                                  Jurisdiction
                                                                     Household
                                 Dana Point city                         2.37
                                 Laguna Hills city                       2.81
                                 Laguna Niguel city                      2.61
                                 Rancho Santa Margarita city             2.93
                                 San Clemente city                       2.62
                                 San Juan Capistrano city                2.99
                                 Orange County                           2.99
                               Source: 2010 Census.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                          13

Household Income
Income levels influence the range of housing prices within a community and its residents’ ability to afford housing.
Obviously, high-income households are more likely to be homeowners than low-income households. Low-income
households may be more burdened by housing costs, and thus, the number of overcrowded households may
increase.
San Juan Capistrano’s household income is slightly lower than the County’s. In 2010, the City’s median income was
$73,806 compared with $75,762 for the County. Overall, the City’s and County’s income distributions, shown in
Figure 7, are not that different. Income categories for both the City and County, with the exception of households
with incomes of $50,000 to $74,999 and the more than $200,000, are within one to two percentage points of one
another. Orange County has almost 14% of households falling within the $50,000 to $74,999 income category,
whereas San Juan Capistrano only has nine percent. Additionally, almost fourteen percent of San Juan Capistrano
households fall within the $200,000 or more income category versus near ten percent for the County. Some of the
least affordable housing is often found in highly urbanized, densely populated areas because other demand-side
factors (e.g., location, services, economy) counteract the supply-side advantages that density brings. The degree to
which these other factors influence the price of housing will vary from community to community. Until recently,
the run-up in the real estate market in Orange County illustrated the complexity of the effects of supply and
demand on housing costs.
 The Orange County median income was $85,300 in 2012. By definition, a very low-income household of four in
Orange County (up to 50% of the region’s median income) was up to $48,150 in 2012. A low-income household of
four (50% to 80% of the region’s median income) was up to $77,050 in 2012. A moderate-income household of
four (80% to 120% of the region’s median income) was up to $102,350 in 2012 (see rental and owner affordability
information below for further descriptions).
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                               14

                                                        Figure 6
                                                   Household Income
                                  San Juan Capistrano and Orange County, 2010 Census
          Source: Census 2010.
Table 2 compares San Juan Capistrano’s median income to the other south Orange County cities and the County as
a whole. While it has the lowest median income out of the list of cities, its median income is still 2.6 percent below
the County’s.
                                                        Table 2
                                              Median Household Income
                              South Orange County Cities and Orange County, 2010 Census
                                                                                    Percent Above/
                        Jurisdiction
                                                  Median Household Income            Below County
                                                                                        Median
               Dana Point city                               $83,306                     10.0
               Laguna Hills city                             $85,971                     13.5
               Laguna Niguel city                           $100,480                     32.6
               Rancho Santa Margarita                       $104,167                     37.5
               city
               San Clemente city                             $89,289                     17.9
               San Juan Capistrano city                      $73,806                     2.6
               Orange County                                 $75,762                      0
              Source: Census 2010.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                  15

For housing planning and funding purposes, the State Department of Housing and Community Development (HCD)
uses five income categories to evaluate housing need based on the Area Median Income (AMI) for the
metropolitan area:
     ·    Extremely Low-Income Households earn between 0 and 30% of AMI
     ·    Very Low-Income Households earn between 31 and 50% of AMI
     ·    Low-Income Households earn between 51 and 80% of AMI
     ·    Moderate-Income Households earn between 81 and 120% of AMI
     ·    Above Moderate-Income Households earn over 120% of AMI
The CHAS special Census tabulations developed for HUD provide a specific breakdown of household income
adjusted for family size. As shown in Table 3, moderate- and above-moderate-income households comprise the
largest share of all households, and the low-income households comprise the second largest category. According
to the 2005-2009 CHAS, more than eleven percent of the City's total households are classified as extremely low
income (0-30% of AMI), eleven percent are classified as very low income (31-50% of AMI), and approximately 16
percent are classified as low income (51-80% AMI). Nearly 62 percent of the City’s households had incomes above
80 percent of the median household income in 2009.
                                                      Table 3
                                        Households by Income Category
                                                                                 Moderate/
                              Extremely      Very Low                        Above Moderate
                             Low Income        Income       Low Income (51-       Income
                               (0-30%)        (31-50%)            80%)            (81% +)            Total
                                                11.3%
                                11.4%                             15.8%            61.5%            100.0%
  San Juan Capistrano                           (1,305
                             (1,310 HHS)                      (1,815 HHS)       (7,080 HHS)      (11,510 HHS)
                                                 HHS)
Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), 2005-2009.
HHS: Households
Special Needs Groups
The following special needs groups have an impact upon the demand for housing. Often these special groups
“compete” for the same housing due to the lack of affordable housing. Identifying special needs groups is
necessary to fully assess San Juan Capistrano’s housing needs and to meet Housing Element requirements. The
special needs groups analyzed include the elderly, people with disabilities, single parents, migrant/farm workers,
homeless, large households, and students. Many of these people overlap, for example many migrant and/or farm
workers are homeless and many elderly people have a disability of some type. The majority of these special needs
groups would be assisted by an increase in affordable housing.
Elderly
The limited income of many elderly persons often makes it difficult for them to find affordable housing. The elderly
often spend a higher percentage of their income for food, housing, medical care, and personal care than non-
elderly families. Many single elderly persons need some form of housing assistance.
Table 4 shows that San Juan Capistrano has a higher percentage (16%) of elderly people (65 years and older) than
the County (12%) and other south Orange County Cities.
                                                         Table 4
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                              16

                                          Persons Age 65 Years and Over
                               South Orange County Cities and Orange County, 2010
         Jurisdiction                                 Age 65+                             Percent 65+
          Dana Point                                 5,670                                  17.0
          Laguna Hills                               3,884                                  12.8
          Laguna Niguel                              8,187                                  13.0
          Rancho Santa Margarita                     2,728                                   5.7
          San Clemente                               8,385                                  13.2
          San Juan Capistrano                        5,397                                  15.6
          Orange County                             363,634                                 11.9
         Source: Census 2010.
In 2010, householders over the age of 65 years in San Juan Capistrano tended to have lower incomes than those
living in Orange County. As shown in Figure 7, San Juan Capistrano has a slightly higher percentage of elder persons
with a household income over $150,000 (10.4%) than the County (10.2%). Likewise, it has a smaller percentage of
elderly with household incomes less than $30,000 (24.3%) than the County (32.3%).
It also is worth noting that almost all of the elderly in both the City and the County have incomes above the
poverty level. In 2010, one percent of the County and 1.4 percent of the City elderly population (65 years and over)
lived below the poverty level.
Figure 8 shows that vast majority of householders age 65 years and older own their homes in both San Juan
Capistrano and Orange County. More than eight out of ten (80%) San Juan Capistrano elderly residents live in
owner-occupied units. Elderly homeownership rates are slightly less for the County (77%).
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                               17
                                                   Figure 7
                          Household Income of Householders Age 65 Years and Over
                             San Juan Capistrano and Orange County, 2010 Census
Source: Census 2010.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                              18
                                                         Figure 8
                            Homeownership Rates for Householders Age 65 Years and Over
                                     San Juan Capistrano and Orange County, 2010
              Source: Census 2010.
People with Disabilities
According to the U.S. Bureau of the Census, a person is considered to have a disability if he or she has difficulty
performing certain functions (seeing, hearing, talking, walking, climbing stairs, and lifting and carrying), or has
difficulty with certain social roles (e.g., doing school work for children, working at a job and around the house for
adults). A person, who is unable to perform one or more activities, uses an assistive device to get around, or who
needs assistance from another person to perform basic activities is considered to have a severe disability.
Four factors—affordability, design, location, and discrimination—significantly limit the supply of housing available
to households of persons with disabilities. The most obvious housing need for persons with disabilities is housing
that is adapted to their needs. Most single-family homes are inaccessible to people with mobility and sensory
limitations. Housing may not be adaptable to widened doorways and hallways, access ramps, larger bathrooms,
lowered countertops, and other features necessary for accessibility. Location of housing is also an important factor
for many persons with disabilities, as they often rely upon public transportation to travel to necessary services and
shops.
Additionally disabilities can hinder the ability of a person to earn an adequate income to afford housing. According
to the 2010 Census, 5 percent of the civilian non-institutionalized population age 18-65 years and 35.6 percent for
population 65 and over in San Juan Capistrano have a disability. Of those with disabilities between the ages of 16
and 64 in Orange County (civilian non-institutionalized population), 32.7 percent are unemployed. It also reported
that 10.8 percent of persons with disabilities in the County were living below the poverty level.
A subgroup of disabled residents is developmentally disabled. Housing Element law Housing elements must include
an analysis of the special housing needs of the disabled including persons with developmental disabilities.
According to Section 4512 of the Welfare and Institutions Code, a "developmental disability" means a disability
that originates before an individual attains age 18 years, continues, or can be expected to continue, indefinitely,
and constitutes a substantial disability for that individual which includes mental retardation, cerebral palsy,
epilepsy, and autism. This term also includes disabling conditions found to be closely related to mental retardation
or to require treatment similar to that required for individuals with mental retardation, but does not include other
handicapping conditions that are solely physical in nature.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                19

Many developmentally disabled persons can live and work independently within a conventional housing
environment. More severely disabled individuals require a group living environment where supervision is provided.
The most severely affected individuals may require an institutional environment where medical attention and
physical therapy are provided. Because developmental disabilities exist before adulthood, the first issue in
supportive housing for the developmentally disabled is the transition from the person’s living situation as a child to
an appropriate level of independence as an adult.
The Census does not record developmental disabilities. The California State Council on Developmental Disabilities
estimates that nationwide 1.8 percent of the population meet the federal definition of a developmental disability.
This equates to 623 persons in the City of San Juan Capistrano with developmental disabilities, based on the 2010
Census population.
The State Department of Developmental Services (DDS) currently provides community-based services to
approximately 243,000 persons with developmental disabilities and their families through a statewide system of
21 regional centers, four developmental centers, and two community-based facilities. Regional Center of Orange
County (RCOC) is one of 21 private, nonprofit organizations contracted by the State of California to coordinate
lifelong services and supports for individuals with developmental disabilities and their families.
According information provided by the Regional Center of Orange County at the November 13, 2013 workshop, in
San Juan Capistrano, approximately 165 persons are reported as consumers of the services provided at the local
Regional Center. The largest age groups of San Juan Capistrano residents being served at the Regional
Center are the 0-21 year group (86 clients), 22-29 year group (41 clients), and the 30-39 year group (24
clients). State data also show that 80 percent of San Juan Capistrano clients using the Regional Center live at
home.
Housing advocacy groups report that people with disabilities are often the victims of discrimination in the home
buying market. People with disabilities, whether they work or receive disability income are often perceived to be a
greater financial risk than persons without disabilities with identical income amounts. The Casa De Amma
development in San Juan Capistrano provides apartment-type housing for learning disabled young adults. It
provides vocational, education, and residential opportunities. The development was built in 2003 and contains 27
one-bedroom units (800 square feet) and 4 two-bedroom units (1,200 square feet).
Homeless
Throughout the country and southern California, homelessness has become an increasing issue. Factors
contributing to the rise in homelessness include a lack of housing affordable to low and moderate income persons,
increases in the number of persons whose incomes fall below the poverty level, reductions in public subsidies to
the poor, and the de-institutionalization of the mentally ill.
Due to the transient nature of the homeless, the precise number of homeless individuals in San Juan Capistrano is
difficult to determine. Once every two years, Orange County undertakes an effort to enumerate all of the
sheltered and unsheltered homeless people within the county in a given twenty‐four hour period. This effort,
known as the Homeless Point‐in‐Time Count, is congressionally‐mandated for all communities that receive
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) funding for homeless programs. HUD’s requirement
includes a count of both sheltered and unsheltered homeless people, as well as the incidence of certain
subpopulation characteristics among the homeless population. HUD requires that the Count be conducted during
the last ten days in January. The latest Orange County Count was held on January 26, 2013.The 2013 Count
indicated that on any given night in Orange County, almost 4,300 people are homeless. More than 12,700 people
are homeless over the course of a year. Of the 4,251 homeless persons counted in 2013, approximately 40% are
unsheltered and 60% are sheltered, mirroring national averages. In previous years, his proportion was reversed,
with over 60% of homeless people living unsheltered.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                 20

The Orange County homeless population includes families and individuals representing every race, age group and
community in Orange County. The homeless are often wrongly portrayed as panhandlers asking for money. On the
contrary, the Orange County homeless population consists of working families and individuals. Many live in cars,
parks, under bridges, motels and in homeless shelters trying to maintain their dignity while they struggle to
survive. As a result, most homeless remain hidden.
According to the City’s Police Services, approximately 50 homeless and at risk persons reside in San Juan
Capistrano. One homeless or at risk person now being served by the Orange County Partnership identified San
Juan Capistrano as their last known address. Although the number of homeless does not appear to very high, the
City remains committed to addressing the needs of its homeless population.
In 2007, the state enacted SB 2, which amends State Housing Element Law and requires local jurisdictions to
strengthen provisions for addressing the housing needs of the homeless, including the identification a zone or
zones where emergency shelters are allowed as a permitted use without a conditional use permit. The City
amended the zoning code to permit emergency shelters without a discretionary review in Public and Institutional
zones.
Single Parents (Female-Headed Households)
Single parents with dependent children represent another important group with special housing needs. Single-
parent households often require special consideration and assistance because they tend to have lower incomes
and a greater need for day care, health care, and related facilities. Table 5 shows that in 2010, San Juan Capistrano
had 2,376 single parent households. Of these, the majority (51.6 percent) were male-headed households. Almost
thirty-seven percent of female-headed households in San Juan Capistrano lived below the poverty level, compared
to about thirty-two percent Countywide.
                                                         Table 5
                                               Single Parent Households
                                    San Juan Capistrano and Orange County, 2010
    Source: Census 2010.
                                                        % of                     % of             Below Poverty
                              Total        Single-               Female Single-
                                                        Total                   Single      Female        % of Female
                             Family        Parent                   Parent
                                                       Family                   Parent      Single-      Single-Parent
                              HHs            HHs                     HHs
                                                         HHs                     HHs      Parent HHs          HHs
  San Juan Capistrano             8,603      2,376       27.6%         1150      48.4%           420             36.5%
  Orange County                721,846     177,230       24.6%      125,348      70.7%        39,848             31.8%
Migrant and/or Farm Workers
Due to the high cost of housing and low wages, a significant number of migrant and/or farm workers have difficulty
finding affordable, safe and sanitary housing. The housing needs of farm workers are frequently overlooked due to
the migratory nature of farm labor. Thus, farm workers are given low priority when addressing housing needs, and
often receive the least hospitable housing. Table 6 shows that in 2010 approximately 126 San Juan Capistrano
residents were employed in agriculture, forestry, fishing, or mining, accounting for less than 1 percent of total
employment among the City’s residents. Agriculture does not play a significant role in the City; therefore, the
migrant and/or farm worker housing need can be met through general affordable housing programs.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                    21

                                                          Table 6
                                                   Agricultural Workers
                                   South Orange County Cities and Orange County, 2010
                                                                Agriculture,         Percent of
                                                             Forestry, Fishing     Total Civilian
                   Jurisdiction
                                                               Hunting, and       Employment (16
                                                               Mining                 Years +)
                    Dana Point city                               55                      0.31
                    Laguna Hills city                              0                      0.0
                    Laguna Niguel city                           198                      0.62
                    Rancho Santa Margarita city                  100                      0.41
                    San Clemente city                              0                      0.0
                    San Juan Capistrano city                     126                      0.83
                    Orange County                               6,929                     0.49
                  Source: Census 2010.
Large Households
In general, large households (with five or more members) are identified as a group with special housing needs
based on the limited availability of adequately sized, affordable housing units. Large households are often of lower
income, frequently resulting in the overcrowding of smaller dwelling units and in time, accelerating unit
deterioration.
Table 7 compares the number of large households in San Juan Capistrano to that in the County as a whole. In 2010,
17.4 percent of households in the City consisted of five or more persons, compared to 15.2 percent Countywide.
                                                          Table 7
                                                     Large Households
                                       San Juan Capistrano and Orange County, 2010
                                                               Persons in Household
                                                                                            Total Large
                                                   Five                  Six      Seven +        HHs     Total HHs
               San Juan Capistrano               896                 513          545          1,954      11,207
                                                                                              17.4%
               Percent of Total                  8%                 4.6%         4.9%                     100%
                                                                                             150,311
               Orange County                   79,157             37,119        34,035                   988,354
                                                                                                15.2
               Percent of Total                  8%                 3.8%         3.4%                     100%
              Source: 2010 Census.
Figure 9 shows that homeownership rates for large households were lower in both San Juan Capistrano and
Orange County. In the City, 10 percent of large households owned their own home, compared to 65.5 percent of
households with fewer than five persons. Countywide, 8.3 percent of large households owned their own home,
compared to 51 percent of households with fewer than five persons.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                               22
                                                        Figure 9
                                     Homeownership Rates for Large Households
                                        San Juan Capistrano and Orange County
           Source: Census 2010.
Students
The need for student housing is another significant factor affecting housing demand. Although students may
produce only a temporary housing need, the impact upon housing demand is critical in areas that surround
universities and colleges. Typically, students are low income, and are therefore affected by a lack of affordable
housing, especially within easy commuting distance from campus. They often seek shared housing situations to
decrease expenses, and can be assisted through roommate referral services offered on and off campus. The lack of
affordable housing also influences choices students make after graduation, often with a detrimental effect upon
the region’s economy. College graduates provide a specialized pool of skilled labor that is vital to the economy;
however the lack of affordable housing often leads to their departure from the region.
Figure 10 shows that in 2010, approximately 5.6 percent of the City’s residents were enrolled in college, a lower
percent than the County as a whole (21.9 percent). Almost 80 percent of the population over 25 years has a high
school diploma or higher and just over 33 percent have a bachelor’s degree or higher. The City does not have any
colleges or universities, thus, there is no need for student designated housing. The Little Hollywood Program offers
assistance to students who are working part-time and going to school part-time.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                               23

                                                         Figure 10
                                Percent of Residents Enrolled in College or Graduate School
                                      San Juan Capistrano and Orange County, 2010
             Source: Census 2010.
Employment Characteristics
To achieve a better balance between jobs and housing, it is important to consider the employment characteristics
of a region. In both the County and the City, employment growth did not keep up with population growth.
Between 2000 and 2010, Orange County’s employment grew by 6.6 percent. During this same time period, the
County’s population grew by 5.8 percent. San Juan Capistrano’s employment grew by 2 percent between 2000 and
2010, while its population grew by 2.3 percent.
As shown in Table 8, the employment growth between 2000 and 2010 for the selected south Orange County cities
range from zero percent (Laguna Niguel) to 19 percent (San Clemente).
                                                          Table 8
                                                       Employment
                              South Orange County Cities and Orange County, 2000 and 2010
                                               2000                     2010            2000-2010 Percent Change
 Dana Point                                   18,900                    17,495                    7.4
 Laguna Hills                                 15,057                    15,014                    0.3
 Laguna Niguel                                31,814                    31,798                    0.0
 Rancho Santa Margarita                       24,812                    24,659                    0.6
 San Clemente                                 24,654                    29,377                   19.1
 San Juan Capistrano                          14,815                    15,126                    2.1
 Orange County                              1,338,838                 1,427,461                   6.6
Source: 2000 Census and Census 2010.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                              24

Table 9 shows that between 2008 and 2030, San Juan Capistrano is projected to gain approximately 100 new
employment opportunities, an increase of 0.6 percent, significantly less than the County as a whole (87.2%).
                                                          Table 9
                                          Projected Change in Total Employment
                            South Orange County Cities and Orange County, 2010 – 2030
                                           Total Employment                               Number         Percent
  Jurisdiction                                                                            Change         Change
                                                                                                        200
                                             2008           2020            2030        2008 - 2030       8- 2030
 Dana Point                                       13,600        13,500        13,700               100     0.7
 Laguna Hills                                     19,900        20,400        20,500               600     3.0
 Laguna Niguel                                    20,000        20,100        21,000             1,000     5.0
 Rancho Santa Margarita                           17,700        16,300        16,600             1,100     6.2
 San Clemente                                     25,600        26,300        26,600             1,000     3.9
 San Juan Capistrano                              15,700        15,700        15,800               100     0.6
 Orange County
                                                664,000       939,000      1,243,000           579,000     87.2
Source: SCAG. 2012 RTP Growth Forecast: City Projections.
Figure 11 shows employment by industry from the Census 2010. The Professional, Science, Management,
Administration, and Waste Management Services and the Education, Health, and Social Science industries employ
the largest portion of workers in San Juan Capistrano with over 15 percent each. The arts, entertainment,
accommodations, and food industry is the third largest industry sector with almost 13 percent. The Education,
Health, and Social Science industry employs the largest portion of employees in Orange County with 18.5 percent.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                             25

                                                                 Figure 11
                                                       Employment by Industry
                                         San Juan Capistrano and Orange County, 2010
 Source: Census 2010.
HOUSING SUPPLY CHARACTERISTICS
According to the California Department of Finance, the City of San Juan Capistrano has a housing stock of
approximately 11,982. As shown in Table 10, it has the second lowest number of housing units of the south Orange
County cities. The City’s housing stock increased by 202 units since 2007, almost a two percent increase.
Countywide the number of housing units increased by almost three percent from 2007 to 2012.
                                                                 Table 10
                                                          Total Housing Units
                             South Orange County Cities and Orange County, 2007 and 2012
                                                                                                Percent Change
                      Jurisdiction                                    2007            2012
                                                                                                   2000 - 2007
                      Dana Point                                      15,940           15,949            0.0
                      Laguna Hills                                    11,153           11,049            0.9
                      Laguna Niguel                                   24,831           25,374            2.2
                      Rancho Santa Margarita                          16,793           17,260            2.8
                      San Clemente                                    26,948           26,017            3.5
                      San Juan Capistrano                             11,780           11,982           1.7
                      Orange County                                1,024,692       1,052,361             2.7
                    Source:    State of California, Department of Finance, E-5 Population and Housing Estimates for
                               Cities, Counties, and the State. May 2007 and May 2012.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                 26

Projected Housing Units
SCAG and the California Department of Finance do not project the number of housing units for the future.
However, SCAG does project the number of households (occupied housing units). Table 11 shows that between the
years 2008 and 2020, San Juan Capistrano will gain approximately 1,000 housing units, an increase of almost 9
percent. During this same time period, Orange County is expected to see a 6 percent increase in number of
households. The increase in housing units is expected to slow between 2020 and 2035.
                                                           Table 11
                                                  Projected Housing Units
                                 San Juan Capistrano and Orange County, 2008 – 2035
                                                                                  Percent     Percent
                                                                                   Change      Change
Jurisdiction                     2008              2020                  2035
                                                                                 2008 - 2020 2020 - 2035
San Juan Capistrano                11.300           12,300                12,300    8.8         0.0
Orange County                     987,000        1,049,000            1,125,000     6.3         7.2
Source:  Number of Households: SCAG. 2010 RTP Growth Forecast: City Projections.
As shown Figure 12, the majority of the housing units in the City and the County are detached single family homes.
Twenty-one percent of the City’s units are single family attached, 12.8 percent are multi-family units, and 12.4
percent are mobile homes. The County has a larger percentage of multi-family units with 32.8 percent and it has a
smaller percentage of mobile homes with 2.9 percent.
                                                           Figure 12
                                                   Type of Housing Units
                                         San Juan Capistrano and Orange County
           Source: 2010 Census
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                            27

Housing Age
The age of a jurisdiction’s housing stock is an important characteristic because it is often an indicator of housing
condition and indicative of potential rehabilitation needs. Many federal and state programs use age of housing as
one factor to determine housing needs and the availability of funds for housing and/or community development.
Figure 13 shows that a very large portion of the housing stock in San Juan Capistrano is relatively new.
Approximately 96 percent of the City’s housing units were built after 1960. The growth after 1960 corresponds
with the incorporation of the City in 1961. However, the City’s very special history includes structures that date
back to the days of the early Spanish and missionary settlers.
                                                      Figure 13
                                                  Year Housing Built
                                   San Juan Capistrano and Orange County, 2010
  Source: Census 2010.
Housing Condition
Housing condition often is defined based on whether or not a unit is substandard. Substandard housing units
include those in need of repair and those in need of replacement. Two types of data that could be used to indicate
substandard housing are the number of units lacking plumbing facilities and the percentage of units built before
1940 (although these do not always indicate substandard conditions). The primary source of information about the
number of substandard units within a jurisdiction is the United States Census.
Plumbing Facilities
San Juan Capistrano did not have a significant amount of substandard housing when considering such factors as
available plumbing facilities and housing age. At the time of the 2010 Census, 100% of units maintained complete
plumbing facilities.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                               28

Pre-1940 Housing
Units may be considered substandard by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) if they
were built before 1940 and have a value less than $35,000. Only one percent of the housing stock in San Juan
Capistrano was built before 1940 according to the 2010 Census, which is approximately 1.7 percent less than in the
County. Again, some of the very old housing units in the City are historic resources which were not included in this
part of the analysis.
Substandard Housing
Of course, the information presented above only can give indirect indication of housing conditions. Based upon a
combination of previous “windshield surveys”, observations and experiences of the code enforcement and
planning staff, and indicators from the redevelopment blight surveys, the City has estimated that approximately
20-30 units would fall into this category, although most, if not all, meet minimum housing and building code
requirements. These units are scattered in the older more urbanized portions of the City. The substandard units do
not appear to be concentrated in any one particular neighborhood but do occur more often in the lower-income
areas. Due to the nature of the housing stock and relatively low number and degree of deterioration, the City does
not anticipate any units needing replacement. There are no capital projects that would cause the removal of units
in the current CIP.
Housing Tenure
Tenure is an important market characteristic because it is directly related to housing types and turnover rates.
Figure 14 shows that in 2010, almost eight out ten households in San Juan Capistrano owned their homes,
compared to 59.2 percent in the County as a whole.
                                                     Figure 14
                                                  Housing Tenure
                                  San Juan Capistrano and Orange County, 2010
     Source: Census 2010.
Affordable Housing
The Orange County Housing Authority administers the Housing Choice Voucher Program (formerly the Section 8
Rental Assistance Program) that extends rental subsidies to very low-income households. The subsidy represents
the difference between the excess of 30 percent of the recipient’s monthly income and the federally approved fair
market rents. As of October 2013, the Orange County Housing Authority was assisting 68 households through the
Housing Choice Voucher Program.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                              29

There are also several affordable housing developments in the City of San Juan Capistrano. Table 12 lists those
projects.
                                                         Table 12
                                              Affordable Housing Projects
                                           City of San Juan Capistrano, 2013
                                      Very              Mod-
                  Name                         Low-               Total      Exp.         Length of Affordability
                                      Low-              erate-
   Villa Paloma Senior Apartments       31       37       16        84   12/14/2055       55 years from 12/14/00
   Casa de Amma Assisted Living          4        7         0       11   03/04/2036        33 years from 3/4/03
   Little Hollywood Rentals*            20        4         0       24   08/16/2060        55 years from 8/16/05
                                                                                        57 years from Certificate of
   Seasons Senior Apts. Phase I         18       74         0       92   2053-2054
                                                                                              Completion date
                                                                                        57 years from Certificate of
   Seasons Senior Apts. Phase II        28       10         0       38   09/01/2066
                                                                                              Completion date
                                                                                        60 years from Certificate of
   Habitat for Humanity                 18        9         0       27   09/19/2066
                                                                                                Occupancy
   Capistrano Valley Mobile Estates      0        1         0        1   09/04/2022      10 years from 09/04/2012
   Total Units Provided Through
                                       119      142       16       277
   -2013:
 * City-owned
 Source: City of San Juan Capistrano.
Assisted Housing Units at Risk of Converting to Market Rate Rents
Housing Element law requires jurisdictions to provide an analysis and program for preserving affordability of
assisted housing developments for the next ten years (2014-2024). San Juan Capistrano has only one assisted unit
with an expiring affordability covenant during that time frame (1 mobile home unit at Capistrano Valley Mobile
Estates). The unit is not considered at risk as it is subsidized by the City and the City anticipates funding to be
available from the Housing In-Lieu Fee program to extend the affordability of the single unit past the 2024
timeframe.
MARKET INDICATORS
Housing Costs
Housing costs are indicative of housing accessibility to all economic segments of the community. Typically, if
housing supply exceeds housing demand, housing costs will fall. If housing demand exceeds housing supply,
housing costs will rise.
The price of housing is influenced by a number of supply and demand factors: availability of developable land, cost
of labor and materials, real estate speculation, governmental land use restrictions (zoning, development
standards, and fees), environmental hazards/constraints, financing and mortgage interest rates, tax policy,
community desirability, availability of infrastructure and public services, employment, and so forth. Because of the
complex interplay of these factors, the concept that increasing the supply of land through density increases alone
will improve affordability is an overly simplistic one.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                  30
Renter Costs
In San Juan Capistrano rents for three bedroom units were averaging about $2,088 per month based on the
University of Southern California 2012 Multifamily Market Report. Table 13 details the average rents found in the
south Orange County region.
                                                                  Table 13
                                                         Cost of Rental Housing
                                                       San Juan Capistrano, 2012
                         Bedroom Size                      One                    Two       Three
                     Average Rent                             $1,421                 $1,702    $2,088
                   Source: University of Southern California 2012 Multifamily Market
In most recent available survey for the South Orange County region rents for three bedroom units were averaging
about $2,088 per month based on the University of Southern California 2012 Multifamily Market Report.
Owner Costs
In 2010, the estimated median housing value for owner-occupied homes in San Juan Capistrano was $550,200
which was higher than the County’s ($522,500). Figure 15 shows that the majority of homes (76.7%) were valued
at $300,000 and above in the Census 2010. Just under twenty percent of homes were valued at $200,000 or less.
                                                                 Figure 15
                                                   Owner-Occupied Housing Value
                                          San Juan Capistrano and Orange County, 2010
  Source: Census 2010.
Table 14 shows the median housing (single family and condos) price sold in 2012 for the south Orange County
Cities and the County as a whole. San Juan Capistrano falls into the middle of the range with $458,000, $19,000
higher than the County’s median cost of $439,000. Based upon Retail Sales Data from DataQuick Real Estate
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                            31

Reports, the average sales price for single family residences was $513,000 and condos were priced at an average of
$419,000.
                                                           Table 14
                                              Median Cost of Resale Homes
                                South Orange County Cities and Orange County, 2012
                                               Jurisdiction               Median Cost
                                  Dana Point                                 $561,750
                                  Laguna Hills                              $436,000
                                  Laguna Niguel                             $510,000
                                  Rancho Santa Margarita                    $355,000
                                  San Clemente                               $607,500
                                  San Juan Capistrano                       $458,000
                                  Orange County                             $439,000
                                 Source: DataQuick Information Services. Sales single-family
                                         homes and condos.2012
Affordability
Any analysis of the local housing market must consider the so-called affordability gap; that is, the existing cost of
housing in comparison to what households could afford based upon state and federal income limits by income
category (very low, low, and moderate). The definitions of income categories and affordable housing payments are
established by law as standard measurements of affordability and do not reflect the private market operations and
industry practices (e.g., debt-to-income ratios) or consumer preference.
Affordability is determined by comparing the cost of housing to the income of local households. If costs are high
relative to income, housing problems such as overcrowding and cost burden are more likely to occur. Orange
County’s high costs of housing impact communities far beyond the affordability problem. The lack of affordable
housing contributes to cost burden, overcrowding, and even homelessness. In assessing housing affordability, the
California Health and Safety Code Section 50052.5 provides the following definition of affordable housing cost
based on the area median income level (AMI) adjusted by family size and income level:
                                                                   Calculation of               Calculation of
                                                                Affordable Housing           Affordable Housing
                                                                  Cost for Owner              Cost for Renters
           Extremely Low (0-30% AMI)                           30% of 30% AMI             30% of 30% AMI
           Very Low (0-50% AMI)                                30% of 50% AMI             30% of 50% AMI
           Lower (51-80% AMI)                                  30% of 70% AMI             30% of 60% AMI
           Moderate Income (81-120% AMI)                       35% of 110% AMI            30% of 110% AMI
As defined by the Health and Safety Code, “adjusted by family size appropriate to the unit” means a household of
one person in the case of a studio unit, two persons in the case of a one-bedroom unit, three persons in the case of
a two-bedroom unit, four persons in the case of a three-bedroom unit, and five persons in the case of a four-
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                32

bedroom unit. Using these updated affordability thresholds, current housing affordability can be estimated for the
various income groups (Table 15).
                                                           Table 15
                                                   Housing Affordability
            Income Group and Household Type                         Maximum Affordable Price
                                                                        Home Purchase              Rental Rate
            Extremely Low (0-30% MFI)
            One Person (Studio)                                             $73,951                    $398
            Two Person (1 bedroom)                                          $88,876                    $462
            Three Person (2 bedrooms)                                       $89,748                    $476
            Four Person (3 bedrooms)                                        $97,690                    $515
            Five Person (4 bedrooms)                                        $96,759                    $516
            Very Low (30-50% MFI)
            One Person (Studio)                                            $135,277                    $696
            Two Person (1 bedroom)                                         $160,151                    $803
            Three Person (2 bedrooms)                                      $169,751                    $859
            Four Person (3 bedrooms)                                       $186,479                    $941
            Five Person (4 bedrooms)                                       $193,461                    $976
            Lower (50-80% MFI)
            One Person (Studio)                                            $197,184                    $997
            Two Person (1 bedroom)                                         $219,789                   $1,109
            Three Person (2 bedrooms)                                      $239,280                   $1,218
            Four Person (3 bedrooms)                                       $257,812                   $1,318
            Five Person (4 bedrooms)                                       $277,362                   $1,412
            Moderate Income (81-120% MFI)
            One Person (Studio)                                            $320,098                   $1,507
            Two Person (1 bedroom)                                         $383,940                   $1,742
            Three Person (2 bedrooms)                                      $425,997                   $1,954
            Four Person (3 bedrooms)                                       $454,928                   $2,135
            Five Person (4 bedrooms)                                       $486,154                   $2,295
            Source: CA Housing and Community Development Department, 2012; MIG, Inc., 2013
            Notations:
            1. Small Family = 3 persons; Large Families = 5 persons
            2. Property taxes and insurance based on averages for the region
            3. Calculation of affordable home sales prices based on a down payment of 10%, annual interest rate
               of 4%, 30-year mortgage, and monthly payment 30% of gross household income
            4. Based on Orange County MFI $85,300 and 2012 HCD State Income Limits
            5. Maximum affordable price also takes into consideration the cost of utilities, taxes, and insurance.
            Calculation of Affordable Housing Cost               Owner                    Rental
               Extremely Low (0-30% AMI)                         30% of 30% AMI           30% of 30% AMI
               Very Low (0-50% AMI)                              30% of 50% AMI           30% of 50% AMI
               Lower (51-80% AMI)                                30% of 70% AMI           30% of 60% AMI
               Moderate Income (81-120% AMI)                     35% of 110% AMI          30% of 110% AMI
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                33
Based upon the affordability thresholds above, rental units in San Juan Capistrano are may only be “affordable” to
the households at the very top of the income range for low-income households and most of the moderate-income
households. For-sale units are not “affordable” to any income category other than those households with levels
substantially above moderate-income. Thus, households must substantially overpay (pay greater than 30% of their
income for housing and in many cases more than 100% of their income).
Some of the least affordable housing is often found in highly-urbanized, densely-populated areas because other
demand-side factors (e.g., location, services, economy) counteract the supply-side advantages that density brings.
The degree to which these other factors influence the price of housing will vary from community to community.
Until recently, the run-up in the real estate market in Orange County illustrated the complexity of the effects of
supply and demand on housing costs.
Vacancy Rates
Vacancy rates are an important housing indicator because they show the degree of choice available. High vacancy
rates usually indicate low demand and/or high supply conditions in the housing market. Too high a vacancy rate
can be difficult for owners trying to sell or rent. Low vacancy rates usually indicate high demand and/or low supply
conditions in the housing market. Too low a vacancy rate can force prices up making it more difficult for low and
moderate income households to find housing. Vacancies between two to three percent are usually considered
healthy for single family housing; and five to six percent for multi-family housing. However, vacancy rates are not
the sole indicator of market conditions. They must be viewed in the context of all the characteristics of the local
and regional market.
The California Department of Finance estimates vacancy rates as part of the housing and population estimate
program. As shown in Table 16, San Juan Capistrano’s vacancy rate is about 4.6%, which is slightly lower than the
County’s.
                                                            Table 16
                                                  Vacancy Rates (by Percent)
                                South Orange County Cities and Orange County, 2007
                          Jurisdiction                                2007          2010           2012
                         Dana Point                                    7.80         11.02          11.02
                         Laguna Hills                                  3.10          5.04           5.22
                         Laguna Niguel                                 2.80          4.27           4.26
                         Rancho Santa Margarita                        1.59          3.45           3.45
                         San Clemente                                  6.10          7.93           7.93
                         San Juan Capistrano                           3.45          4.57           4.57
                         Orange County                                 3.53          5.35           5.42
                       Source:  State of California, Department of Finance, Census 2010, and City/County E-5
                                Housing Estimates January 2012.
Overcrowding
The combination of low incomes and high housing costs has forced many households to live in overcrowded
housing conditions. According to both California and federal standards, a housing unit is considered overcrowded if
it is occupied by more than one person per room (excluding kitchens, bathrooms, and halls). Occupancy by more
than 1.5 persons per room constitutes “severe” overcrowding. Overcrowding can indicate that a community does
not have an adequate supply of affordable housing and/or housing units, especially for large families.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                               34

In 2010, the Census estimated that 916 housing units in San Juan Capistrano were overcrowded based on the 1.01
or more occupants per room threshold. San Juan Capistrano had the largest percentage of overcrowded housing
units (8.1%) of the six south Orange County Cities. However, it was still less than the County (9.7%).
                                                       Table 17
                                              Overcrowded Housing Units
                                  South Orange County Cities and Orange County, 2000
                                             Occupied         Overcrowded(More than           Percent
          Jurisdiction
                                           Housing Units      1.01occupant per room)       Overcrowded
           Dana Point                           14,297                          340                 2.3
           Laguna Hills                         10,850                          455                 4.2
           Laguna Niguel                        24,113                          756                 3.1
           Rancho Santa Margarita               16,339                          704                 4.3
           San Clemente                         23,700                          778                 3.3
           San Juan Capistrano                  11,207                          916                 8.1
                Source: Census 2010.
Overcrowded units in San Juan Capistrano are evenly split between renters and homeowners, with 50 percent
each. The majority of overcrowded units in Orange County, on the other hand, are renter-occupied households.
                                                       Figure 16
                                         Tenure of Overcrowded Housing Units
                                     San Juan Capistrano and Orange County, 2000
              Source: Census 2010.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                          35
Overpayment
State and federal standards specify that households spending more than 30 percent of gross annual income on
housing experience a housing cost burden. Housing cost burdens occur when housing costs increase faster than
household income. When a household spends more than 30 percent of its income on housing costs, it has less
disposable income for other necessities such as health care. In the event of unexpected circumstances such as loss
of employment and health problems, lower-income households with a burdensome housing cost are more likely to
become homeless. Homeowners with a housing cost burden have the option of selling the homes and become
renters. Renters, on the other hand, are vulnerable and subject to constant changes in the housing market.
Table 18 demonstrates the extent of cost burden (overpaying for housing costs) by household type (elderly
households, large households, all households), and income. In summary, lower income households regardless of
tenure were disproportionately experiencing cost burden. Low income elderly renter households and low income
large owner households had the highest levels of cost burden.
                                                       Table 18
                                         Households Experiencing Cost Burden
                                     Extremely       Very Low                          Moderate/
                                   Low Income       Income (31-     Low Income     Above Moderate       All Income
        Household Type                 (0-30%)          50%)          (51-80%)          (81% +)         Categories
Renter-Occupied Households
Elderly (62+ years)                           93%            90%             100%               31%             78%
Large Families (5+ persons)                   89%            64%              62%                0%             53%
Total Renters                                 73%            71%              70%               19%             53%
Owner-Occupied Households
 Elderly (62+ years)                          81%            63%              44%               20%             44%
 Large Families (5+ persons)                 100%           100%              84%               45%             62%
Total Owners                                  85%            75%              62%               35%             47%
Total Households                              81%            74%              64%               33%             48%
Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), 2005-2009.
Estimates of Current Housing Need
CHAS data, developed by the Census for HUD, provides detailed information on housing needs (e.g., housing cost
burden) by income level for different types of households in San Juan Capistrano. Table 19 shows the percentage
of households who experience cost burden and other “housing problems”. For the CHAS data, HUD defines
housing problems to include:
     §    Units with physical defects (lacking complete kitchen or bathroom)
     §    Households living in overcrowded conditions (housing units with more than one person per room)
     §    Households experiencing housing cost burden, including utilities, exceeding 30 percent of gross income
     §    Households experiencing severe housing cost burden, including utilities, exceeding 50 percent of gross
          income
Specific households in San Juan Capistrano had disproportionate housing needs. In general, renter-households had
a higher level of housing problems (61 percent) compared to owner households (48 percent). Among elderly
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                              36

  renter-households in the City, 78 percent experienced one or more housing problems compared to 44 percent of
  elderly owner households. Most large renter families (81%) experienced one or more housing problems, the
  highest rate among all other groups.
                                                        Table 19
                            Housing Assistance Needs of Lower Income Households, 2009
                                                Renters                                    Owners
Household by Type, Income &               Small       Large        Total              Small      Large        Total     Total
       Housing Problem          Elderly  Families Families Renters Elderly Families Families Owners HHs
Extremely Low-Income (0-30%
MFI)                            145     60         135          445        545      205        35           865        1,310
with any housing problems       93%     100%       89%          80%        83%      88%        100%         86%        84%
with cost burden > 30%          93%     42%        89%          73%        81%      88%        100%         85%        81%
with cost burden > 50%          86%     42%        89%          71%        72%      88%        100%         75%        73%
Very Low-Income (31-50%
MFI)                            99      215        110          450        435      170        130          855        1,305
with any housing problems       90%     58%        86%          76%        63%      91%        100%         75%        75%
with cost burden > 30%          90%     58%        64%          71%        63%      91%        100%         75%        74%
with cost burden > 50%          66%     53%        0%           47%        29%      88%        88%          56%        52%
Low-Income (51-80% MFI)         20      185        130          435        515      540        225          1,380      1,815
with any housing problems       100%    76%        92%          79%        45%      70%        89%          64%        67%
with cost burden > 30%          100%    76%        62%          70%        44%      69%        84%          62%        64%
with cost burden > 50%          0%      11%        0%           7%         19%      60%        49%          42%        33%
Moderate-Income (81% + MFI) 80          335        130          745        1,205    3,720      685          6,335      7,080
with any housing problems       31%     36%        58%          30%        20%      38%        53%          36%        35%
with cost burden > 30%          31%     36%        0%           19%        20%      37%        45%          35%        33%
with cost burden > 50%          0%      10%        0%           5%         5%       9%         13%          9%         8%
Total Households                344     795        505          2,075      2,700    4,635      1,075        9,435      11,510
with any housing problems       78%     56%        81%          61%        44%      46%        67%          48%        50%
with cost burden > 30%          78%     52%        53%          53%        44%      45%        62%          47%        48%
with cost burden > 50%          55%     25%        24%          28%        25%      21%        33%          24%        25%
Source: HUD Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), 2005-2009.
Notes: HUD CHAS (Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy) data is based on tabulations from the American
Community Survey (ACS) and has a smaller sample size than the Decennial Census. Due to the smaller sample size, the
data presented may have significant margins of error, particularly for smaller geographies. The intent of the data is to
show general proportions of household need, not exact numbers.
  Projected Housing Need
  California General Plan law requires each city and county to have land zoned to accommodate its fair share of the
  regional housing need. This share for the SCAG region is known as the Regional Housing Needs Allocation, or
  RHNA. HCD determined that the projected housing need for the Southern California region (including the counties
  of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, Ventura, and Imperial) is 412,721 new housing units for the
  2014-2021 planning period. SCAG allocated this projected growth to the various cities and unincorporated county
  areas within the SCAG region, creating the RHNA. The RHNA is divided into four categories: very low, low,
  moderate, and above moderate income. As determined by SCAG, the City of San Juan Capistrano’s fair share
  allocation is 638 new housing units during this planning cycle, with the units divided among the four income
  categories as shown in Table 20.
  San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                    37

                                                              Table 20
                                                        RHNA 2014-2021
                                                                          2013 Total
                                                  % of County          Housing Units            Percentage of
                   Income Group                       AMI                  Allocated                 Units
                   Extremely/Very Low                0-50%                    147                     23%
                   Low                               51-80%                   104                     16%
                   Moderate                         81-120%                   120                     19%
                   Above moderate                    120%+                    267                     42%
                   Total                                                      638                    100%
                   Source: Southern California Association of Governments
                   Note: Pursuant to AB 2634, local jurisdictions are also required to project the housing needs of
                   extremely low-income households (0-30% AMI). In estimating the number of extremely low-
                   income households, a jurisdiction can use 50% of the very low-income allocation or apportion
                   the very low-income figure based on Census data. As shown in Table 3, extremely low- and
                   very low-income households total 2,615 households, with extremely low-income households
                   comprising 50% of the total. Therefore, the City’s very low-income RHNA of 147 units can be
                   split into 73 extremely low-income and 74 very low-income units.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                 38

                                    CONSTRAINTS TO THE PROVISION OF HOUSING
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                       39
CONSTRAINTS TO THE PROVISION OF HOUSING
Actual or potential constraints to the provision of housing affect the development of new housing and the
maintenance of existing units for all income levels. Both governmental and non-governmental constraints can
affect the cost, supply, and demand for housing. Governmental constraints can include such things as government
land use and construction or tax codes, while non-governmental constraints would encompass factors such as
market mechanisms, physical or environmental constraints, or the health of the economy. This chapter addresses
those constraints that are relevant to the people who live and work in San Juan Capistrano.
GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
Governmental constraints can limit the operations of the public, private, and nonprofit sectors, making it difficult
to meet the demand for housing and limiting supply in a region. Such constraints can limit access to housing to or
from various ethnic, racial, or social groups, or prevent lower-income segments of society from having adequate
housing opportunities. Potential governmental constraints include, but are not limited to, growth management
measures, inclusionary zoning, land use controls, building codes, processing fees and procedures, exactions,
property taxes, and site improvement costs.
In San Juan Capistrano, Governmental Constraints include zoning code provisions, enforcement requirements, on
and off site improvement requirements for support infrastructure and utilities, fees and exactions, processing and
permit procedures, and growth controls. These constraints are identified in this section.
Land Use Controls
The current developmental standards contained within the Land Use Code limit the development of affordable
housing in several ways. Adopted in 1999, the General Plan, a comprehensive, long-range general policy
statement, establishes the overall character and development patterns of the community. The Land Use Element
of the General Plan provides for a variety of residential densities dispersed throughout the City. The provisions of
the Element do not constrain the opportunity for a broad range of housing types and densities.
Much of the community can be characterized as residential and rural residential. A large part of the remaining
vacant land to be developed consists of parcels with environmental constraints, with topographic and drainage
constraints, and with other limitations as identified in the Public Safety and Resource Management elements of
the General Plan. Much of the land has been designated single family residential. However, opportunities for multi-
family development based on the multi-family land use designations can be found in many areas of the City.
The land use controls and development standards described are below comparable to, and in some cases less
demanding than the typical set of requirements necessary for residential development throughout the State and
have not, and will continue not to, impede nor substantially impact the cost of the development of affordable
housing and the maximum densities necessary. The City will continue to provide a broad range of housing types for
all income groups necessary to meet the City’s regional share. The cumulative effect of the City’s development
standards, its height limits and maximum second floor per first floor ratio of 80 percent has not deterred the
development of affordable housing. The City has recently developed affordable housing at densities well within
these standards. The Seasons development provided 38 units of affordable housing on 1.5 acres in late 2009. The
City, in partnership with Habitat for Humanity, provided 27 affordable units on 4 acres in 2010. Finally, the City
built, owns, and rents out 24 affordable units (10 developed in 2009) as free standing single family detached in the
Little Hollywood development on approximately 4.5 acres.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                               40

                                                                                 Table 21
                                                           Existing Residential Development Standards
                                                                    City of San Juan Capistrano
                                                                        One Story1                                       Two Story1
                                             Min                                                                                                     Max 2nd
                                                         Min          Min          Min                     Min       Min          Min                            Build.
                    Max          Min       Street
 District                                               Front         Side        Rear       Max Lot      Front      Side        Rear     Max Lot Floor/ 1st    Height
                  Density     Lot Area    Frontage                                                                                                     Floor
                                                         Yard        Yard        Yard       Coverage      Yard       Yard        Yard     Coverage
                                                           3,4         3,5,6      3,7,8,19
                                                                                              Ratio         3,4       3,5,6      3,7,8,19
                                                                                                                                           Ratio 9     Ratio
                                            (feet)       (feet)      (feet)       (feet)                  (feet)     (feet)      (feet)                          (feet)
      10,11
RA               0.4 du/ac     2.5 acres   200                 150        20           50      0.12          150        20           50     0.12       75%          35
                  Ref. 9-
HR 12,13                      10,000 s.f.    60             25-20      15-5       25/20         0.4       25-20      15-5       25-20       0.35       80%          35
                 3.301c(2)
RSE-
40,000            1 du/ac     40,000 s.f.  150                  30        20           25      0.15            30       20           25     0.15       75%          35
10,11
RSE-
20,000            2 du/ac     20,000 s.f.    90                 30        10           25      0.25            30       10           25     0.25       80%          35
10,11
RS-
10,000           3.5 du/ac    10,000 s.f.    60                 20     10-5            25       0.4            20       10           25     0.35       80%          35
10,11
RS-
7,000             5 du/ac     7,000 s.f.     60                 20          5          20      0.45            20    10-5            20     0.32       80%          35
10,11
RG-
7,000             5 du/ac     7,000 s.f.    60.                 20     10-0            20      0.45            20    10-0            20     0.32       80%          35
10,11,15
RS-
4,000             8 du/ac     4,000 s.f.     50                 18          5          16       0.5            20    10-5            20     0.35       80%          35
10,11,14
MRD-
4,000             8 du/ac     4,000 s.f.     50                 18          5          16       0.5            20    10-5            20     0.35       80%          35
10,11,17,18
RG-
4,000             8 du/ac     4,000 s.f.     50                 18     10-0            16       0.5            20    10-0            20     0.35       80%          35
10,11,14,15
RM*
10,16            18 du/ac       1 acre     150                  30        20           20      n/a             20       20           20     0.35       80%          35
VHDR10
,16              30 du/ac       1 acre     150                  30        20           20      n/a             20       20           20     0.35       80%          35
            Notes:
            MHP development standards for mobile homes shall be per State law. Max = Maximum             Min = Minimum DU = Dwelling Unit
            1
              All new residential projects shall incorporate a combination of one- and two-story units adjacent to all master planned arterial streets, with at
              least 20 percent of the total project units being one-story. In addition, in the HR District, one- and two-story structures shall be intermixed to
              provide a variety of roof lines, building mass, and setbacks, and two-story structures shall not be located adjacent to project entries or to
              existing single-story residences.
            2
              Lots with street frontages below the minimum set forth in this table may be permitted without the approval of a variance if all of the following
              conditions are met:
              (a) The lot’s street frontage remains a minimum of 20 feet; (b) The lot is designed such that the reduced width portion constitutes an access
              corridor to the buildable portion, which is set back away from the street; (c) The minimum width of the buildable portion of the lot conforms
              to the requirements of this table; and (d) The Planning Commission determines that adequate visitor parking will be provided on the lot to
              compensate for the loss of street frontage parking.
              The actual creation of reduced frontage lots shall be subject to normal City approval of required tract or parcel maps. Reduced frontage portion
              of such lots shall not be included in the computation of lot area (see Section 9-4.315, Irregular and Cul-de-sac Lots.)
            San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                                              41

3
    The criteria for measuring setbacks on irregularly shaped and cul-de-sac lots are set forth in Section 9-4.315, Irregular and Cul-de-sac Lots.
4
    The setback for garages shall maintain the minimum setbacks for the district. For those residential districts that allow a minimum front yard of
    18 feet or less, a minimum setback of 18 feet from the front property line shall be maintained for the garage. If the garage is a side entry, the
    front yard setback may be reduced to a minimum of 10 feet. However, in no instance shall side entry garages using this standard exceed 20
    percent of the total units for the residential project. In the MRD-4,000 District, garages shall comply with Section 9-3.301(c) (4) (C) (2) of
    these regulations.
5
    Architectural projections may extend into required side yards no more than 40% of the applicable district requirement, or more than 3 feet
    whichever is greater.
6
    Minimum exterior side yards shall not be less than 10 feet for all districts, except for the HR District, in which the minimum exterior side yard
    adjacent to the street shall not be less than 15 feet.
7
    On lots with an existing building setback encroachment into a required rear yard, structural additions having the same said encroachments shall
    be permitted without the approval of a variance. However, neither new encroachment in excess of that existing, nor any new encroachment
    may be permitted without the approval of a variance (see Section 9-3.533, Nonconforming Uses, Lots, and Structures).
8
    In the RA, HR. RSE-40,000, RSE-20,000, RS-10,000, RS-7,000, RS-4,000, RG-7,000, RG-4,000, MRD-4,000, and RM, Districts, open patios
    may extend up to a minimum of 5 feet from rear property lines pursuant to Section 9-3.501, Accessory Uses and Structures.
9
    The overall building square footage for the primary structure shall not exceed that using the floor area ratio. For the purposes of calculating
    overall square footage, open volume ceilings that include second story area shall be included as square footage as if a second floor has been
    installed said area shall include garage and enclosed porches.
10
    All front, side, and exterior side architectural elevations shall be fully articulated with the integration of details and materials consistent with
    the approved architectural style of the unit for residential subdivision.
11
    Single-family Design Standards: In all districts where single-family dwellings (site-built, modular, or manufactured home) are permitted, such
    dwellings shall be subject to the development standards for that district as well as the following requirements:
    (a) The minimum width of the residential dwelling shall be 20 feet outside dimension measured to the building line. For the purposes of this
    section, the width shall be distinguished from the length of the building as the dimension having the lesser measurement; (b) The exterior
    sides shall be covered with wood, stucco, masonry, or other material of similar texture and durability. Metal siding shall not be permitted;
    (c) The roof material shall be wood shingle or shake, slate, tile, or other material of similar appearance, texture, substance, and durability;
    (d) Roof eaves and gables shall be no less than 12 inches, measured from the vertical side of the unit, unless otherwise approved by the
    Planning Commission.
    The preceding criteria shall be administered by either the Planning Director or Planning Commission, depending on which is responsible for
    reviewing specific residential projects or custom homes prior to plan check.
12
   HR Design Standards: A residential project in the HR District shall be in compliance with the following:
    (a) The residential design of the project shall give the appearance of a variety of setbacks; (b) The residential design shall encourage
    pedestrian use for internal circulation; (c) Existing mature trees shall be preserved to the maximum extent and shall be integrated into the
    overall design of the project.
13
   In the HR District, as part of the subdivision review process, lots shall comply with the following:
    (a) At least 30% of the units shall maintain a minimum front yard setback of 25 feet and rear yard setback of 20 feet; (b) At least 70% of the
    units shall maintain a minimum front yard setback of 20 feet and rear yard setback of 25 feet; (c) The minimum side yard setbacks shall be
    15 feet combined, but not less than 5 feet on one interior side yard.
14
   Projects that propose 7,000 square foot lots or less shall provide private common recreational facilities equal to 250 square feet per unit. In
    addition, the minimum setback from a master planned arterial street shall be 25 feet as measured from the ultimate right-of-way. A homeowner
    association shall be created to maintain all the recreational facilities and landscaping and to assume other responsibilities as appropriate. The
    organization, legal authority, duties, and obligations for such homeowner association shall be set forth in a set of Codes, Covenants, and
    Restrictions (CC&R) to be approved by the Planning Commission and recorded with the final tract map. Such CC&R shall incorporate
    provisions for the City to take over or otherwise provide for the maintenance of all the recreational facilities, landscaping, and common areas
    should the City determine that adequate maintenance is not being performed.
15
   The RG-7,000 and RG-4,000 Districts allow attached units with zero lot lines.
16
   In the “RM” “VHDR” District, a minimum distance of 20 feet shall be maintained between all buildings including principal and accessory
    structures.
17
   The minimum lot depth in the MRD-4,000 District shall be 65'-0".
18
   In the Mission Hill area of the MRD-4,000 District, lots with an average slope in the front yard of less than 15% shall comply with the
    minimum front yard setback. Lots with an average slope equal to or greater than 15% shall provide a minimum 10 feet setback. In the Mission
    Flat area of the MRD-4,000 District, the principle dwelling, with or without an attached front-loaded garage, shall maintain a minimum front
    yard setback of 18'-0" for one-story and 20'-0" for two-story structures.
19
    In the MRD-4,000 District, detached garages situated to the rear of the principal dwelling shall maintain a minimum 3'-0" side and rear yard
    setback. Detached garages may incorporate other permitted accessory uses.
    Source: City of San Juan Capistrano Municipal Code, Title 9 Chapter 3.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                                                  42

Expanded Analysis of Development Standards
The standard development review process takes into account density allowances established by the General Plan,
in the form of maximum and average densities as a finding of approval or denial. Further the City’s Municipal Code
further restricts proposed development by limiting building heights, restricting second floor area to only 80% of
the first floor area, lot coverage, setbacks, and parking requirements. These increasingly restrictive governmental
constraints potentially create uncertain costs and products going into the process.
Through the use of the Planned Community/Specific Plan method a more flexible and innovative approach can
occur. Specifically the General Plan rather than dictating average and maximum densities for individual lots within
General Plan Designations provides only general parameters for development uses. This allows for specific
densities to be identified during the creation of a Specific Plan or Comprehensive Development Plan. Additionally
the Municipal Code’s district regulations and supplemental regulations are not applied and specific development
standards are established through the creation of a Specific Plan or Comprehensive Development Plan. This form
of innovative Planning process reduces the amount of Governmental constraints, while providing a more
consensus approach to which the Developer is a stakeholder in thus providing additional certainty to the process.
Zoning for a Variety of Housing Types
Zoning ordinances directly shape the form and intensity of residential development by providing controls over land
use, building heights, lot coverage, and floor area ratios which regulate the bulk and mass of buildings on a site.
Table 21 shows that residential zoning categories in the City cover a broad spectrum of densities.
The City’s Land Use Element includes a mix of densities to provide for new residential units, which will be
affordable to a variety of income levels. The Housing Resources section demonstrates the City’s ability to identify
adequate sites for its share of the region’s housing needs as determined by the SCAG.
1.   Manufactured and modular homes on a permanent foundation system: These uses are permitted in most of
     the residential zones (RA, HR, RSE-40,000, RSE-20,000, RS-10,000, RS-7,000, RS-4,000, RG-4,000, RM, and AF/S
     MHP. The permitting of manufactured housing on foundations is subject to the same development standards
     as conventional single-family units, consistent with Government Code Section 65852.3. The City considers
     proposals for farm worker housing within this category.
2.   Transitional housing (residential care facilities (6 or fewer persons)): These uses are permitted in most of the
     residential zones (RA, HR, RSE-40,000, RSE-20,000, RS-10,000, RS-7,000, RS-4,000, MRD-4,000, and RG-4,000).
     The permitting of residential care facilities (6 or fewer persons) is subject to the same development standards
     as conventional single-family units, consistent with Government Code Section 65852.3.
3.   Transitional housing (residential care facilities (over 6 persons)): These uses are conditionally permitted in
     most of the residential zones (RA, HR, RSE-40,000, RSE-20,000, RS-10,000, RS-7,000, RS-4,000, and RG-4,000.
4.   Transitional housing (alcoholism recovery residential facilities (six or fewer persons)): These uses are
     permitted in most of the residential zones (RA, HR, RSE-40,000, RSE-20,000, RS-10,000, RS-7,000, RS-4,000,
     MRD-4,000, RG-4,000, RM, AF/S, and MHP. The permitting of alcoholism recovery residential facilities (six or
     fewer persons) is subject to the same development standards as conventional single-family units, consistent
     with Government Code Section 65852.3.
5.   Transitional housing (family care homes (14 or fewer children)): These uses are permitted in most of the
     residential zones (RA, HR, RSE-40,000, RSE-20,000, RS-10,000, RS-7,000, RS-4,000, RG-4,000, RM, AF/S, and
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                43

     MHP. Family care homes (14 or fewer children) are subject to the same development standards as
     conventional single-family units, consistent with Government Code Section 65852.3 except in the MRD-4,000
     zone which requires a conditional use permit.
6.   Transitional housing (migrant and/or farm workers (six or fewer persons)): These uses are permitted in most
     of the residential zones (RA, HR, RSE-40,000, RSE-20,000, RS-10,000, RS-7,000, RS-4,000, MRD-4,000, RG-
     4,000, RM, AF/S, and MHP.
7.   The permitting of employee housing and transitional housing for migrant and/or farm workers (six or fewer
     persons) is subject to the same development standards as conventional single-family units, consistent with the
     Employee Housing Act. In accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 17021.5 and 17021.6 employee
     housing occupied by six (6) or fewer employees in a single family structure, are treated the same as any other
     single family dwelling in the same zone.
8.   Emergency shelters: The City adopted a Supportive Housing code which permits emergency shelters,
     transitional housing, and supportive housing facilities within the Public and Institutional zoning district by
     right, or not subject to approval of a conditional use permit. The City has approximately 186 acres for this
     category. Of this amount, approximately 90 acres are currently vacant of which approximately 30 acres could
     be considered a suitable location for housing for this special group. In addition, existing Public Institutional
     sites may also be compatible for this type of housing with adjacent land uses.
9.   Mobile Homes: The City has seven mobile home parks that are valuable resources for the provision of
     affordable housing. The mobile home parks constitute 12.4% of the City’s housing stock (1,485 of 11,982 total
     units). The City has a number of programs in place to protect the affordability of these units. The City has a
     mobile home park zoning category (MPH) that provides for such use. City Council has consistently expressed a
     strong interest in encouraging the preservation of mobile homes and on numerous occasions have expressed
     interest in receiving credit for these programs as part of their overall effort to address affordable housing
     needs.
10. The City would consider Single Room Occupancy’s (SRO), which would convert hotel rooms into long term
     living quarters, as if they were hotel submittals. However, the City has never had a proposal for SRO’s to date,
     and with only two hotels City-wide, the possibility of receiving a proposal is improbable.
11. Family Definition: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption, or a group of persons
     including unrelated individuals, living together as a relatively permanent, bona fide housekeeping unit.
Inclusionary Housing
Developers of new residential developments with two or more units are required to provide 10% of the
development as affordable housing or pay fees in-lieu of reserving affordable housing units for very low, low, and
moderate income households. The purpose of the fees is to promote the construction and/or assistance of
affordable housing projects throughout the City. The fees are dedicated to an affordable housing fund. The
collected funds can only be used for programs outlined in the Hope Plan (Housing Opportunities Program
Empowerment Plan), as established by City Council, in order to meet the housing needs of very low, low, and
moderate income households. The programs assist their housing needs through the production, acquisition,
rehabilitation, and preservation of affordable housing units. The amount of the in-lieu fees is calculated using the
housing market variables. The rental developments have a fee that is calculated annually, and ownership
developments have a fee that is calculated monthly. The fee formula is within the City of San Juan Capistrano
Municipal Code Section 9-5.103.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                44

Building Code
The City has adopted and enforces the Uniform Building Code as Title 8 of the Municipal Code. This Code ensures
that all housing units are built to specific standards, which are considered to be the minimum necessary to protect
the public’s health, safety, and welfare. The City has adopted the Code with few administrative amendments for
fire safety and protection. These amendments always place greater restrictions and requirements on development
rather than reduce standards.
The requirement that all rental and multi-family buildings install fire sprinklers adds approximately $2 - $5.00 per
square feet in construction costs. In most cases, the sprinkler requirement will not affect multi-family projects, but
it does add to the costs for building housing in San Juan Capistrano.
To ensure that standards for building construction are met, the City has a staged inspection program where
inspectors review projects and also carry out inspections on a complaint basis. These enforcement activities are
conducted in a sensitive manner and a minimum of two written violation notifications are given to violators.
Although code requirements and enforcement are necessary, they do add a cost to the construction of affordable
housing because the minimum safety requirements must be met by all development, and therefore, set a
minimum cost of a unit’s construction.
Development Fees
A developer is required to pay building fees as part of the permit process in order to construct housing in the City.
Fees are outlined in the City’s adopted Building Fee schedule and vary based on the valuation of the project.
Valuation is determined by the square footage of the project multiplied by the Building Standards factors for this
region’s cost of construction per square foot. Therefore, the larger the unit, the more expensive the fees are. Table
22 summarizes the building fees.
There are other fees in addition to building fees for residential projects. The school and transportation systems
also require fees. The school system charges $2.97 per square foot for new residential developments. The
transportation system charges from $2,158 to $5,086 per unit. Each of these fees are charged by outside agencies
and authorized by specific State legislation.
On average, fees for a single family development are comparable to the surrounding jurisdictions in Orange County
and represent a reasonable level of fees necessary to retain the quality of development that characterizes the
City’s standards. The average fee is slightly less for multi-family units. Fees represent a barrier to the construction
of affordable housing because they increase the minimum costs of a dwelling unit and are passed onto the
purchaser or renter.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                  45

                                                                   Table 22
                                                         Building Fees Summary
                                                      City of San Juan Capistrano
                     Descriptions                                                            Fee
                      § Building Permit Fees                         Dependent upon valuation of project
                      § Construction and Demolition
                              Submittal                              $92.74
                              Deposit                                1% of valuation, with $250 minimum
                      § Base Fees
                              Base                                   ICBO Building Valuation Data per sq. ft. (changes
                                                                     depending on type of development)
                              Building Permit                        Dependent upon valuation of project
                              Permit Issuance                        $26.92
                              Building Address                       $86.93
                              NPDES Permit Fee                       10% of permit fee
                   Source: City of San Juan Capistrano Web site, July 1, 2012. Building Fees Summary.
Planning fees are different from building fees because they are based upon the type of application necessary for
project approvals. The City processing fees are part of a development deposit, whereby an applicant deposits a
specified amount of money to cover the actual costs of processing the application. If the deposit is exhausted,
additional deposits are necessary; refunds also can occur (i.e. if there is money remaining within a deposit after the
project has been officially approved or denied). These planning fees are another cost to development which affects
the affordability of housing. The planning fees and developer deposits are shown in Table 23.
Developers of new residential developments with two or more units are required to pay fees in-lieu of reserving
affordable housing units for very low, low, and moderate income households. The purpose of the fees is to
promote the construction and/or assistance of affordable housing projects throughout the City. The fees are
dedicated to an affordable housing fund. The collected funds can only be used for programs outlined in the Hope
Plan (Housing Opportunities Program Empowerment Plan), as established by City Council, in order to meet the
housing needs of very low, low, and moderate income households. The programs assist their housing needs
through the production, acquisition, rehabilitation, and preservation of affordable housing units. The amount of
the in-lieu fees is one percent of valuation as determined under the City of San Juan Capistrano Municipal Code
Section 8-1.05.
                                                                   Table 23
                                                          Planning Related Fees
                                                      City of San Juan Capistrano
          Applications                                                                                          Fees/Deposits
          General Plan Amendment                                                                                   $10,000
          Zone Change                                                                                               $4,000
          Zone Change with CDPs, SDPs, or Code Amendments                                                           $5,000
          Zone Variance (not with other applications)                                                               $2,000
          Zone Variance (with Arch. Control and Conditional Use Permit applications)                                $2,000
          Conditional Use Permit                                                                                    $8,000
          Floodplain Development Permit                                                                             $1,500
          Administrative Approval/Land Use Adjustment/Modification                                                  $2,000
          Architectural Control                                                                                    $15,000
          Tentative Parcel Map                                                                                      $5,000
          Tentative Parcel Map Waiver                                                                               $1,500
          Tentative Subdivision (Tract Map)                                                                        $10,000
         Source: City of San Juan Capistrano Web site, July 1, 2012. Planning Fees Summary.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                           46

In San Juan Capistrano, total typical development fees (planning, building and impact fees) are approximately
$47,000 per unit for a 2,500 sf single family dwelling and $43,500 per unit for a multi-family unit of 900 sf. While
impact fees and connection fees contribute to development costs, the fees are necessary to provide sewer service
to the developments, and provide adequate funding to maintain the City’s parks and schools.
Processing and Permit Procedures
The City of San Juan Capistrano has a proactive developmental review process that provides certainty to both the
development community and the residents of the City while taking into account the need to maintain its beautiful
setting. The City provides certainty by specifically spelling out its permit and application processes through
pamphlets available at the planning department and through the City’s web site.
The Review process consists of three main steps; each step is spelled out specifically so that the development
community is aware of the requirements prior to submittal. A summary of the key features of the site review
application process is described in the following paragraphs:
1.    The first step is the pre-application. The applicant meets with the staff and become familiar with applicable
     General plan, historical guidelines and zoning requirements applicable to the project. Thus, certainty regarding
     the requirements is provided at the outset of the process. These standards also are on the City website, with
     all forms, aerial photographs, examples of projects and other extensive helpful data.
2.   The second step is the submittal of the application. Within 30 calendar days of submittal (at least twice a
     month), the City staff holds a Development Advisory Board meeting to review the application for
     completeness. Key senior staff members from all the key departments meet simultaneously with the applicant
     to go over the proposal, clarify details, and to offer suggestions to insure expeditious processing and certainty.
     A formal, written follow-up letter is expeditiously provided to the applicant by staff (normally within five
     working days) to confirm the details discussed and to increase certainty in the process. Thus, the applicant will
     know at the outset if any additional elements are required as part of the application.
3.   The third step is a public hearing on the application.
The Site Plan Review Process assures that new development conforms to the City’s general plan, U. S. Federal
Government required the Secretary of the Interior’s Guidelines, and, if necessary, the Los Rios Specific Plan
guidelines for those few projects located in the Federal and State recognized historic districts/properties. The
process spells out the submission requirements, including the application packet contents, fees required, and
other materials.
The City also specifically spells out the Architectural Control Application process through pamphlets available at
the planning department and on the City’s web site. These steps are similar to the site plan review described above
except the hearing takes place before the planning Commission. The Architectural Control Application process
assures that new development conforms to the City’s General Plan, Land Use Codes, and Architectural Design
Guidelines. The City requires all developments with a density of eight units per acre or greater to process an
Architectural Control Application. The City’s Planning Commission has decision-making authority on these
applications. Architectural Control Application process spells out the submission requirements, including the
application packet contents, fees required, and other materials in a manner very close to the site review process.
The findings of approval are tied to the projects compliance to the City’s General plan, land use Codes, and zoning
requirements. These findings are the same for single family as for multi-family. The impact on the approval
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                 47

certainty is spelled out specifically in the aforementioned materials and guidelines. Thus, there should be no
surprises to the applicant as a result of this process.
This requirement for quality affects the time frame for receiving developmental approval. The City’s committee
and commission process for larger projects may take four to eight months. The City collects deposits to cover the
cost of staff and administrative time associated with processing the applications and presenting reports to the
Committees, Commissions and City Council Table 31.
After receiving developmental approval, an applicant must apply for grading and building permits. Although the
building department has a quick turn-around for review of plans, applicants are usually required to revise their
plans to make them comply with the State of California established Building Code requirements. The revision
process also affects the time frame for receiving a building or grading permit. However, the developers’ design
team can greatly reduce this latter impact by giving attention to plan preparation.
The “holding costs” associated with waiting for project approval can affect the affordability of housing. These costs
are passed along into the final price of the housing unit.
The City eliminated several committees including the Housing Advisory Committee, the Design Review Committee,
and the Transportation Commission to streamline the review process. The City is currently establishing a
streamline table which will show developers the process of each type of review to ensure each project remains on-
track.
Density Bonus
The City’s Density Bonus Ordinance (Chapter 9-3.505 of the Municipal Code) allows up to a 35 percent increase in
density where units are reserved for lower-income (minimum 10 percent) or very low-income (minimum 5
percent) units, or condominium units are reserved for moderate-income residents (minimum 10 percent). Density
bonuses are also available to applicants who donate at least 10 percent of their land for affordable housing (15 to
35 percent density bonus increase) or when a childcare facility is involved (matching square footage increase).
Projects that are eligible to receive a density bonus can benefit from other incentives, including reduced parking
requirements and waiver or modification of certain development standards. The Density Bonus Ordinance is
consistent with California Government Code Section 65915.
Design Review
The City has instituted an architectural control (AC) review procedure for residential projects with a zoning
designation of eight units per acre or higher and/or the construction of three or more units on a lot. The process
requires an application to be submitted to the Planning Department. The reviewing authority is the Planning
Commission or the City Council on appeal. The City concurrently reviews the AC application while other
requirements also are being reviewed (e. g., rezoning, subdivision, use permits, variances, etc.). The process does
not significantly impact the time or cost of the development of housing (including affordable housing) in the City
due to the concurrency of the review process with other review processes and due to the fact that the
requirements are comparable to the requirements of all residential development within the City and comparable
to the processes followed by many Orange County cities.
Parking
The City’s parking requirements are:
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                48

     ·    Group Residential: one space per room and one per dwelling unit plus one space per 100 square feet for
          assembly purposes (if applicable);
     ·    Multifamily Residential: 2 spaces per unit, including one covered, and 0.8 spaces per dwelling unit for
          visitor parking;
     ·    Residential Care: one space per 3 beds;
     ·    Single Family Residential: two enclosed spaces per unit; and
     ·    Senior Housing Units: one space per unit.
These parking standards are necessary to protect the public health and welfare and community ambiance. The
standards do not measurably impact the cost of housing and are reasonable standards for developments
throughout the State.
Parking standards for single family and low density residential are generally addressed on site and could
theoretically impact the supply of housing by marginally limiting the amount of land available for more units on the
site. However, the parking standards in San Juan Capistrano are essentially equivalent to, or less than, those of the
surrounding Orange County jurisdictions. The City has provided a number of affordable housing projects to which
the current standards were applied. The application of those standards did not prevent the construction of
affordable housing.
On a case-by-case basis the City has, and can, modify these standards for affordable housing. Parking for higher
density units require a different construction style (usually podium style with stalls under the units) and run about
$23,000 per stall. These costs are industry standards and would constitute less than 10 percent of the costs of
smaller affordable housing units and less for larger affordable units. Again, these costs are part of the overall costs
of housing development and necessary for parking needs generated by the residential units and do not impact the
supply nor the cost of such housing beyond what residential development normally occurs.
On- and Off-Site Improvement Requirements
On- and off-site improvements represent a substantial amount of the housing construction costs. Projects in San
Juan Capistrano are required to underground utilities; install street lights and traffic signals; provide water
transmission facilities, drainage, and sanitary sewers. In addition, if a project is anticipated to directly and
significantly impact an existing roadway or other facility, the City can require additional fees or improvements
necessary to mitigate impacts in accordance with California Environmental Quality Act provisions. These costs also
increase the cost of housing production and can represent a barrier to affordable housing.
Code Enforcement
The City’s Code Enforcement staff responds to potential violations of the City of San Juan Capistrano Municipal
Code. The City has two code enforcement officers whose responsibility it is to investigate complaints of property
maintenance and municipal code violations. After an inspection is made to determine the validity, nature, and
extent of violation(s) and if the code violation is observed, the property owner is informed and given an
opportunity to bring the property into compliance.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                  49

If corrective action is not completed in a reasonable time, or manner, the City may file a criminal complaint
through the City Attorney’s office. Through the code enforcement process, a number of blighted properties
throughout the community have significantly been reduced.
The City provides on-line services for filing potential code enforcement violations, access to the City’s Municipal
Code and other resources that assist homeowners in correcting code deficiencies.
Endangered Species Act
Some of the remaining vacant land designated for residential development by the General Plan is either partially or
wholly impacted by the animals and plant species that are listed on the Endangered Species Act. Such lands are
currently being evaluated as part of the coordinated effort by the State and Federal governments to create the
Natural Communities Conservation Plan for the Orange County region. Final disposition of the impacts of the
preservation program may create some limited constraints on the development of these properties in the City. In
those properties that would possibly result in a partial take, significant mitigation fees or actions are imposed by
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California Department of Fish and Game in order to develop the property. In
many instances, the permit processing time associated with these two agencies is prolonged and can add a
significant cost to the price of housing. Although this is an issue of statewide importance, the costs of preservation
will continue to be a constraint to creating affordable housing as well as the limitation on the available land for
other residential purposes at the local level.
Growth Management Measures
The City’s General Plan, adopted in December 1999, includes a Growth Management Element. The basis for the
element is Measure M, passed in 1990, which requires Orange County cities to adopt a growth management
element in order to receive funds from a half cent sales tax for transportation improvements. As a developed
community, San Juan Capistrano was only required to address the transportation related requirements of Measure
M. However, the City has expanded the scope to address other public facilities. The Growth Management Element
neither poses a constraint on current or future housing production, nor impedes the City’s ability to accommodate
its share of the regional housing need. This Element addresses how the City will accommodate the infrastructure
for new development; it does not include a cap to new development.
Housing for Persons with Disabilities
As noted in the Special Needs section of the Housing Element, persons with disabilities have a number of specific
housing needs, including design and location. Design needs generally include the removal of architectural barriers
that limit the accessibility of dwelling units, and construction of wheelchair ramps, railings, etc. Location needs
include accessibility to public transportation, commercial services, healthcare, and supportive services. Some
persons with disabilities need group housing opportunities, especially those who are very low-income or homeless.
The City has adopted the 2010 California Building Code. Standards within the Code include provisions to ensure
accessibility for persons with disabilities. These standards are consistent with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
No local amendments that would constrain accessibility or increase the cost of housing for persons with disabilities
have been adopted. The City ensures that new housing developments comply with Title 24 of the California Code
of Regulations. The City implements and enforces Chapter 11 of the 1998 California Code of Regulations, which has
regulations comparable to those found in ADA. The City provides information to applicants or those inquiring of
City regulations regarding accommodations in zoning, permit processes, and application of building codes for
persons with disabilities.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                 50

4.   The City has no requirements regarding the maximum concentration or siting requirements for residential
     care facilities.
5.   The City‘s site planning requirements for housing for persons with disabilities are the similar to those for other
     residential development. Thus, the City’s requirements do not constrain housing for persons with disabilities.
6.   The City’s parking requirements the similar to those for other residential development. Thus, the City’s parking
     requirements do not constrain housing for persons with disabilities.
7.   The City’s definition of “family’ is: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, or legal adoption, or a
     group of persons including unrelated individuals, living together as a relatively permanent, bona fide
     housekeeping unit.
Applicants for development projects may apply for a variance from development standards if circumstances
warrant. Certain minor variances may be granted by the City’s Planning Director, while other variance requests
must be approved by the Planning Commission. In either case, rather strict findings must be made in order to grant
a variance. As such, the formal variance procedure may not be the appropriate vehicle to consider requests for
reasonable accommodations. The City has no formalized procedures for obtaining a waiver of development
standards which may be necessary to make improvements for reasonable accommodation pursuant to ADA. In the
past the City has considered such requests on a case-by-case basis. To comply with state law (SB 520), the City will
implement a program to develop a formal reasonable accommodation procedure for persons with disabilities (see
Governmental Constraints Program). The City also provides housing rehabilitation loans to help with reasonable
accommodations for disabled owner-occupied low-income households.
Improvements designed to improve accessibility (e.g. a wheelchair ramp) that encroaches on the public right of
way needs a permit. Encroachment permits for structures within public rights-of- way are handled
administratively by the Engineering Services Department. The applicant provides a drawing of the proposed
improvements in relation to the public right of way, which is then reviewed by the City Engineer. The
improvements must be completed by a licensed and insured general contractor. There is a nominal permit fee as
well as a small recording fee. The City’s permit processes for waivers and encroachments are relatively simple and
expeditious and do not constitute a constraint to reasonable accommodations for persons with disabilities.
Efforts to Remove Regulatory Constraints for Persons with Disabilities
Existing state law supersedes City discretion for review of small group home projects (six or fewer residents). The
City does not impose additional zoning, building code, or permitting procedures other than those allowed by state
law. There are no City-initiated constraints on housing for persons with disabilities caused or controlled by the City.
The City does not have any planning requirements regarding concentrations of residential care facilities.
The City also allows residential retrofitting to increase the suitability of homes for persons with disabilities in
compliance with ADA requirements. Such retrofitting is permitted under Chapter 11 of the 1998 version of the
California Code. The City works with applicants who need special accommodations in their homes to ensure that
application of building code requirements does not create a constraint.
Permits and Processing
The City does not impose special permit procedures or requirements that could impede the retrofitting of homes
for accessibility. The City’s requirements for building permits and inspections are the same as for other residential
projects. City officials are not aware of any instances in which an applicant experienced delays or rejection of a
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                  51

retrofitting proposal for accessibility to persons with disabilities; also the City has not had a request for exceptions
in a site plan for housing for persons with disabilities. However, the Planning Director has the discretion to accept
exceptions and to process them as part of the permit process. The City has not had a request to change parking
standards for housing for persons with disabilities. Again, the Planning Director has the discretion to consider such
requests and to process them as part of the permit requirements. The City also has the ability to consider such
developments under the planned community or specific plan processes which offer even more flexibility for
exceptions and parking flexibility. The City allows group homes of six of fewer persons by right, as required by
California state law. No conditional use permit or other special permitting requirements apply to such homes. The
City does require a Conditional Use Permit for group homes of more than six persons in all residential and
commercial zones that allow for residential uses. The City does not impose special occupancy permit requirements
for the establishment or retrofitting of structures for residential use by persons with disabilities. Generally, if
structural improvements were required for an existing group home, a building permit would be required. If a new
structure were proposed for a group home use, discretionary review would be required as for any other new
residential structure. Many residential projects in the City require some level of design review. The design review
and hearing process is the same for group homes and special needs housing for persons with disabilities as for
other residential projects. The City’s design review process has not been used to deny or substantially modify a
housing project for persons with disabilities to the point where it is no longer feasible.
Building Codes
The City provides reasonable accommodation for persons with disabilities in the enforcement of building codes
and the issuance of building permits through its flexible approaches to retrofitting or converting existing buildings
and construction of new buildings that meet the shelter needs of persons with disabilities. The City adopted and
implements the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and 2010 California Code, which incorporates and amends
the 2009 IBC. The only additions that the City has made to the IBC is a requirement that multi-family housing have
fire sprinklers and another requirement to use Class “A” roof materials which are fire resistant.
Conclusion
In light of current and proposed planning policies and zoning regulations, the City has mitigated any potential
constraints to the availability of housing for persons with disabilities. The City will continue to monitor its zoning
ordinance and procedures to ensure that it continues providing flexibility in, and not constraining the development
of, housing for persons with disabilities. Program 10 in the Housing Plan reflects the City’s commitment to
adopting a formal reasonable accommodation procedure.
Energy Conservation Standards
Energy conservation standards are included within the regulations that must be satisfied when presenting plans for
permit issuance. The City has adopted the most recent energy standards (minimum) as required by the State of
California. Although the City has not imposed increased standards for the energy conservation based upon the
initial increased cost of construction, the City worked with local utility companies to include energy saving
methods on the City’s Web site as a public information service.
The City, which has long been a leader on the environmental front, adopted a Sustainability Charter in 2007 and
continues to work to reduce its carbon footprint. Solar photovoltaic power generation consumes no fossil fuels,
generates no air pollution and therefore increases energy efficiency and reduces greenhouse gases and air
pollution.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                   52

In December, 2007, the City adopted a sustainability charter, a green building and temporary solar energy program
(subsequently continued). In adopting the sustainability charter, the City expressed its desire to meet current
environmental, economic and social needs without compromising the ability of future generations to do the same.
The City found that solar photovoltaic systems readily available and the use of these systems promote the City's
commitment to become a sustainable community. The City held workshops to educate the community, business,
residents and developers on the benefits of solar energy and provided input on rebates and tax credits. The City is
participating with Orange County Sunenergy Program. This program provides the opportunity for business and
residents to purchase solar photovoltaic systems through a loan paid on the property. The City will continue to
aggressively pursue its energy conservation and sustainability efforts. It has committed to continue the above
programs, and it will continue to explore even more aggressive programs and actions.
NON-GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
A number of private sector factors contribute to the cost of housing, including land costs, construction costs,
financing, and the limited availability of Federal, State, and local funding sources, all of which affect the availability
of affordable housing.
Land Costs
The following anecdotal information from the development community working in the Orange County areas in the
City and close to the City provides insight to land and construction costs. Land costs are approaching and, in some
cases, exceeding $1.1 million or more per acre in the City’s “urban” areas (higher in the back country areas), about
$90-150 per square foot. Depending on site configuration and views, these costs can rise to close to $4 million an
acre.
Construction Costs
Construction costs for multifamily runs about $115 per square foot for Type 5 construction (wood and stucco over
parking) with one bedroom units ranging between 600 to 1,100 square feet (averaging about 720 square feet) and
two bedrooms at 1,000 to 1,200 square feet. Parking (podium style with stalls under the units) runs about $23,000
per stall. Type 5 construction generally is used until the development reaches higher densities (60 units per acre or
higher) and then construction type would probably be Type 3 (for rent) or 1 (for sale) which involves steel and
concrete. In those cases, construction costs would rise to about $200 per square foot.
Financing Availability
Interest rates affect home ownership opportunities throughout the City. In March 2013, Freddie Mac’s primary
mortgage market survey listed interest rates on home loans at 3.52% on 30 year fixed loan rate. The surge in
foreclosures through 2007 and 2008 dramatically affected the housing market, resulting in a low housing market in
Orange County. The Federal Government passed several programs to stimulate the housing market to stimulate
the sale of foreclosed homes. The low interest rates and competitive housing market made the homeownership
market favorable to lower income households. Although financing availability has slowed over the past year, the
low interest rates are expected to prolong the availability of financing.
Federal and State Programs
There is limited funding available for housing assistance programs from the State and Federal governments.
Current funding sources being used by the City include continued participation in the Community Development
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                     53

Block Grant (CDBG) program, HOME, MCC program, program income, Section 8 Rental Assistance, and use of tax
credits programs. These funds are supplemented by the City’s Housing In-lieu Fee program.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                     54

                                    HOUSING RESOURCES
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                 55
HOUSING RESOURCES
The resources available for the development, rehabilitation, and preservation of housing in San Juan Capistrano
are addressed in this section of the Housing Element. This section provides an overview of available land resources
and residential sites for future housing development, and evaluates how these resources can work toward
satisfying future housing needs. Also discussed are the financial and administrative resources available to support
affordable housing and energy conservation opportunities.
LAND INVENTORY
Availability of Suitable Sites
Housing Element law mandates that a city must show that it has adequate sites with required public services and
facilities for a variety of housing types for all income levels. In this section, adequate sites will be discussed in
terms of the City’s regional share goals¾the City’s share of the region’s housing needs for 2014-2021. Based upon
the City’s inventory of residential land with development potential and a parcel by parcel review with planning,
housing staff, it can be demonstrated that the City has land currently designated for residential development with
a capacity of 772 residential units based upon the current planned/zoning designations, surpassing its fair share of
638 units.
Regional Share Goals
State law requires that a community provide an adequate number of sites to allow for and facilitate production of
the regional share of housing. To determine whether a jurisdiction has sufficient land to accommodate its share of
regional housing needs for all income groups, that jurisdiction must identify “adequate sites.” Under State law
(California Government Code section65583[c][1]), adequate sites are those with appropriate zoning and
development standards, with services and facilities, needed to facilitate and encourage the development of a
variety of housing for all income levels. San Juan Capistrano’s Regional Housing Needs Allocation (RHNA) for the
2014-2021planning period has been determined by SCAG to be 638 housing units, including 147 units for very low-
income households, 104 units for low-income households, 120 units for moderate-income households, and 267
units for above moderate-income households.
                                                                 Table 24
                                                               RHNA 2014
                                          Very                                                     Above
                                                              Low-            Moderate-
                                          Low-                                                  Moderate-         Totals
                                                             Income             Income
                                       Income*                                                    Income
            RHNA                        147                  104                120              267             638
            *Note: Pursuant to AB 2634, local jurisdictions are also required to project the housing needs of extremely low-
            income households (0-30% AMI). In estimating the number of extremely low-income households, a jurisdiction can
            use 50% of the very low-income allocation or apportion the very low-income figure based on Census data. As shown
            in Table 3, extremely low- and very low-income households total 2,615 households, with extremely low-income
            households comprising 50% of the 2,615 households. Therefore, the City’s very low-income RHNA of 147 units can be
            split into 73 extremely low-income and 74 very low-income units.
Realistic Densities
For the purpose of this Housing Element, calculations of realistic capacity assume that properties will achieve a
density that is 80 percent of the maximum allowed density. This reduction accounts for applicable land use
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                           56

 controls and site requirements and takes into consideration recent development trends in San Juan Capistrano.
 This approach is supported by recent sites analyses conducted on the sites. In several cases the site analysis
 estimated a larger capacity than what is shown in this site inventory. To maintain consistency and present a
 conservative estimate, a realistic capacity calculation based on 80 percent of maximum density is used. However,
 this average density should not be construed as a result of the City’s development standards. Oftentimes,
 developers choose not to exhaust available resources to maximize their development, or the failure to maximize
 the development is due to inefficient site plan and architectural design. Finally, achievable density on a property is
 often influenced by how much a developer is willing to spend on a development, which is beyond the discretion of
 the local agency. In a tight housing market, achieving maximum density is financially feasible because the
 developer is able to recuperate the investment even at high density products that do not usually command the
 highest market value.
  Zoning Appropriate to Accommodate Housing Affordable to Lower-Income Households
 The capacity of sites that allow development densities of at least 30 units per acre are credited toward the lower-
 income RHNA based on State law. The California Government Code states that if a local government has adopted
 density standards consistent with the population based criteria set by State law (at least 30 units per acre for San
 Juan Capistrano), HCD is obligated to accept sites with those density standards (30 units per acre or higher) as
 appropriate for accommodating the jurisdictions share of regional housing need for lower-income households. Per
 Government Code Section 65583.2(c)(3)(B), the City’s Very High Density Residential designation consistent with
 the default density standard (30 units per acre) for metropolitan jurisdictions such as San Juan Capistrano and
 therefore considered appropriate to accommodate housing for lower-income households.
 Additionally, developments in San Juan Capistrano have demonstrated that affordable housing can be constructed
 at substantially less than the densities normally associated with affordable housing due to the City’s aggressive and
 diverse set of affordable housing programs. The two most recent, non-age restricted, multi-family affordable
 housing projects (Habitat for Humanity and Little Hollywood Expansion) that were constructed re-affirm the City’s
 commitment and ability to provide multi-family affordable housing at densities between 20 units per acre to 30
 units per acre. In addition, the City has approved an age restricted multi-family affordable housing development at
 25 units to the acre Seasons II.
 Sites Inventory
 Table 25 below indicates that the 2014-2021 RHNA can be accommodated based on the current availability of
 vacant and underutilized land. As explained further below, in May 2016, two sites initially considered for the
 inventory, the Rancho San Juan Apartments site and the Camino Las Ramblas site, were subsequently identified as
 inappropriate for housing development and were replaced with the City Hall site. As the table below and this
 section detail, the City maintains a surplus beyond the RHNA mandate for very low and low income housing units
 (+96) and for total housing units (+134).
                                                          Table 25
                                                   Sites Inventory Table
                                                       Realistic Capacity by RHNA Affordability Level
                                        Size/         Very                                Above              Environmental
                    Existing          Allowed         Low         Low      Moderate     Moderate                    or
                 General Plan/       Maximum         (0-50%     (51-80%    (81-120%      (120%+               Infrastructure
Site Name            Zoning           Density      of AMI)*      of AMI)    of AMI)      of AMI)    Total      Constraints
 San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                 57

                                                        Table 25
                                                 Sites Inventory Table
                                                     Realistic Capacity by RHNA Affordability Level
                                       Size/        Very                              Above             Environmental
                      Existing       Allowed        Low          Low     Moderate  Moderate                    or
                  General Plan/      Maximum       (0-50%     (51-80%    (81-120%    (120%+             Infrastructure
   Site Name           Zoning         Density    of AMI)*      of AMI)    of AMI)    of AMI)    Total     Constraints
                                   10.2 ac
                  Medium Low
                  Density/RS-      3.5 units per
1: The Oaks       10,000           acre          --           --        --                 32       32 No
                                   1.89 acres
                  Medium High
                  Density/ RS-     8 units per
2: Calle Lorenzo  4,000            acre          --           --        --                 12       12 No
                  Planned
                  Comm./Planne
                  d                0.35 ac
                  Comm. (CDP
3: C. Romer       78-1      -Very  30 units per
Homestead         High Density)    acre                   8   --        --         --                8 No
                                                                                                       No: constrained
                                                                                                       portion of the
                                   2 acres                                                             site     is  not
                  Very       High                                                                      included in the
                  Density/ Very    30 units per                                                        capacity
4: The Groves     High Density     acre                  48   --        --         --               48 calculation
                  Planned
                  Comm./ (CDP
                  78-01- Mixed     9 acres
                  Use & Very
                  High             30 units per
5: Ventanas*      Density)         acre                 230   --        --         --             230  No
                                   21.5 acres
                  Low Density/
                  Hillside         3.5 units per
6: Oliva          Residential      acre          --           --        --                 40       40 No
                                   1.8 acres
                  Medium     High
7: The     Cove   Density/    RS-  8 units per
Estates           4,000            acre          --           --        --                   4       4 No
                                   257 acres
                  Planned
8: Pacifica San   Comm./     CDP   3.7 units per
Juan**            81-01            acre          --           --        39               282      321  Yes
    San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                         58
                                                                       Table 25
                                                                Sites Inventory Table
                                                                    Realistic Capacity by RHNA Affordability Level
                                                  Size/             Very                                      Above                  Environmental
                             Existing           Allowed             Low          Low       Moderate         Moderate                        or
                         General Plan/          Maximum           (0-50%      (51-80%       (81-120%         (120%+                   Infrastructure
    Site Name                 Zoning             Density         of AMI)*      of AMI)       of AMI)         of AMI)      Total        Constraints
                                              2.10 acres
                        Medium High
9: Don Juan             Density/ MRD-         8 units per
Duplex Property         4,000                 acre               --           --           --                         8         8    Yes
                                              3 acres
                        Medium        Low
10:        Hidden       Density/       RS-    3.5 units per
Creek Estates           10,000                acre               --           --           --                         8         8    Yes
                                              2.52 acres
                        Very         High
                        Density/ Very         30 units per
11: City Hall           High Density          acre                      61    --           --              --                61      No
                                     Total     311.36 acres            347    --           39              386              772
Notes:
Housing Element law allows local governments to utilize “default” density standards determined by HCD. Per HCD’s determination, cities in
Orange County (including San Juan Capistrano) with sites allowing a density of at least 30 dwelling units per acre can be used to meet lower-
income RHNA requirements.
*Calculations of realistic capacity assume that properties will achieve a density that is 80 percent of the maximum allowed density with the
exception of the Ventanas site (Site 5). For Site 5, realistic capacity calculations use a slightly higher percent (85 percent) of the maximum
allowed density based on recent developer interest in the site. Discussions with potential developers indicate that realistic capacity for the site is
closer to 93 percent of maximum allowed density (in excess of 250 units).
**Affordability of units for the Pacific San Juan site is based on the Planned Community zoning 7.4 acres for a multi-family development
proposing 10.5 du/ac and able to accommodate Moderate Income housing based on affordability levels presented in the General Plan Housing
Element.
*** Sites #6-10 were previously included in the 2008 Housing Element.
     Site Details
     Site 1 – The Oaks (APN: 664-041-09/-10/-12)
     This site is a 10.2-acre lot on the edge of the City’s eastern border and south of Ortega Highway. The current use
     on the site is an equestrian stable. A residential development would be a more efficient use of the site and given
     the potential units that can be built, may be a financial incentive for the current owners to redevelop. There is a
     pending development proposal on this site for 32 units with RS-10,000 zoning.
     Site 2 – Calle Lorenzo (APN: 649-052-08 & 649-053-13)
     This site is a 1.89 acre lot east of Camino Capistrano and south of Junipero Serra Road. It contains the potential for
     a total of 12 units in RS-4,000 zoning. The current use on the site is one single family unit. The site is zoned to
     San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                                     59

permit a larger capacity, and over the last year the site been investigated for development. No applications for
development have been received to date. Given the potential units that can be built, redevelopment to the sites
full potential is expected.
Site 3 – C. Romer Homestead (APN: 666-241-12)
This site is a 0.35-acre lot east of Rancho Viejo Road and south of Ortega Highway. It contains the potential for a
total of 8 units at densities that can accommodate affordable housing. The site is zoned to permit a larger capacity,
and over the last year the site been investigated for development. No applications for development have been
received to date. Given the potential units that can be built, redevelopment to the sites full potential is expected.
Site 4 – The Groves (APN: 121-050-21)
This 2.0-acre vacant site is located on the northwest corner of Camino Capistrano and Junipero Serra Road. The
site has a potential development capacity for 48 units at densities that can accommodate affordable housing. The
site was rezoned in January 2014 from Office Commercial to Very High Density Residential. The new zoning
designation allows for development of residential uses at 30 units per acre. The site is owned by the City of San
Juan Capistrano, and the City has been actively engaging developers to pursue potential development of the site as
affordable housing. Environmental constraints that would have limited development have already been accounted
for in the site analysis. With the required 75 foot set back from the creek as part of the Resource Agency
permitting requirements and the full right-of-way for Camino Capistrano, the site provides two net useable acres.
Only 2 acres are used to calculate realistic capacity.
Site 5 – Ventanas (APN: 666-131-09/-13/-15)
This 9-acre vacant site located east of Interstate 5 and north of San Juan Creek, has been identified as a potential
site for housing development due to access to transit, schools, etc. The site additionally has a potential for mixed
use. The site has a potential development capacity for 230 units. The realistic capacity of 230 units is supported by
a recent developer analysis which determined that 253 units could be accommodated on the site with a mixed use
element. For the purposes of this site inventory, capacity for the Ventanas site is based solely on the portion of the
site allowing Very High Density residential and does not include portions of the site allowing commercial
development.
The Ventanas site was rezoned in January 2014 from Planned Community (Sector B-2 Industrial Park) to Planned
Community (Sector B-3 Very High Density Residential). Under the Comprehensive Development Plan for the area,
the City’s Very High Density Residential zone regulates the land use and development standards for the portion of
the site included in this sites inventory. The new zoning designation allows for development of residential uses at
30 units per acre. Further, the site is subject to the City’s inclusionary housing requirement, under which
developers of new residential developments with two or more units are required to provide 10 percent of the
development as affordable housing or to pay fees in-lieu of reserving affordable housing units for very low, low,
and moderate income households. The City has successfully financially assisted several affordable projects with
housing in-lieu fee funds and will continue to explore the use of these fees to increase affordability of
development on this site.
The City understands that the Ventanas site contributes 230 of the inventory’s 347 very low and low income
housing units. Given the site’s zoning and suitability for residential development as well as City’s affordable
housing incentives and programs, the City is confident in the site’s potential to meet the inventory projections.
Sites 6 – 10
Opportunities for moderate or above moderate income housing are available on sites #6 - #10. These five sites
were previously included in the 2008 Housing Element, have appropriate zoning in place and have not been
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                  60

developed. Site #6, Oliva, has the potential for 40 low-density units on 3.5 acres. Site #7, The Cove Estates
(referred to as Village Alipaz in the 2008 Housing Element), has the capacity for 4 units in 1.8 acres zoned RS-4,000.
Affordability of units for the Pacific San Juan site (Site #8) is based on the Planned Community zoning 7.4 acres for
a multi-family development proposing 10.5 du/ac and able to accommodate moderate income housing based on
affordability levels presented in the Housing Element. Site # 9, the Don Juan Duplexes property, is located at the
terminus of Andres Pico west of Interstate 5. The site has the potential development of 8 units on a total of 2.1
acres in MRD-4000 zoning. Site # 10, Hidden Creek Estates, is located west of Camino Capistrano and has the
potential for the development of 8 units on a total of 3.0 acres in RS-10,000 zoning.
Site 11: City Hall (APN: 668-101-10)
Site 11 is currently zoned for high density residential development and currently houses City Hall and a Public
Works & Utility Department equipment storage building. The site has a capacity for 61 units at densities
appropriate to accommodate lower-income housing. The site was rezoned in May 2016 from Commercial
Manufacturing to Very High Density Residential. The new zoning designation allows for development of residential
uses at 30 units per acre. The City owns this site, and the will actively engage developers to pursue potential
development of the site as affordable housing (see Program 1). Current use of the site as a City Hall is not an
impediment to development of the site, as the current site was intended as a temporary location. Upon Council
approval of a development project on the site, City Hall offices would be relocated. The City is currently exploring
site options for relocation of City Hall.
The City updated the Housing Element site table in May 2016 to replace two sites which were identified as
inappropriate for housing development with a site (Site #11) which offered more realistic development
opportunities. The first site, Rancho San Juan Apartments, was removed due to the City Council finding that the
traffic study for the development showed inadequate traffic and circulation capacity. The second site, Camino Las
Ramblas, was removed due to the site no longer being identified as surplus property by the Capistrano Unified
School District (previously identified the site as surplus in 2006), who maintain an option to purchase the property
from the current property owners.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                 61
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element 6
Environmental and Infrastructure Constraints
The inventory above takes into account any environmental constraints (habitat, flood and noise hazards, steep
slopes, and other constraints), as part of the City’s site by site analysis. Any environmental constraints that would
lower the potential yield (e. g., steep slopes) have already been accounted for in the site/unit capacity analysis.
Full urban level services are available throughout the City and specifically to each of this site. Such services are (or
will be) in place prior to development and adequate for the potential unit yield on each site. Specifically, water and
sewer service are available to all parcels within the City, including each of the sites in this inventory, and the City
has the water and sewer capacity to service the number of units necessary to meet, and substantially exceed, the
regional share goals.
Comparison of Sites Inventory and RHNA
Identified properties in the sites inventory have the combined capacity to accommodate 772 income-targeted
housing units on vacant and underutilized residential sites and meet the RHNA for the 2014-2021 planning period.
                                                        Table 26
                                      Comparison of Sites Inventory and RHNA
                                        Very                                          Above
             Income Category             Low           Low          Moderate        Moderate            Total
       Total       Sites      (with
       Appropriate Zoning in             347            --              39              386              772
       Place)
       RHNA                              147           104            120               267              638
       Surplus/Shortfall
                                                +96                    -81             +119          +134 units
       (+/-)
Financial Resources
Housing In Lieu Fees
The City has required, and will continue to require, all new residential developments to provide a minimum of ten
percent of its units as affordable through its implementation ordinances. If a residential developer does not
provide the units within the boundary, they may participate in the construction of affordable housing in another
location in the City or be subject to payment of the Housing In-lieu fee which is calculated using the housing
market variables. The rental developments have a fee that is calculated annually, and ownership developments
have a fee that is calculated monthly. The fee formula is within the City of San Juan Capistrano Municipal Code
Section 9-5.103. The Housing In-lieu Fee is used to assist in the creation of affordable housing opportunities.
Housing Choice Voucher
The Orange County Housing Authority administers the Housing Choice Voucher Program (formerly the Section 8
Rental Assistance Program) that extends rental subsidies to very low-income households. The subsidy represents
the difference between the excess of 30 percent of the recipient’s monthly income and the federally approved fair
market rents. As of October 2013, the Orange County Housing Authority was assisting 68 households through the
Housing Choice Voucher Program.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                   63

Department of Housing and Urban Development Grants
The City receives CDBG/HOME funds through the competitive state HUD program as San Juan Capistrano is not an
entitlement jurisdiction. Since 2008, the City has received $1,379,942 through State Grants and reimbursements
from loans for the Owner Occupied Rehabilitation Program. This averages $275,988 received annually for the
Owner Occupied Rehabilitation Program. This program offers $20,000 to $30,000 loans for Lower income
households to correct code violations, Health and Safety concerns, weatherization improvements and accessibility
improvements.
Administrative Resources
The City of San Juan Capistrano Development Services Department is the lead department implementing a number
of the programs outlined in this Housing Element. The Development Services Department provides information
and advisory services to decision makers and the public regarding the growth and development of the community
to ensure balanced physical development. The Development Services Department has three divisions; Planning,
Building and Safety, and Code Enforcement. The Planning division processes current and long-range development
applications in accordance with the City's adopted General Plan and zoning regulations and provides staff support
to the City Council, Planning Commission, Cultural Heritage Commission, Zoning Administrator, and Environmental
Administrator. The Building and Safety division reviews and approves building plans, issuance of building permits,
and inspection of buildings during and after construction. The Code Enforcement division responds to potential
violations of the City of San Juan Capistrano Municipal Code. The department is also responsible for managing the
City's preservation and maintenance of the City's historic structures.
Opportunities for Energy Conservation
The primary uses of energy in urban areas are for transportation lighting, water heating, and space heating and
cooling. The high cost of energy demands that efforts be taken to reduce or minimize the overall level of urban
energy consumption. Energy conservation is important in preserving non-renewable fuels to ensure that these
resources are available for use by future generations. Also a number of benefits are associated with energy
conservation including improved air quality and lower energy costs.
The City has included energy conservation standards within the regulations that must be satisfied when presenting
plans for permit issuance. The City has adopted the most recent energy standards (minimum) as required by the
State of California. Although the City has not imposed increased standards for the energy conservation based upon
the initial increased cost of construction, the City worked with local utility companies to include energy saving
methods on the City’s Web site as a public information service.
The City’s energy goals, stated in the Public Services and Utilities Element of the General Plan, make every effort to
conserve energy in the City thus reducing dependence on fossil fuels. The City’s policies relating to energy include
encouragement of the use of alternate energy systems, urban design that maximizes opportunities for solar energy
use and energy conservation, and promotion of energy conserving standards and requirements for new
construction.
Title 24, Building Energy Standards for Residential Development, establishes energy budgets or maximum energy
use levels. The standards of Title 24 supersede local regulations, and State requirements mandate Title 24
requirements through implementation by local jurisdictions. The City will continue enforcement of local and state
energy regulations for new residential construction and continue providing residents with information on energy
efficiency.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                 64

   EVALUATION OF PREVIOUS
HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAMS
EVALUATION OF PREVIOUS
HOUSING ELEMENT PROGRAMS
This section analyzes the City’s accomplishments during the past Housing Element, as adopted on October 19,
2010, cycle through July 2014. This is performed by evaluating the previous Housing Element in the two contexts:
(1) the City’s progress towards meeting its housing goals and program objectives; and (2) the City’s progress
towards meeting its Quantified Objectives, especially its Regional Housing Needs Assessment goals. This evaluation
is a key component in the determination of goals and programs to be included in the 2014-2021 Housing Element.
EVALUATION OF PREVIOUS HOUSING ELEMENT
An important component of this revised housing element is the evaluation of the previous housing element. It is
important to determine if the housing needs have changed, if the goals and policies are still relevant, and if the
programs were effective. These questions were systematically considered as part of the 2014-2021 Housing
Element update. The analysis is summarized in the following paragraphs and is reflected throughout the revised
Housing Element.
Quantified Objectives
Housing Element law requires that quantified objectives be developed with regard to new construction,
rehabilitation, conservation and preservation activities that will occur during the housing element planning period.
Table 27 summarizes the City’s quantified objectives for the previous Housing Element cycle and progress in
meeting those objectives.
                                                                Table 27
                              Quantified Objectives and Progress from Previous Housing Element
                                        Extremely        Very                                           Above
                                                                         Low-        Moderate-
                                     Low Income*         Low-                                        Moderate-      Totals
                                                                       Income          Income
                                                       Income                                          Income
       New Construction
        Goal                                105            123            188             210           313**          939
        Progress                                 56                    20               2              273         351
       Rehabilitation
        Goal                                  25            25              50               0                0        100
        Progress                               7            13              29               0                0         49
       Conservation
        Goal                                  30            30               0               0                0         60
        Progress                              34            34               0               0                0         68
       Preservation
        Goal                                   0              0         1,350                0                0      1,350
        Progress                               0              0         1,350                0                0      1,350
         * Extremely low Income was estimated based upon 2000 Census (953 extremely low income households divided by 2,076
            total very low income households = 46%; 228 very low income projected households times .46 = 105.
         ** The 313 units represent the original 436 units minus the construction of 123 above moderate-income units between
            January 1, 2006 and July 1, 2008.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                          65

New Construction
The City’s regional share for the 2008-2014 period was 1,062 new dwelling units. As shown in Table 6, 351 new
units were constructed during the last Housing Element cycle’s reporting period. The total number fell short of the
City’s RHNA’s quantified objective for total unit (939) as well as for the separate income categories. The City used
two programs to stimulate the construction of new units for very low and low income households: Affordable
Density and Inclusionary Housing. Seventy-eight new units for very low- and low-income households and two units
for moderate-income households were constructed. This includes the Habitat for Humanity development off Calle
Rolando (18 low, and 9 very low income units), the Little Hollywood development in the historic Los Rios district
(10 very-low income units), the Seasons Senior Apartments off Rancho Viejo Road (10 low, and 28 very low income
units), one low income unit in Capistrano Valley Mobile Estates off Avenida Aeropuerto, and two secondary
dwelling units which are considered to be available for moderate income households.
Rehabilitation
The City funded rehabilitation through the Owner-Occupied Rehabilitation Loans. The City has rehabilitated a total
of 49 residential units during the 2008-2014 period. Funding during this 2008-2014 period was provided from the
2007 HOME grant awarded to the City from the State of California and from CDBG and HOME program income.
When loans made with HOME and Community Development Block Grant funds are repaid, this income is then used
to fund additional housing rehabilitation loans.
Conservation
The City’s quantified conservation objective for 2008-2014 was 30 for extremely low and 30 very low income
households based on continuing the existing number of Housing Choice (formerly Section 8) vouchers. As of
October 2013, the Orange County Housing Authority was assisting 68 households through the Housing Choice
Voucher Program.
Preservation
The quantified objective refers to the City’s actions to preserve the affordability of 1,350 mobile home rental
housing units. As of October 2013, affordability of all 1,350 mobile homes were preserved. Conservation efforts
were conducted primarily through the Mobile Home Park Conversion ordinance which establishes regulations that
a mobile home park owner/operator must satisfy before a land use conversion is to be considered. The City
received an application from the owner of Capistrano Terrace Mobile Home Park to close the park. The City has
hired a consultant to prepare the Relocation Impact Report. Prior to the City’s approval of the Relocation Impact
Report, the park residents negotiated to purchase the park from the owners.
Program Summary
Program 1: Mixed-Use Zoning
Objective: Discuss the policy recommendation to allow for the inclusion of mixed-use development of secondary
residential units with development of principal commercial uses
Progress: The City was successful in completing a re-zone and General Plan Amendment to permit mix-use zoning
within the Historic Down Town through the Historic Downtown Master Plan. Additionally, the City approved of a
new Planned Community, Distrito La Novia/San Juan Meadows, which allows for the mixed use development of
condo multifamily housing, apartment housing, retail, office, and hotel commercial on the same site.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                               66

Continued Appropriateness: The City completed this program by establishing a master plan and planned
community which incorporate mixed-use provisions within two years of adopting the Housing Element. This
program will be continued in the Housing Element and will focus on continued efforts to expand mixed use
opportunities in the City.
Program 2:         Inclusionary Housing
Objective: Evaluate how this program may be combined with the City’s Density Bonus program to maximize
affordable housing opportunities and make appropriate necessary revisions that will comply with state law and
maximize the production of affordable housing without necessarily constraining development.
Progress: In 2009, the City updated the Housing In-Lieu fee to a variable amount which is directly associated to
housing costs. Since updating the fee, the City has entitled two developments which have chosen to include
affordable units within their developments opposed to paying a fee, and is currently negotiating terms of a third.
The City assessed the possibility of combining the Inclusionary Housing requirement with the Density Bonus, as
well as the Housing In-lieu fee attributed to the Inclusionary Housing requirement. The City has not found a benefit
to creating a conjoined program, but as more developers provide ten percent of the residential development, it is
likely the developers will take advantage of the City’s Density Bonus program to maximize their development
possibilities.
Continued Appropriateness: This program is completed as the City has evaluated combining the Inclusionary
Housing program with other programs and has decided against combining affordable housing programs. The
program aspects that have been completed are removed from the Housing Element and the program will focus on
continued implementation and evaluation of the Inclusionary Housing program.
Program 3:         Density Bonus
Objective: The City will revise its current density bonus program to comply with the new state law. Additionally,
the City will evaluate how the ordinance may be applied in conjunction with the City’s Inclusionary Housing
program to maximize affordable housing opportunities and make appropriate necessary revisions that will comply
with state law and maximize the production of affordable housing without necessarily constraining development.
Progress: The City completed this program by adopting a new Density Bonus Program ordinance in
compliance with state law. Additionally, the City evaluated how the ordinance may be applied in conjunction
with the City’s Inclusionary Housing program to maximize affordable housing opportunities. The City has not found
a benefit to creating a conjoined program, but as more developers provide ten percent of the residential
development, it is likely the developers will take advantage of the City’s Density Bonus program to maximize their
development possibilities.
Continued Appropriateness: This program has been fully implemented and will be removed from the 2014 Housing
Element.
Program 4:         Density Gap Financing/City Housing In-Lieu Fees/Redevelopment Financing
Objective: Use Density Gap Financing to provide affordable housing at densities lower than those that normally are
necessary to support affordable housing. Require all new residential developments to provide a minimum of ten
percent of its units as affordable or pay an in-lieu fee. Use redevelopment set-aside funds to promote affordable
housing.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                              67

Progress: The City financially assisted two affordable projects with housing in-lieu fee funds, Habitat for Humanity’s
27 unit project and Season’s Senior Apartments Phase II 38 unit project. The City revisited the in-lieu fee to assess
key policies and updated the fee to a variable amount directly connected to the housing market. Since updating
the fee the housing market did not allow for any new developments to occur, resulting in the City only taking in
approximately $190,000 during the 2008-2014 period. The City completed a 10 unit addition to the Little
Hollywood Affordable Rental Housing program, to total 24 units within the development, using redevelopment set-
aside funds, and assisted in the development of Habitat for Humanity’s 27 unit development by providing a
development loan.
Continued Appropriateness: Redevelopment was terminated by the State of California effective February 2012.
Portions of the program linked to redevelopment funding will be removed. Providing financing mechanisms is a
critical step in increasing affordable housing opportunities. This program will remain in the 2014 Housing Element
but will be folded into a general Inclusionary Housing program.
Program 5:          Smart Growth Housing Opportunity
Objective: To augment the capacity of the mixed-use zones and the remaining available multi-family residential
sites, the City would amend the City’s Land Use Code to include zoning text designating specific mixed-use sites to
allow residential uses as secondary uses. Once amended, developers would be allowed to include residential uses
as a secondary use without having to individually go through a General Plan Amendment or rezoning process.
Progress: The City determined that the historic downtown area was the ideal location for a Smart Growth Housing
Opportunity and successfully completed a re-zone and General Plan Amendment to permit mix-use zoning within
the Historic Down Town through the Historic Downtown Master Plan.
Continued Appropriateness: The City implemented this program by establishing a master plan and planned
community which incorporate mixed-use provisions within two years of adopting the Housing Element. Many
aspects of this program are also included in the general Mixed Use program. To eliminate redundancy, this
program is removed from the Housing Element and key aspects are included in a general Mixed Use program.
Program 6:          Zoning Code – Existing Provisions
Objective: The City has identified sustainable design standards as an issue for which the City Council has a high
level of interest. The City Council directed the Development Services Director to identify specific efforts or
incentives to pursue through amendments.
Progress: The City Council encourages sustainable design standards through fee waivers of sustainable energy
installation. The City Council adopted a form based code for the historic Downtown Master Plan which encourages
sustainable design standards for the residential elements.
Continued Appropriateness: The City implemented this program by establishing a master plan and planned
community and programs to encourage sustainable design standards within two years of Housing Element
adoption. This program is removed from the 2014 Housing Element, but policies encouraging sustainable design
standards will remain.
Program 7:          Overall Land Use Plan Implementation
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                68

Objective: The City will continue to apply zones through the Zoning Code and Zoning Map to correspond with the
Land Use Element’s residential designations to continue to provide a range of residential housing types and
densities.
Progress: The City amended zoning within the Forester Canyon Planned Community, thus creating a new Planned
Community, Distrito La Novia / San Juan Meadows, which includes single-family units, condo units, and apartment
units, in addition to several commercial uses. The City also approved of the Historic Town Center Master Plan
which allows for 213 multifamily units in the City’s downtown, The City is also in the beginning stages of reviewing
several new residential developments including a 100 unit apartment complex which would require a General Plan
Amendment.
Continued Appropriateness: The City completed this program by taking steps to apply zones which provide a range
of residential housing types and densities, and still has capacity for housing, both in terms of vacant land suitable
for residential development and potential for redevelopment/in-fill/smart growth opportunity areas. Using the
City’s Land Use Element and Zoning Code to provide for varied housing types and densities is a routine function of
the City. As such this program is not necessary and is removed from the 2014 Housing Element.
Program 8:         Accessory Units
Objective: The City will apply zoning code provisions that allow accessory units (also known as secondary units or
granny flats) by right in all single family residential zones, in accordance with state law
Progress: The City has affordability covenants which are adaptable to secondary dwelling units and will continue to
encourage homeowners to permit the covenant over their secondary dwelling unit.
Continued Appropriateness: The City completed this program by establishing a policy to encourage homeowners to
establish affordability covenants over their secondary dwelling units. However, no residents have opted to
establish affordability covenants over their new secondary dwelling units. The City also has a second unit
ordinance in place that complies with state law. Aspects of the program that have been implemented are removed
from this Housing Element. The program aspects related to affordability of second units will remain in 2014
Housing Element and will be renamed to accurately reflect its intent.
Program 9:         Constraints for Housing for the Disabled
Objective: This program will develop a formal reasonable accommodation procedure for persons with disabilities
as related to zoning/development and building permit processes. The City will analyze its zoning ordinance and
procedures to ensure that it is providing flexibility in and not constraining the development of housing for persons
with disabilities
Progress: The City has reviewed and evaluated its zoning and development standards and has found limited
constraints to development, maintenance, and improvements of housing for disabled persons. The City has offered
a zoning variance procedure to provide flexibility should any element of the Zoning Code restrain the development
of accessible structures and areas. The City has improved the relationship with the Fair Housing Council for the
response to existing private residential developments which may not meet the current maintenance and
improvement standards for persons with disabilities. Additionally, the City continues to assist with accessibility in
existing dwelling units for qualified households through the Owner-Occupied Rehabilitation program.
Continued Appropriateness: The City met the objective of conducting an analysis of the code to determine if
constraints exist. This program is revised to exclude the completed program objectives. A reasonable
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                69

accommodation ordinance or procedure was not set in place and as such the program will be renamed Reasonable
Accommodation Procedure to focus on that aspect of the program in the 2014 Housing Element.
Program 10:         Constraints for Housing for Care Facilities
Objective: The City will assess its ordinance and definitions related to license care facilities in order to determine
their compliance with recent State legislation.
Progress: The City permits licensed care facilities of six or less persons within all single family residential districts
with a discretionary review or “by right” and may permit licensed care facilities of six or more persons within all
single family residential districts through a conditional use permit which is approvable by the City’s Planning
Commission.
Continued Appropriateness: The City completed this program by analyzing the code for state law compliance within
twelve months from the Housing Element adoption. This program is removed from the 2014 Housing Element.
Program 11:         Agricultural Worker Housing
Objective: Evaluate zoning ordinance to be consistent with state law regarding farm worker employee housing
Progress: The City continues to allow for the development of residential developments and does not require
Conditional Use Permits or other discretionary reviews for the use of the property, so long as the use remains
residential. Additionally, the City does not restrict the number of occupants within a housing unit beyond the
health and safety standard established by the building code.
Continued Appropriateness: The City completed this program by analyzing the code for state law compliance within
36 months from the Housing Element adoption. This program is removed from the 2014 Housing Element.
Program 12:         Emergency and Transitional Housing
Objective: The City will revise its current provisions for emergency and transitional housing for any potential
constraints and to bring the local processes and procedures into compliance with the provisions of SB 2.
Progress: The City revised the zoning code to permit emergency and transitional housing without a conditional use
permit or other discretionary action, and established guidelines to ensure the future developments would be well
integrated into the zone. The amendment enables 27 sites within the City to accommodate emergency and
transitional housing “by right”. The 27 sites total approximately 180 acres, thirteen of which are vacant land.
Continued Appropriateness: The City completed this program by adopting an Emergency and Transitional Housing
ordinance in compliance with state law (Ordinance 994). The City will explicitly address transitional and supportive
housing in all other zones in the zoning code and permitting for transitional and supportive housing will be based
on the type of use (residential, boarding house, medical facility) and not the populations served. This program is
renamed and modified to remove completed objectives.
Program 13:         Other Potential Constraints: Land Use Controls, Fees and Exactions, Permit Streamlining and
Parking
Objective: The City will engage in a program to improve the efficiency of the development review process. The City
will identify policies or efforts to address fee impacts for housing for affordable housing; such efforts may include,
but not necessarily limited to, fee waivers, fee deferrals, streamlined fee processing, or consolidated fee
schedules. The City will continue its existing policy to expedite permitting procedures for affordable housing
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                    70

projects on a case-by-case basis. The City will continue to monitor its parking standards to insure that they do not
constrain the supply of affordable housing and its land use controls (especially impact development standards).
Progress: The City eliminated several committees including the Housing Advisory Committee, the Design Review
Committee, and the Transportation Commission to streamline the review process. The City is currently establishing
a streamline table which will show developers the process of each type of review to ensure each project remains
on-track. The City identified fee waivers and fee deferrals as the most realistic policies to address fee impacts for
housing for affordable housing. The City will focus on these polices.
Continued Appropriateness: The City completed this program by evaluating constraints and implementing
streamlining procedures to reduce the constraints to affordable housing development. This program is completed
and removed from the 2014 Housing Element. Policies related to affordable housing development and specifically
expedited permitting procedures for affordable housing projects will be included in this Housing Element.
Program 14:       Mobile Home Park Rent Control Ordinance
Objective: Implement the Mobile Home Park Rent Control Ordinance
Progress: The City received an application to close the Capistrano Terrace Mobile Home Park in 2008 and
proceeded with Public Hearings. Prior to completing the application, the park owner and residents were able to
negotiate the purchase of the park, and is no longer at risk of closure. The City has continued to oversee the Rent
Control Ordinance and has ensured that since 2008, the rent for each mobile home park has not increased beyond
12.7%.
Continued Appropriateness: Continued affordability of mobile homes is an important to the City. The program will
remain in the Housing Element and will focus on continued implementation of the Mobile Home Park Rent Control
Ordinance.
Program 15:       Emergency Foreclosure and Rent Relief Program
Objective: Continue assisting residents through the “Emergency Rent Relief Program” and the “Rental Securement
Program”
Progress: Since 2008, thirteen households have been assisted with emergency rent relief and fifteen households
have been assisted with security deposit assistance.
Continued Appropriateness: This program was supported solely with Redevelopment set-aside funding. Due to the
loss of redevelopment funding and the lack of alternative funding, the program is removed from the Housing
Element.
Program 16:       First-Time Homebuyer Downpayment
Objective: Continue to offer the First-Time Homebuyer Program on a limited basis.
Progress: The City offered the First-Time Homebuyer Program on a limited basis. Rising home prices rendered this
program all but infeasible in the City due to the need for purchasers to increase their first mortgage loan amount
and due to the State of California maximum sales price limits. However, the City planned on revising the program,
to allow up to $10,000 or 3 percent of the purchase price, as a down payment assistance program. However
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                71

because the program was to be funded with Community Redevelopment Agency Housing Set Aside funds the
revised program was never accomplished.
Continued Appropriateness: Due to loss of redevelopment funding, the First-Time Homebuyer Program was
discontinued. Lack of an alternative finding source has made this program infeasible. This program is removed
from the 2014 Housing Element.
Program 17:        Mortgage Credit Certificate Program (MCC)
Objective: Continue to participate in and promote Mortgage Credit Certificates through the County of Orange.
Provide 31 MCCs to San Juan Capistrano residents.
Progress: Only a third of the objective was completed. The NHFI representatives encouraged the City to continue
promoting the program to increase the participation.
Continued Appropriateness: This program will be continued in the 2014 Housing Element with the addition of an
objective related to increased awareness of the program.
Program 18:        Section 8 Rental Assistance
Objective: Participate in the County of Orange Section 8 Rental Assistance Program
Progress: The City continued to work with the OC Housing Authority to administer the Housing Choice Voucher
Program (formerly Section 8) and supported County efforts to receive additional voucher allocations from HUD. As
of October 2013, the Orange County Housing Authority was assisting 68 households through the Housing Choice
Voucher Program. The City’s ability to gain or even maintain its participation in this program at its current level is
dependent upon the annual Federal budget process.
Continued Appropriateness: the Housing Choice Voucher Program is an important resource for San Juan Capistrano
residents. This program is renamed for the 2013-2021 Housing Element to exclude reference to Section 8.
Program 19:        Residential Rehabilitation
Objective: Continue to apply for grant funding (CDBG and HOME) to assist in the rehabilitation of housing.
Progress: The City has completed this program by providing rehabilitation loans to 49 units and expects to
complete 10 additional loans by early 2014.
Continued Appropriateness: The City will continue to apply for grant funding (CDBG and HOME) to assist in the
rehabilitation of housing. This program will remain in the 2014 Housing Element and the objective will be modified
to reflect recent funding levels.
Program 20:        Capital Improvement Program
Objective: Conduct an annual review of the Capital Improvement Program to insure that adequate infrastructure to
serve existing residential neighborhoods is maintained.
Progress: This program is updated annually during the budget process.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                72

Continued Appropriateness: Maintaining a Capital Improvement Program and annually updating the program
during the budget process is a routine function of the City. This program is not necessary and is removed as a
separate program from the 2014 Housing Element.
Equal Housing Opportunities and Administrative
Program 21:        Equal Housing Opportunity
Objective: Insure equal housing opportunities are available and requirements are enforced.
Progress: The City has ensured that all housing information, housing website pages, and front counter to the
Development Services Department maintains the fair housing and equal housing opportunity logos, and that any
concerns be addressed or forwarded to the Fair Housing Council of Orange County.
Continued Appropriateness: This program is included in the 2013-2021 Housing Element but will be combined into
a general Fair Housing/Equal Opportunity Program to reduce duplicate programs.
Program 22:        Enforcement of Accessible Housing Regulations
Objective: Continue to maintain accessible housing regulations and implement California Title 24 provisions for
development review and approval.
Progress: Complying with Title 24 and accessible housing regulations is a routine function of the City and required
by law. Regulations related to accessible housing are updated regularly to remain compliant with California Code.
Continued Appropriateness: This program is not necessary as complying with Title 24 and accessible housing
regulations is a routine function of the City and required by law. This program is removed from the 2014 Housing
Element.
Program 23:        Fair Housing
Objective: Refer all complaints to the Fair Housing Council of Orange County. Through the City’s website make
available to the public information about the Fair Housing Council
Progress: The City has an ongoing relationship with the Fair Housing Council of Orange County, and will regularly
refer residents to the Council for numerous concerns including landlord tenant issues, health and safety conditions
provided by landlords, concerns with landlord discrimination, and proper procedures for ending leases and
evictions.
Continued Appropriateness: This program is included in the 2013-2021 Housing Element but will be combined into
a general Fair Housing/Equal Opportunity Program.
Program 24:        Federal and State Financing
Objective: The City will facilitate or support the applications of experienced housing developers and homeless
providers for financing to develop affordable housing. The City will meet with potential affordable housing
developers, provide site information, assist in the entitlement processes, and consider on a case-by-case other
incentives, including, but not limited to, fee waivers and modification of standards.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                              73

Progress: The City partnered with Season’s Senior Apartments and Link Housing, combining the financial resources
of Low Income Housing Tax Credits, Redevelopment Funds, and In-Lieu funds, to complete a 38 unit affordable
senior complex. The City also partnered with Habitat for Humanity, combining the financial resources of a CDBG
grant, Redevelopment Funds, and In-Lieu funds, to complete a 27 unit single family development.
Continued Appropriateness: This program is not included the 2014 Housing Element as a separate program but will
be folded into a general program related to affordable housing funding.
Program 25:        Local Government Financing
Objective: The City will investigate potential local sources that will generate dedicated housing revenue to
augment the City’s affordable housing trust fund.
Progress: The City met with several potential affordable housing developers, and directed them toward City owned
or vacant sites for potential development. Local funding to assist in the development of affordable housing has
been significantly impacted due to the loss of Redevelopment in accordance with California AB 1x26. As the City
receives proposals for development of affordable housing the City will evaluate the assistance that can be
provided.
Continued Appropriateness: This program is removed from the Housing Element as key program aspects are
already included in a general affordable housing program.
Program 26:       Annual Review of the Housing Element
Objective: Complete Annual Review of the Housing Element
Progress: Annual reviews have been approved by City Council and sent to the State. The City currently is working
on the 2012-2013 Annual Review.
Continued Appropriateness: Annual Review of the Housing Element is a required and routine function of the City.
This program is not necessary and as such is removed from the 2014 Housing Element as a separate housing
program.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                           74

                                    HOUSING PLAN
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element            75
HOUSING PLAN
This Housing Plan sets forth the City’s overall housing objectives in the form of Goals, Policies, and Programs. While
most General Plan element programs are located in Appendix A, programs for the Housing Element are contained
within the Element. This format will facilitate the periodic update of the Housing Element, as required by State
Law.
This Plan identifies goals, policies, and programs that guide housing policy for the City for 2014-2021. The
objectives, policies, and programs are consistent with the direction of the other General Plan elements, specifically
the Land Use Element. Each goal is followed by one or more policies that are designed to provide direction to the
policy makers that will enable progress towards the goals. Under the goals and policies of each section programs
designed to implement these goals and policies are listed.
The Housing Element objectives, policies, and programs aim to:
     ·   Encourage the development of a variety of housing opportunities and to provide adequate sites to meet
         the 2014-2021 RHNA
     ·   Assist in the development of housing to meet the needs of lower and moderate income households
     ·   Address and where appropriate, and legally possible, remove governmental constraints to housing
         development
     ·   Conserve, preserve, and improve the condition of the existing affordable housing stock
     ·   Promote equal housing opportunity for all residents to reside in the housing of their choice
These objectives are required by and delineated in State Law (California Code Section 65583 [c][1]).
GOALS AND POLICIES
HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
Meeting the housing needs of all residents of the community requires the identification of adequate sites for all
types of housing.
Goal 1:     Provide a broad range of housing opportunities with emphasis on providing housing which meets the
            special needs of the community.
            Policy 1.1:   Consistent with the Land Use Element, provide a range of different housing types and unit
                          sizes for varying income ranges and lifestyles.
            Policy 1.2:   Continue the City's program of allowing the placement of mobile homes, factory built
                          housing on vacant residential parcels in single family zoning districts.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                77

            Policy 1.3:  Encourage both the private and public sectors to produce or assist in the production of
                         housing with particular emphasis on housing affordable to persons with disabilities,
                         elderly, large families, female-headed households with children, veterans, and homeless.
            Policy 1.4:  Facilitate the development of second dwelling units on single-family parcels.
HOUSING TO MEET THE NEEDS OF ALL INCOME LEVELS
The City of San Juan Capistrano has encouraged the creation and maintenance of affordable housing opportunities
and has recognized that the success of any such program requires financial assistance. In recognizing this fact the
City has several funding resources that it has availed itself to assist in this endeavor.
Goal 2:     To the maximum extent feasible, encourage and provide housing opportunities for persons of lower
            and moderate incomes.
            Policy 2.1:  Encourage the development of affordable housing through the Density Bonus, Inclusionary
                         Housing, and City financial assistance programs.
            Policy 2.2:  Facilitate housing development that is affordable to extremely low-, lower-, and
                         moderate-income households by providing technical assistance, regulatory incentives and
                         concessions, expedited development review, and financial resources as funding permits.
            Policy 2.3:  Continue to utilize federal and State subsidies, as well as City housing in-lieu fees in a cost-
                         efficient manner, to the fullest extent to meet the needs of lower-income residents,
                         including extremely low-income residents.
            Policy 2.4:  Implement affordability agreements for all housing projects that receive financial
                         assistance from the City.
            Policy 2.5:  Encourage mixed use development on a case-by-case basis to allow for increased housing
                         opportunities.
            Policy 2.6:  Target City owned sites available for housing production for working families.
            Policy 2.7:  Promote the development of affordable and special needs housing near transit and/or
                         “smart growth areas”.
            Policy 2.8:  Encourage energy efficient design in new and rehabilitated development and in existing
                         housing units as a means to lowering housing costs.
            Policy 2.9:  Encourage collaborative partnerships to maximize resources available for the provision of
                         affordable housing to lower-income households.
REMOVAL OF GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
Governmental constraints to development of affordable housing exist in every community. Governmental
constraints in San Juan Capistrano are typical of those constraints and include such items as zoning regulations,
enforcement requirements, on and off-site improvements, fees and exactions, processing and permit procedures,
and growth controls. These categories are required to protect the public’s health and safety or to provide for
necessary infrastructure to support the project. In order to insure that such governmental constraints are
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                   78

minimized as a barrier to the creation of affordable housing opportunities, the City constantly has to be aware of
their impact of future decisions on the feasibility of such projects and remove such barriers wherever possible.
Goal 3.     Reduce or remove governmental constraints to the development, improvement, and maintenance of
            housing where feasible and legally permissible.
            Policy 3.1:    Periodically review City regulations, ordinances, permitting processes, and residential fees
                           to ensure that they do not constrain housing development and are consistent with State
                           law.
            Policy 3.2:    Continue cooperative agreements, as appropriate, with State, County and other agencies,
                           so that community housing needs are met to the greatest degree possible.
            Policy 3.3:    Offer financial and/or regulatory incentives, where feasible, to offset or reduce the costs
                           of developing quality housing affordable to a wide range of households.
            Policy 3.4:    Accommodate housing needs for extremely low-income households and special needs
                           persons in the City’s development regulations.
CONSERVE, PRESERVE, AND IMPROVE THE HOUSING STOCK
Goal 4.     Create and maintain decent housing and a suitable living environment for all households in the
            community.
            Policy 4.1: Encourage all households to maintain and rehabilitate all housing to prevent
                           deterioration.
            Policy 4.2:    Preserve all housing and neighborhoods throughout the City in a safe environment to live,
                           work and play.
            Policy 4.3:    Encourage the rehabilitation of deteriorating houses where feasible and provide
                           assistance when necessary for households who cannot afford the costs of such
                           improvements.
            Policy 4.4:    Provide and maintain an adequate level of services and facilities in all areas of the City.
EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
It is important that all segments of the community have equal access to all housing types. The City will proactively
promote equal opportunities for all households
Goal 5. Promote equal opportunity for all residents to reside in housing of their choice.
            Policy 5.1:    Prohibit discrimination in the sale, rental, or financing of housing based on race, color,
                           ancestry, religion, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity, age,
                           disability/medical condition, familial status, marital status, source of income, or any other
                           arbitrary factor.
            Policy 5.2:    Continue efforts to facilitate the unimpeded access to housing without consideration of
                           arbitrary distinctions.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                    79

             Policy 5.2:  Accommodate persons with disabilities who seek reasonable waiver or modification of
                          land use controls and/or development standards pursuant to procedures and criteria set
                          forth in the Zoning Ordinance.
             Policy 5.2:  Continue adopted procedures whereby the City refers apparent violations of the law to
                          enforcement agencies for consideration of remedial actions.
PROGRAMS
The programs contained in this section of the Housing Element describe specific actions the City will carry out over
the eight year Housing Element cycle to satisfy the community’s housing needs and meet the requirements of
State law. The programs are organized into five Goal and Policy areas identified in the Goals and Policies.
HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
Program 1: Adequate Sites
The City of San Juan Capistrano has a RHNA of 638 units for the 2014-2021 RHNA period. The 638 units include
147 extremely/very low-income, 104 low-income, and 120 moderate-income, and 267 above moderate-income
units. The residential sites inventory consists of over 311 acres of vacant and developable land with capacity to
yield at least 772 new units. All site included in the sites inventory have appropriate in zoning in place and can
accommodate the RHNA for all income levels through year 2021. To allow and encourage increased housing
opportunities, revisions to the City’s Density Bonus Ordinance will be completed prior to adoption of the 2014
Housing Element to reflect current state law.
The City will:
     ·    Rezone three sites as indicated in Table 25 to allow for residential development at densities of up to 30
          units per acre as a means of providing adequate sites to address the City’s RHNA shortfall. [Sites 4 and 5
          were rezoned in January, 2014; site 11 was rezoned in May, 2016.]
     ·    Adopt revisions to the General Plan and Zoning Code prior to adoption of the 2014 Housing Element that
          will replace land use and zoning designation of “Affordable Family / Senior Housing” (25 units/acre), to
          “Very High Density” residential (30 units/acre). [General Plan Amendments and Zoning Ordinance revision
          adopted in 2014]
     ·    Maintain an inventory of available sites for residential development and provide it to prospective
          residential developers upon request.
     ·    Adopt a revised Density Bonus ordinance prior to adoption of the 2014 Housing Element that is consistent
          with Government Code 65915 and Senate Bill 1818 regulations. [Zoning Ordinance revisions were adopted
          in January, 2014]
     ·    Encourage Development of sites zoned to accommodate units affordable to lower income households by
          1) reviewing all requests for financial assistance on a case-by-case basis, and to the extent fiscally feasible,
          providing financial assistance and 2) streamlining development permits for affordable housing
          development applications.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                    80

    ·    Encourage development of the City Hall site (Site #11) by: 1) initiating relocation of City Hall upon City
         Council approval of a development proposal on Site #11, 2) maintaining close coordination with local non-
         profit developers, and 3)annually, during the first quarter of the year starting in 2018, conducting
         discussions with City leaders regarding development of the site, the merits of developing the site with
         affordable housing, and potentially selling the site at less than market value to encourage development of
         a high-quality, affordable development.
         Implementing Agency: Development Services Department
         Timeframe: Zoning Code Revisions Prior to Adoption of Housing Element. Presentations to City Council at
         their annual strategic planning workshop regarding City-owned sites in the sites inventory to be
         conducted annually during the first quarter of the year starting in 2018. Biannual contact with non-profit
         developers regarding City-owned sites in the sites inventory (February and September). Implementation
         throughout the planning period.
         Funding Source: General Fund
Program 1A: Sites Inventory Monitoring
The City will implement an annual monitoring procedure to ensure sufficient residential capacity for units
affordable to lower income households is maintained on sites identified to accommodate the RHNA.
    ·    Where an approval of a development on a site identified as having lower income potential in the sites
         inventory results in a reduction of potential units below the residential capacity needed to accommodate
         the RHNA, the City will identify and designate appropriately zoned sites to accommodate the shortfall.
    ·    The City will also monitor site suitability to evaluate whether development and development interest on
         sites zoned to accommodate units affordable to lower income households is occurring as expected related
         to development types, densities, and quantities. As necessary, in the event that the lower income RHNA
         sites are not meeting intended objectives, the City will identify alternate sites with appropriate zoning in
         place or alternative sites that may require a rezone (to be completed within six (6) months of such a
         determination).
The City will report on the status and implementation of the Housing Element including development occurring on
identified sites as part of the annual reporting process.
         Implementing Agency: Development Services Department
    ·    Timeframe: Ongoing implementation and assessment of status of housing sites inventory as part of the
         annual reporting process. Annually evaluate site suitability for lower income RHNA sites beginning at the
         start of 2019 and on a case by case basis, if necessary, identify alternate sites with appropriate zoning in
         place or alternative sites that may require a rezone (to be completed within six (6) months of such a
         determination).
         Funding Source: General Fund
HOUSING TO MEET THE NEEDS OF ALL INCOME LEVELS
Program 2:         Mixed-Use Zoning
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                81

The City Council amended their policies to allow for the inclusion of mixed-use development with the approval of
the Historic Downtown Master Plan. To further increased residential capacity in a mixed-use context, the City will
explore additional locations to implement mixed-use zoning provisions. Efforts will focus on potential Smart
Growth opportunity areas and possibly other select non-residential areas identified through the City’s economic
development programs In assessing whether to expand mixed-use zoning, consideration will be given to the
historic development pattern of existing areas to ensure that land use/zoning changes will result in future
development that is compatible with the character of established neighborhoods.
Once additional areas with mixed use potential are identified, the City will add zoning text designating the specific
sites to allow residential uses as secondary uses. Once amended, developers would be allowed to include
residential uses as a secondary use without having to individually go through a General Plan Amendment or
rezoning process.
         Implementing Agency: Development Services Department
         Timeframe: Implementation throughout the planning period.
         Funding Source: General Fund
Program 3:         Inclusionary Housing and In-Lieu Fees
Developers of new residential developments with two or more units are required to provide 10% of the
development as affordable housing or pay fees in-lieu of reserving affordable housing units for very low, low, and
moderate income households. The City has financially assisted several affordable projects with housing in-lieu fee
funds. The purpose of the fees is to promote the construction and/or assistance of affordable housing projects
throughout the City. The fees are dedicated to an affordable housing fund. The collected funds can only be used
for programs outlined in the Hope Plan (Housing Opportunities Program Empowerment Plan), as established by
City Council, in order to meet the housing needs of very low, low, and moderate income households. The programs
assist their housing needs through the production, acquisition, rehabilitation, and preservation of affordable
housing units. The amount of the in-lieu fees is calculated using the housing market variables. The rental
developments have a fee that is calculated annually, and ownership developments have a fee that is calculated
monthly. The fee formula is within the City of San Juan Capistrano Municipal Code Section 9-5.103.
The City will continue to implement and evaluate this program and its impacts on developments. Staff will
encourage developers combine this program with other affordable housing programs (such as the density bonus)
to maximize affordable housing opportunities. In addition the City will make specific efforts to assist in the
development of housing that meets the needs of special needs households such as large families, extremely low
income households, seniors, and persons with disabilities, including developmental. The City will give priority and
expedited permitting for such development proposals and will give priority for the use of these funds.
         Implementing Agency: Development Services Department
         Timeframe: Implementation throughout the planning period
         Funding Source: General Fund, City Housing In-Lieu Fees
Program 4:         Housing Choice Voucher Program
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                               82

The City will continue to participate in the County of Orange Housing Choice Voucher Rental Assistance Program.
This program provides rental assistance to eligible very low and low-income households. The subsidy represents
the difference between the rent that exceeds 30 percent of a household’s monthly income and the actual rent
charged. The City’s ability to gain or even maintain its participation in this program at its current level is dependent
upon the annual Federal budget process. Recent indications from HUD are that Federal support for Section 8 will
not be expanded. As of October 2013, the Orange County Housing Authority was assisting 68 households through
the Housing Choice Voucher Program. The City will work with and support the County’s efforts to maintain and, if
funding permits, increase assistance levels.
          Implementing Agency: Orange County Housing Authority
          Timeframe: Implementation throughout the planning period
          Funding Source: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
Program 5:          Affordable Housing Funding
The City will facilitate or support the applications of experienced housing developers and homeless service
providers for financing to develop affordable housing. As part of the City activities associated with this program,
the City will meet with potential affordable housing developers, provide site information, assist in the entitlement
processes, and consider on a case-by-case other incentives, including, but not limited to, fee deferrals and
modification of standards. Additionally, the City will strive to use these funds to assist special needs households,
including but not limited to extremely low income households, large families, seniors, and persons with disabilities,
including developmental. In order to make affordable housing development economically feasible, developers
must layer financing from several State and Federal financing sources. Below is a list of the major public financing
programs currently available:
§    Low Income Housing Tax Credits— The CA Tax Credit Allocation Committee provides equity for investment for
     low-income rental housing projects.
§    Tax-Exempt Mortgage Revenue Bonds— The CA Debt Limit Allocation Committee provides debt financing for
     low-income rental housing project through bond financing.
§    Multifamily Housing Program (Proposition 46)— The CA Housing and Community Development provides debt
     financing for rental housing projects, with a set-aside for permanent supportive housing.
§    HOME Investment Partnership Program— The City competes for funds directly to the State of California for
     HOME funds. The State of California receives entitlement funds from HUD annually.
§    Community Development Block Grant Funds— The City competes for funds directly to the State of California
     for CDBG funds. The State of California receives entitlement funds from HUD annually.
§    Project-based Housing Choice Vouchers— The City participates in the County of Orange Section 8 voucher
     program.
§    HUD Competitive Grant Funding— HUD issues a Super NOFA annually which makes competitive grant funding
     available for the following programs: Section 202 program for senior housing development projects; Section
     811 program for housing development projects serving disabled persons; Supportive Housing Program for
     transitional and permanent housing development projects serving homeless persons with disabilities, and,
     Shelter Plus Care program providing rental assistance and supportive services for homeless persons with
     disabilities. The City applies for all grants funding directly to the State of California. It does not receive County
     of Orange funds or funds directly from HUD.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                     83

§    Housing Opportunities for People with AIDS/HIV— The Orange County Housing Authority receives funds
     annually from HUD. The City supports the County or Orange for requests for funding from HUD.
         Implementing Agency: Development Services Department, County of Orange
         Timeframe: Implementation on an annual basis
         Funding Source: State of California HCD; County of Orange; CA Tax Credit Allocation Committee; CA Debt
                               Limit Allocation Committee
Program 6:         Affordability Covenant for Accessory Units
The City has zoning code provisions that allow accessory units (also known as second units) by right in all single
family residential zones, in accordance with state law. This program can be successful in fostering the development
of accessory units throughout the community. The City has also developed an approach to allow for affordability
covenants for new secondary dwelling units and will encourage interested property owners to use this mechanism
to expand affordable housing opportunities in the City.
         Implementing Agency: Development Services Department
         Timeframe: Implementation throughout the planning period
         Funding Source: General Fund
Program 7:         Mobile Home Park Rent Control Ordinance
The City’s rent control ordinance governs the maximum annual rent increases in all seven of the City's mobile
home parks. The City conducts hearings for mobile home parks in which the owners wanted to raise rents higher
than the allowable rent increase amount. In 2000 the City adopted an ordinance that regulates mobile home park
closures. The City also works with the owners and residents of mobile home parks to facilitate the purchase of
mobile home parks in order to control the costs for mobile home residents. The City also works with the park
residents, reviews pro forma and paperwork, conducts required public hearings, and supports the issuance of tax
exempt bonds for the park purchase.
The City will continue to implement the Mobile Home Park Rent Control Ordinance to ensure that the City’s 1,266
mobile homes continue to be the most affordable homeownership option within the City.
         Implementing Agency: Development Services Department
         Timeframe: Implementation throughout the planning period
         Funding Source: General Fund
Program 8:         Mortgage Credit Certificate Program (MCC)
The City will continue to participate in and promote Mortgage Credit Certificates through the County of Orange.
This program entitles qualified first time homebuyers to take a Federal income tax credit of 15 percent of the
interest paid on the mortgage. The credit reduces the buyers’ income taxes and increases net earnings, thereby
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                              84

increasing the buyers’ ability to qualify for a mortgage loan. Qualified applicants must be first time homebuyers
earning no greater than 120 percent of the area median income.
The City will increase awareness of the MCC program by providing information on the MCC program on the City’s
website with links to the County of Orange information website and the County’s MCC Program Administrator's
website. Flyers and brochures created by the County’s MCC Program Administrator will be made available
to residents at key public locations.
          Implementing Agency: Orange County Housing Authority
          Timeframe: Implementation on an annual basis
          Funding Source: California Debt Limit Allocation Committee (CDLAC)
REMOVAL OF GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
Program 9:         Reasonable Accommodation Procedure
The Fair Housing Act, as amended in 1988, requires that cities and counties provide reasonable accommodation to
rules, policies, practices, and procedures where such accommodation may be necessary to afford individuals with
disabilities equal housing opportunities. While fair housing laws intend for all people have equal access to housing,
the law also recognizes that people with disabilities may need extra tools to achieve equality. Reasonable
accommodation is one of the tools intended to further housing opportunities for people with disabilities.
Reasonable accommodation provides a means of requesting from the local government flexibility in the
application of land use and zoning regulations or, in some instances, even a waiver of certain restrictions or
requirements because it is necessary to achieve equal access to housing. Cities and counties are required to
consider requests for accommodations related to housing for people with disabilities and provide the
accommodation when it is determined to be “reasonable” based on fair housing laws and case law interpreting the
statutes.
The City will create a process for making requests for reasonable accommodation to land use and zoning decisions
and procedures regulating the siting, funding, development and use of housing for people with disabilities.
Information will be provided to residents on reasonable accommodation procedures via public counters and the
City website.
          Implementing Agency: Development Services Department
          Timeframe: Within 18 months of adoption of the Housing Element
          Funding Source: General Fund
Program 10:        Emergency, Transitional and Supportive Housing
The City adopted a Supportive Housing Code in 2013 which permits emergency shelters, transitional housing, and
supportive housing facilities within the Public and Institutional zoning district by right, or not subject to approval of
a conditional use permit.
Transitional and supportive housing units are allowed in the City based on the type and character of development.
Transitional housing provides longer term housing (up to two years), coupled with supportive services such as job
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                    85

training and counseling to individuals and families who are transitioning from homelessness to permanent
housing. In a supportive housing development, housing can be coupled with social services such as job training,
alcohol and drug abuse programs, and case management for populations in need of assistance, such as the
homeless, those suffering from mental illness or substance abuse problems, and the elderly or medically frail.
     ·   To reflect state law, the zoning code will explicitly address transitional housing and supportive housing.
         Consistent with state law, transitional and supportive housing that is provided in zones the permit
         residential uses (including mixed-use) will be permitted, conditionally permitted or prohibited in the same
         manner as the other zones that permit residential uses (including mixed-use).
     ·   The City will monitor provisions of the Supportive Housing Code to ensure that specific conditions and
         restrictions do not unduly constrain development of emergency, transitional and supportive housing. If
         substantial constraints are identified, revise the Supportive Housing Code accordingly.
         Implementing Agency: Development Services Department
         Timeframe: Within 18 months of adoption of the Housing Element; Ongoing monitoring of the Supportive
         Housing Code
         Funding Source: General Fund
CONSERVE, PRESERVE, AND IMPROVE THE HOUSING STOCK
Program 11:        Residential Rehabilitation
The City will continue to apply for grant funding (CDBG and HOME) to assist in the rehabilitation of housing. The
City applies directly to the State of California for CDBG and HOME affordable housing grants. Since 1999, the City
has been awarded $6,435,000 in grant funds for the City's owner-occupied housing rehabilitation program, first
time home buyer program, a welfare-to-work child care facility, a planning and technical assistance grant, and a
new construction ownership condominium project. The City’s goal is to provide residential rehabilitation assistance
for 60 units (averaging to about 8 to 9 units per year).
         Implementing Agency: Development Services Department
         Timeframe: Implementation throughout the planning period
         Funding Source: State Community Development Block Grant and HOME Funds
EQUAL HOUSING OPPORTUNITIES
Program 12:        Fair Housing and Equal Housing Opportunity
The City will continue to abide by and enforce fair housing laws. To assist in education and understanding of fair
housing rights and protections, the City will continue to distribute information on fair housing and refer fair
housing questions and housing discrimination claims to the Fair Housing Council of Orange County. All housing
advertising, housing public hearing notices, and contracts for housing-related work include fair housing language
as required by the State of California. The City will continue to display the fair housing and equal housing
opportunity logos on all housing information, housing website pages, Community Center, and at the front counter
to the Development Services Department.
         Implementing Agency: Development Services Department
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                86

          Timeframe: Implementation throughout the planning period
          Funding Source: CDBG, HOME, and General Funds
QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
Housing Element law requires that quantified objectives be developed with regard to new construction,
rehabilitation, conservation, and preservation activities that will occur during the eight-year Housing Element
cycle. Table 28 summarizes the City of San Juan Capistrano’s quantified objectives for the provision of affordable
housing opportunities based on its programs, during the eight year, 2014-2021, Housing Element cycle.
     ·    The Construction Objective represents the City’s RHNA of 74 units for extremely low-income households,
          147 units for extremely/very low-income households, 104 units for low-income households, 120 units for
          moderate-income households, and 267 units for moderate-income households.
     ·    The Rehabilitation objective represents rehabilitation assistance to 60 households through the City’s
          Residential Rehabilitation Program.
     ·    The Conservation objective represents the conservation of the 1 unit at risk of converting to market rate
          and the affordability of the City’s 1,266 mobile homes through implementation of the City’s Mobile Home
          Park Rent Control Ordinance.
                                                               Table 28
                                                     Total Quantified Objectives
                                                  San Juan Capistrano, 2013-2021
                                                                                                       Above
                                                          Very           Low-         Moderate
                                     Extremely                                                      Moderate-           Totals
                                                     Low-Income        Income          Income
                                    Low Income*                                                       Income
        New Construction                73              74             104             120            267              638
        Rehabilitation                   0              30              30              0              0                60
        Conservation/
        Preservation                     0               1            1,266             0              0              1,267
         * *Note: Pursuant to AB 2634, in estimating the number of extremely low-income households, a jurisdiction can use 50% of
            the very low-income allocation or apportion the very low-income figure based on Census data. As shown in Table 3,
            extremely low- and very low-income households total 2,615 households, with extremely low-income households
            comprising 50% of the 2,615 households. Therefore, the City’s very low-income RHNA of 147 units can be split into 73
            extremely low-income and 74 very low-income units.
San Juan Capistrano Housing Element                                                                                               87

   Appendix A - Table A-1: Sites Inventory Table
                                                                                        Allowable          Realistic
                          Parcel Number                                                  Density   Current Capacity  Affordability   Infrastructure    On Site
Site Name                      (APN)         Size (acres)  General Plan/Zoning           (du/ac)     Use    (units)     Level           Capacity    Constraints
                                                           Medium Low Density/RS-
                         664-041-09                    6.3 10,000                              3.5 Stables                         Yes              No
                                                           Medium Low Density/RS-
                         664-041-10                    3.9 10,000                              3.5 Stables                         Yes              No
                                                           Medium Low Density/RS-                                    Above
1: The Oaks              664-041-12                    .01 10,000                              3.5 Stables    32     Moderate      Yes              No
                                                           Medium High Density/ RS-
                         649-052-08                  1.70  4,000                                 8 SF Unit    11                    Yes             No
                                                           Medium High Density/ RS-                                   Above
2: Calle Lorenzo         649-053-13                  0.18  4,000                                 8 SF Unit     1      Moderate      Yes             No
                                                           Planned Community/ Planned
3:          C.     Romer                                   Community (CDP 78-1 -Very
Homestead                666-241-12                  0.35  High Density)                        30 SF Unit     8      Very Low      Yes             No
                                                                                                                                                    No:
                                                                                                                                                    constrained
                                                                                                                                                    portion of
4; The Groves --Only                                 4.40:                                                                                          the site is
residential portion                                  2.00                                                                                           not included
                                               Residential                                                                                          in the
                                               2.40 Open   Very High Density/ Very High                                                             capacity
                         121-050-21                Space   Density                              30 Vacant     48      Very Low      Yes             calculation
                                                   11.14:
                                                     8.56
                                               Residential Planned Community/ (CDP 78-
                                                     2.58  01- Mixed Use & Very High
                                                                                                                 2
                         666-131-09           Commercial   Density)                             30 Vacant    219                    Yes             No
5: Ventanas2 --Only
residential portion
                                                           Planned Community/ (CDP 78-
                         666-131-14                  0.04  01- Very High Density)               30 Vacant     12                    Yes             No
                                                     5.92
                                                     0.40
                                               Residential Planned Community/ (CDP 78-
                                               5.52 Open   01- Mixed Use & Very High
                         666-131-15                Space   Density)                             30 Vacant     102     Very Low      Yes             No
                         Tr. 16146, Tr.                    Low Density/ Hillside                                      Above
6: Oliva                 17655                      21.50  Residential                         3.5 Vacant     40      Moderate      Yes             No
                         668-511-94                    .03
                         668-511-95                    .25
                         668-511-96                    .23
                         668-511-91                    .11
                         668-511-92                    .10 Medium High Density/ RS-                                   Above
7: The Cove Estates      668-511-93                    .11 4,000                                 8 Vacant      4      Moderate      Yes             No
   Appendix A - Table A-1: Sites Inventory Table
                                                                                       Allowable            Realistic
                          Parcel Number                                                 Density     Current Capacity  Affordability  Infrastructure   On Site
Site Name                      (APN)         Size (acres)  General Plan/Zoning          (du/ac)       Use    (units)     Level          Capacity    Constraints
                        668-511-94                     .17
                        Tr. 14196, Tr.
                        15609, Tr. 15687,
                        Tr. 16747, Tr.                                                                                Moderate/
                        16750, Tr. 16751,                  Planned Community/ CDP 81-                                 Above
8: Pacifica San Juan    Tr. 16752                     257  01                                   3.7 Vacant     321    Moderate      Yes             No
9: Don Juan Duplex                                         Medium High Density/ MRD-                                  Above
Property                Tr 16802                     2.10  4,000                                8.0 Vacant      8     Moderate      Yes             No
10:     Hidden    Creek                                    Medium Low Density/ RS-                                    Above
Estates                 Tr. 16572                    3.00  10,000                               3.5 Vacant      8     Moderate      Yes             No
                                                           Very High Density/Very High              City
11: City Hall           668-101-10                   2.52  Density                              30  Hall        61    Very Low      Yes             No
                                                                                          Total                772



















                                                                                                Parks & Recreation Element
                                                                                               Table          of Contents
         Sec:tion                                                                                                                  Pane
         Introduction
                  Purpose of the Parks & Recreation Element . . . . . . . .            . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
                  Scope and Content of the Parks & Recreation Element                  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  1
                  Related Plans and Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
                  Relationship to Other General Plan Elements . . . . . .              . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  3
         Issues, Goals and Policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
                  Parks and Recreational Facilities      ...   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  5
                  Trails Network . . . . . . . . . . . ....    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
                  Neighboring Cities . . . . . . . . . ....    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
                  Related Goals and Policies . . .     ....    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
         Parks and Recreation Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
                  Parks and Recreational Facilities      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
                  Trails Network . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   18
                  Equestrian Lifestyle . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
                  Neighboring Cities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   19
         December 14, 1999                                                                     San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineorint.com
         Parks & Recreation Element
                                                  List ofTables
         Th~                                                                                                                P~e
         PR-1   Related Goals and Policies by Element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
         PR--2  Existing Parks and Recreational Facilities Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
         PR-3   Planned Parks and Recreational Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         PR-4   Existing and Future Park Acreage Needs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
                                                 List of Figures
         Fioure                                                                                                             Pane
         PR-1   Parks and Recreational Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
         December 14, 1999                                  ii                         San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                                Parks & Recreation Element
                                                                                        Introduction
                                             Some of San Juan Capistrano's most valuable assets include its
                                             parks, recreational facilities, hiking, biking and equestrian trails
                                             and natural open space. Parks and facilities for recreational
                                             activities contribute significantly to the quality of life of the
                                             City's residents. The Parks & Recreation Element focuses on
                                             the provision and maintenance of parks, recreational facilities
                                             and hiking, biking, and equestrian trails within the City.
                     Purpose of the          The Parks & Recreation Element is not a mandatory element
                 Parks & Recreation          under state planning law. The City elected to include the Parks
                             Element         & Recreation Element due to the importance of parks and
                                            recreational facilities in the community, and the close
                                            relationship between the provision of parks and the
                                            enhancement of open space areas. The Parks & Recreation
                                            Element includes goals, policies and plans to ensure the
                                            provision and maintenance of adequate parks and recreational
                                            facilities to meet the needs of the existing and future population
                                            of the City. The Parks & Recreation Plan identifies existing and
                                            planned parks and recreational facilities throughout the City.
                  Scope and Content         The Parks & Recreation Element addresses the level of existing
                      of the Parks &        facilities, the provision of new parkland, recreational facilities,
                 Recreation Element         and hiking, biking and equestrian trails, as well as the economic
                                            feasibility of providing and maintaining these facilities. The
                                            Parks & Recreation Element expresses community goals to
                                            provide adequate parks and recreational facilities. The element
                                            contains specific goals and standards to guide the provision and
                                            maintenance of parks and recreational facilities for the current
                                            and future residents of San Juan Capistrano.
                                            The Parks & Recreation Element consists of three sections: 1)
                                            Introduction; 2) Issues, Goals and Policies; and 3) the Parks &
                                            Recreation Plan. In the Issues, Goals and Policies section,
                                            community parks and recreation needs are identified, and
                                            corresponding goals and policies are established. The goals,
                                            which are overall statements of the City's desires, comprise
                                            broad statements of purpose and direction. The policies serve
                                            as guides for planning recreational facilities to meet the needs
                                            of the existing and future population of San Juan Capistrano.
                                            The Plan describes how the goals and policies will be achieved
                                            and implemented. Specific implementation programs are
                                            included in the General Plan Implementation Program.
         May 7, 2002                                                           San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Parks & Recreation Element
                   Related Plans and        A number of existing plans and programs directly relate to the
                           Programs         Park & Recreation Element. These plans and programs have
                                            been enacted through federal, state, and local actions and are
                                            administered by agencies or special districts.
                                            The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
                                            The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1991 was
                                            adopted to make public areas, including parks and play areas,
                                            accessible to all persons. The ADA requires that all playground
                                            equipment, trails and recreational facilities be usable by adults
                                            and children with disabilities. Designing recreational facilities
                                            and retrofitting existing facilities is addressed in the Parks &
                                            Recreation Element.
                                            California Environmental Quality Act and Guidelines
                                            (CEQA)
                                            The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was
                                            adopted by the state legislature in response to a public mandate
                                            for thorough environmental analysis of projects impacting the
                                            environment. The provisions of the law and environmental
                                            review procedures are described in the CEQA Statutes and
                                            Guidelines. CEQA will continue to be instrumental in ensuring
                                            that the environmental impacts associated with local
                                            development projects are appropriately assessed and mitigated.
                                            The Quimby Act
                                            The Quimby Act (State of California Planning Law Section
                                            664-77) allows the legislative body of a city or county to require
                                            by ordinance the dedication ofland, the payment of in-lieu fees,
                                            or a combination of both for parks and recreational purposes as
                                            a condition to the approval for a final tract or parcel map. In
                                            cases where such dedication or fees are not obtained through a
                                            map, they may be imposed when building permits are issued.
                                            The following conditions must be met to comply with the
                                            Quimby Act:
                                                The city or county ordinance must include definite
                                                standards for determining the proportion of a subdivision to
                                                be dedicated and the amount of any fee to be paid in-lieu
                                                thereof.
                                                The legislative body has adopted a General Plan containing
                                                a recreation element, and any proposed park or recreational
                                                facility must be consistent with the principles and standards
                                                established in the element.
         May 7, 2002                                     2                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                               Parks & Recreation Element
                                            County of Orange Master Plan ofLocal Parks
                                            The County of Orange Master Plan of Local Parks provides
                                            goals, objectives, policies and implementation programs for a
                                            comprehensive Countywide Park Plan. The Master Plan
                                            provides a regional park planning context for the City of San
                                            Juan Capistrano.
                                            County of Orange Master Plan ofRegional Riding and
                                            Hiking Trails
                                            The County of Orange Master Plan of Regional Riding and
                                            Hiking Trails includes an inventory of existing and proposed
                                            trails, and standards and criteria for the provision of new trails.
                                            This plan also provides policies and programs to implement the
                                            future development and operation of the Countywide trails
                                            system.
                                            County ofOrange Recreation Element
                                            The County of Orange General Plan Recreation Element
                                            provides an inventory of existing and proposed parks and open
                                            space and includes the Local Parks and Trails Master Plans.
                                            These Master Plans provide a regional park planning context for
                                            the City of San Juan Capistrano.
                                            City of San Juan Capistrano Open Space Master Plan
                                            The City adopted an Open Space Master Plan in 1992. The
                                            purpose of the Open Space Master Plan is to preserve, protect
                                            and enhance open space uses, agricultural preserves,
                                            recreational facilities and trails within the City. The San Juan
                                            Capistrano Open Space Master Plan provides an inventory of
                                            existing and planned open space uses, as well as goals, policies,
                                            plans and programs to ensure the continued preservation,
                                            development and management of open space resources within
                                            the City. The goals, policies and plan contained in the Open
                                            Space & Conservation Element of this General Plan are the
                                            required legal documentation to be used when planning for
                                            open space and conservation uses within the City.
                     Relationship to        The Parks & Recreation Element must be consistent with the
                      Other General         other General Plan elements and all elements of the General
                      Plan Elements         Plan are interrelated to a degree. Certain goals and policies of
                                            the Parks & Recreation Element may also address issues that are
                                            the primary subjects of other elements. The integration of
                                            overlapping issues throughout the General Plan elements
                                            provides a strong basis for the implementation of plans and
         May 7, 2002                                     3                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Parks & Recreation Element
                                            programs, and achievement of community goals. The Parks &
                                            Recreation Element most closely relates to the Land Use
                                            Element and the Conservation & Open Space Element.
                                            The Land Use Element provides a planned land use pattern with
                                            the following general land use designation categories:
                                            Residential, Commercial, Industrial, Public/Institutional,
                                            Open Space & Conservation and Special. These community
                                            designations are applied to public and private land that is
                                            intended for open space and parks and recreational uses.
                                            The Parks & Recreation and the Conservation & Open Space
                                            Elements are also closely related. The Conservation & Open
                                            Space Element identifies existing and planned open space.
                                            These areas are in some cases suitable for parks and recreational
                                            activities. The Parks & Recreation Element proposes parks,
                                            trails and recreational uses in some of these areas when these
                                            uses are compatible with surrounding land uses and are
                                            appropriate to meet public parks and recreational needs.
         May 7, 2002                                                        San Juan Capistrano General
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                               Parks & Recreation Element
                                                             Issues, Goals, and Policies
               Parks & Recreational         San juan Capistrano has a growing and diverse population. To
                           Facilities       meet the recreational needs of this population, the City needs
                                            to assure that a variety of park and recreational facilities exist.
                                            These facilities provide open space and add to the quality oflife
                                            within the community.
                                            Parks &. Recreation Goal 1: Provide, develop, and
                                            maintain ample park and recreational facilities that
                                            provide a diversity of recreational activities.
                                            Policy 1.1: Coordinate with local groups to identify and meet
                                            the community's recreational needs.
                                            Policy 1.2: Work with the County and other agencies'
                                            planning for the development of regional parks and regional
                                            linkages which will be accessible to City residents.
                                            Policy 1.3: Identify and implement funding programs to
                                            maintain and expand park and recreational facilities.
                                            Policy 1.4: Develop and maintain a balanced system of public
                                            and private recreational lands, facilities, and programs to meet
                                            the needs of the community.
                                            Policy 1.5: Operate and maintain public park and recreational
                                            facilities in a manner that ensures safe and convenient access for
                                            all members of the community.
                                            Policy 1.6: Increase the accessability of existing open space
                                            areas for recreational activities.
                                            Policy 1. 7: Provide parkland improvements and facilities that
                                            are durable and economical to maintain.
                                            Policy 1.8: Publicize park and recreation opportunities in San
                                           Juan Capistrano to the community.
                                            Policy 1.9: Utilize existing public utility easements for
                                            recreation and open space.
         May 7, 2002                                      5                  San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Parks & Recreation Element
                     Trails Network         San Juan Capistrano already has an extensive trail system for
                                            bicycles, hikers, and horses. As well as reducing automobile
                                            traffic through the provision of alternative modes of
                                            transportation, the trail systems also provide the community
                                            with active and interesting recreational opportunities.
                                            Parks &. Recreation Goal 2: Develop and expand the
                                            existino bicycle, hikin9, and equestrian trail system and
                                           facilities.
                                            Policy 2.1: Develop and expand the existing trails network
                                            that supports bicycles, pedestrians, and horses, and coordinate
                                            linkages with those networks of adjacent jurisdictions.
                                            Policy 2.2: Preserve the equestrian lifestyle by designating land
                                            for the preservation or provision of new equestrian facilities.
                                            Policy 2.3: Encourage the affordable provision of equestrian
                                            facilities within the City.
                        Neighboring         San Juan Capistrano offers a range of Parks & Recreational
                               Cities       opportunities, while some of the surrounding cities do not offer
                                            the same level of service. As a result, the City has experienced
                                            an increase in the number of non-residents using City facilities.
                                            Since these non-residents do not help to support San Juan
                                            Capistrano's Parks & Recreational facilities through tax
                                            revenues, the City is in effect subsidizing the surrounding cities'
                                            recreational opportunities.
                                            Parks &.Recreation Goal3: Reduce the impact ofadjacent
                                            cities' residents on San Juan Capistrano's recreational
                                           facilities.
                                            Policy 3.1: Develop and implement programs which distribute
                                            the cost ofbuilding and maintaining recreational facilities to the
                                            actual users with credit to City residents for past and current
                                            payment for providing facilities through Measure "D" bonds.
                      Related Goals         The goals and policies described in the Parks & Recreation
                        and Policies        Element are related to and support subjects included within
                                            other General Plan elements. In turn, many goals and policies
                                            from the other elements directly or indirectly support the goals
                                            and policies of the Parks & Recreation Element. These
                                            supporting goals and policies are identified in Table PR-1.
         May 7, 2002                                                          San Juan Capistrano
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                                   Parks & Recreation Element
                                                        Table PR-1
                                      Related Goals and Policies by Element
                                                            Parks & Recreation Issue Area
          General Plan Elements        Parks & Recreational             Trails               Neighboring Cities
                                       Facilities                       Network
          Land Use                     1.3, 2.1, 7.2                    1.3, 2.1, 7.2
          Housing
          Circulation                  3.1                              3.1, 4-.1            3.1
          Safety
          Conservation & Open Space    1.1, 1.2, 1.3                    1.1, 1.2, 1.3
          Noise
          Cultural Resources
          Community Design             1.3, 3.2                         3.2
          Growth Management            1.1, 1.2, 1.3,4-.2               1.1, 1.2, 1.3,       4-.2
                                                                        4-.2
          Parks & Recreation
          Public Services & Utilities  4-. 1
          Floodplain Management        3.1                              3.2
         May 7, 2002                                        7                     San ] uan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Parks & Recreation Element
                                                             Parks &.._Recreation Plan
                                            A distinct combination of physical setting, agricultural land,
                                            Mission-related heritage and natural open space provide identity
                                            and unique recreational opportunities for San Juan Capistrano.
                                            The Parks & Recreation Element establishes an approach to
                                            provide a variety of Parks & Recreational opportunities while
                                            preserving open space and adding to the quality of life within
                                            the community. The Plan addresses the Parks & Recreation
                                            issues identified in the previous section of this Element. The
                                            related goals and policies serve as the basis of the Plan and are
                                            supported by approaches to provide, enhance and maintain
                                            Parks & Recreational facilities. The Parks & Recreation
                                            Implementation program is an extension of this Plan and
                                            contains specific programs to achieve recreational goals.
               Parks & Recreational         The San Juan Capistrano park and recreation system exists
                           Facilities       within the context of the City's existing development pattern.
                                            The existing and planned parks & recreational system consists
                                            of neighborhood parks, community parks, the planned Prima
                                            Deshecha County Regional Park, joint use parks, private Parks
                                            & Recreational facilities, community services and facilities and
                                            an extensive trail system. City parks and recreational facilities
                                            are depicted on Figure PR-1.             The existing Parks &
                                            Recreational system can be characterized as neighborhood-
                                            serving with Parks & Recreational facilities generally well
                                            distributed throughout the City. Most of the neighborhoods in
                                            the City are within three-quarters of a mile from an existing
                                            park. Those developments that fall outside of the three-quarter
                                            radius from a public park often have private Parks &
                                            Recreational facilities. Table PR-2 provides a complete list and
                                            description of existing Parks & Recreational facilities within the
                                            City. The approximate location, acreage and features of
                                            planned parks are summarized in Table PR-3.
                                            To ensure sufficient Parks & Recreational opportunities, the
                                            City has established a parkland standard of five acres per 1 , 000
                                            residents. The standard is useful in determining existing
                                            parkland deficiencies and predicting the demand from future
                                            population growth. Table PR-4 summarizes the parkland
                                            requirements for the existing population and the anticipated
                                            population from development of planned land uses (as
                                            established in the Land Use Element). Based on the parkland
                                            standard, there is an existing surplus of approximately five acres
                                            in the City.
         May 7, 2002                                    8                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                     Parks & Recreation Element
                                    Bike Routes                          Recreational Trails
                                    j__..-J     Bike Path Class 1        1....,..........1 Hiklng/Equestrian/Mtn.
                                                                                           Bike Trail (Unpaved)
                                    r-:-;-;)
                                                Bike Lane Class 2        ~
                                   L..:.!.....J                          t..:.:..._j Hiking/Equestrian/Min.
                         Miss;on                                                             Bike Trail Feeder Trail
                          Viejo
                                   !.••"'I      Bike Route
                                                (Sign Only)
                                                                                            Not Owned or Maintained
                                                                                            by City
                                                Proposed Bike
                                                Route
                                                                         12:}              Proposed Trail
                                                                              0             Park Facility (Numbers
                                                                                            correspond to Ust provided
                                                                                            in Table PR-2)
                                                                                             City Boundary
                                                                                             Sphere of Influence
                                                                          Source: Ci9' if San Juan Capistrano,
                                                                                           Recreational Trails '![San Juan
                                                                                           Capistrano Map         ·
                                                            San Clemente
   Pacific Ocean
                                                                                        Figure PR-1
0           1/2   I Mile         Parks and Recreational Facilities
December 14, 1999                    9                             San Juan Capistrano General Plan

         Parks & Recreation Element
                                                                 Table PR-2
                                   Existing Parks and Recreational Facilities Inventory
          Name                           Size                  Location                        Amenities
          1
          A •
                A~.. r~~~,~~ D~~lr
               111..-u va.uyvu J. <tJ.~
                                         Ll   '7 ,...~... """
                                         - 1 . / <l'L-1\....., Ca..~:i..~o Las R'L.-enblas and  A ..... t-Amati£'1
                                                                                               1 ~ULVH.<
                                                                                                                      ;.,..r1n-r..t-iAn
                                                                                                               L.<\.- .<.< .< -'5UL.<V.<.<) g}
                                                                                                                                            rrrr..cc'\r
                                                                                                                                                U,.:J._, J
                                                               Avenida Pescador                area, multi-purpose fie ds.
          2.   Arce Park                 0.2 acres             Northwest corner of             Grassy area with automatic
                                                               Alipaz and Del Obispo           irrigation and signage.
          3.   Arroyo Park               3.6 acres             Bordered by Via Parra           Equestrian trail and grassy area
                                                               on the east and Sundance        wtth automatic irrigation.
                                                               on the west
          4.   Bonita Park               0.6 acres             West side of Via Del            Children's play area and grassy
                                                               Rey, across from Via            area with automatic irrigation.
                                                               Lorado
          s.   Buchheim Field            17.7 acres            North of Sging Street,          Food concessions, unlighted
                                                               east of El mmo Real             Little League and softball fields,
                                                               and west of Interstate 5        unlighted soccer fields and
                                                                                               parking.
          6.   Cook Park                 9.0 acres             East side of Calle Arroyo       Automatic irrigation, BBQ and
               (Cordova)                                       between Via Entradero           frre rings, bike paths,
                                                               and Via Solana                  equestrian/hiking trails, multi-
                                                                                               purbose fields, grassy area,
                                                                                               par ·n~, restrooms, softball and
                                                                                               soccer lelds and scenic views.
          7.   Cook Park (Del            1.5 acres             Calle Arroyo and Del            Bike paths, children's Elay area,
               Campo)                                          Campo                           equestrian/hiking trai s, grassy
                                                                                               area, and scenic views.
          8.   Cook Park (La             6.5 acres             East side of Calle Arroyo       Automatic irrigation, BBQs and
              Novia)                                           between La Novia and            frre rinE, basketball courts,
                                                               Paseo Tirador                   bike pa s, children's play area,
                                                                                               drinl<ing fountains,
                                                                                               equestrian/hiking trails, grassy
                                                                                               area, multi-purpose fields,
                                                                                               parkin~ picnic areas, restrooms
                                                                                               and vo eyball courts.
          9.  De La Vista Park           .3 acre               East ofTrabuco Creek            Picnic areas and tables.
                                                               and west of Avenida Del
                                                               La Vista, near the
                                                               western terminus of
                                                               Mission Street
              Descanso Park              1.0 acre              At the terminus of Paseo        Automatic irrigation, BB~ and
                                                               Adelanto                        frre rings, bike ~aths, chil en's
                                                                                               tlay area, City all, drinking
                                                                                                ountains, rrassy area, Head
                                                                                               Start, Hot prin~ Dance Hall,
                                                                                               horse corral and orseshoe pits,
                                                                                               parking, pic~ic area, restrooms,
                                                                                               and scemc views.
         May 7, 2002                                                     10                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com

                                                                            Parks & Recreation Element
                                                  Table PR-2
                              Existing Parks and Recreational Facilities Inventory
          Name                      Size         Location                  Amenities
               El Camino Real       4-.5 acres   Camino Capistrano from    Automatic irrigation, bike
               Park                              La Zanja to Calle Chueca  paths, drinking fountains, grassy
                                                                           area, picnic area, restroom'S. -
              Four Oaks Park        2.54- acres  East side of Via Madonna  Automatic irrigation, bike
                                                 between Calle Santa       paths, fkassy area, picnic area
                                                 Ynez and Via Del Cerro    and vo ey oall courts.
              Fran Joswick          5.3 acres    Between Trabuco Creek     Equestrian Facility
              E estrian Center                   and Camino
                0
               ( so Park)                        Capristrano, south of
                                                 Oso Road
              Good Neighbors        0.2 acre     West ofTrabuco Creek      Biking, equestrian/hiking trail,
              Park                               between Calle Lucana      grassy area, picnic area and
                                                 and Calle Delphina        restrooms.
              Helicopter Hill                    East of the terminus of   Scenic Views
                                                 Paseo Cardero
              Junipero Serra        3.75 acres   Terminus of San Felipe    Automatic irrigation, bike
              Park                               Circle                    r.aths, children s play area,
                                                                           Clrinking fountains, and grassy
                                                                           area.
              La Ronda Park         .5 acre      On Camino La Ronda        Benches and children's play
                                                 between Via Montura       area.
                                                 and Paseo Corrales
              Los Rios Historic     8.0 acres    East of Trabuco Creek     Bike paths, buildings of
              Park                               between Ramos Street      distinction, historical sites, and
                                                 and Historic River Street parking.
              Marco Forster         10.0 acres   Northeast corner of Del   Li~hted and unlighted baseball
              Junior High                        Obispo and Camino Del     fie ds and basket all courts; bike
                                                 Avion                     paths; children's play area;
                                                                           grassy area; ~ymnastics; multi-
                                                                           purpose fiel s; parking; lighted
                                                                           and unlighted racquet all
                                                                           courts; running track; li~hted
                                                                           and unlighted softball fie ds,
                                                                           soccer fields and tennis courts;
                                                                           and volleyball courts.
              Mini Park             0.3 acre     East side of Camino       Benches, gravelpathsand
                                                 Capistrano at Yorba       container garden.
                                                 Street
              Mission Bell Park     2.8 acres    West side of AliEaz       Bike paths, children's play area,
                                                 Street, north of Calle    grassy area, ocean views and
                                                 Jardin                    scemc v1ews.
              Mission Trails        8.0 acres    Between Calle Arroyo      Equestrian Facility
              Equestrian Center                  and San Juan Creek
         May 7, 2002                                     11                San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Parks & Recreation Element
                                                  Table PR-2
                              Existing Parks and Recreational Facilities Inventory
          Name                      Size         Location                Amenities
               Old Ca~istrano       4.3 acres    Camino Catistrano,      Unli~hted basketball courts,
               High Sc ool Site                  west of El amino Real   unli~ ted soccer fields and
                                                 between La Zanja and    unlignted tennis courts.
                                                 Acjachema
               Old Fire Station     1.3 acres    El Horno Street and La  City Community Services
               Community                         Matanza                 Department, recreation classes,
               Center                                                    semor center and restrooms.
               Rio Oso Park         5.3 acres    South of Oso Road       Benches and biking trail
                                                 between Trabuco Creek
                                                 and Camino Capistrano
               San Juan             56.0 acres   Camino Del Avion        Bike path, basketball courts,
               Capistrano                                                ~nasium, multi-purpose
               Communi~                                                   e ds, senior and community
               Center an Sports                                          center, City community
               Park                                                      services, recreation classes,
                                                                         Kinoshita Farm Preserve.
              San Juan Creek        4. 7 acres   Northwest corner of San Children's play area and
              Neifhborhood                       Juan Creek and Camino   benches.
              Par                                Lacouague
          Total Acres               162.6
         May 7, 2002                                   12                San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                                     Parks & Recreation Element
                                                        Table PR-3
                                     Planned Parks and Recreational Facilities
          Site                    Net New Acreage         Location                          Possible Features
          Las Ramblas Park        5.5 acres               North side of Camino Las          Soccer field, trees, turf,
                                                           Ramblas, between Via             baseball fields and
                                                           California and Via De Agua       parking
          N o:rthwest Open        77.0 acres               Between Camino Capistrano        Picnic areas, historical
          Space Site                                      and the railroad, north of        area, nature center, tot
                                                          Junipero Serra Road               lots, hiking and biking
                                                                                            trails
          Total                   82.5
                                                        Table PR-4
                                      Existing and Future Park Acreage Needs
                                                                       Available
                                                                       Acreage from
                                                    Park               Existing and           Surplus I Shor
                                   Population1      Acreage            Planned                t-faU of
                                                    Required 2         Parkland3              Acreage
                Existing City              31,337               157                    163                     6
                Future City                36,440               182                    245                   63
             Projected population for purposes of establishing parkland acreage needs.
             Five acres per 1,000 persons.
             County anCI Regional parks are not used to meet this standard.
         May 7, 2002                                          13                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
          Parks & Recreation Element
                                            The facilities comprising the Parks & Recreation Plan are
                                            described in the following sections, and standards and criteria
                                            for developing new park sites are established.
                                            Parks System
                                            The City's parks system consists of existing public and private
                                            neighborhood parks, community parks, the planned Prima
                                            Deshecha County Regional Park and joint use parks. San Juan
                                            Capistrano currently has 27 developed public parks which range
                                            in size from the 0.2 acre Arce Park to the 56 acre San Juan
                                            Capistrano Community Center and Sports Park. Several public
                                            parks are small and function as passive parks.              Active
                                            recreational parkland is provided in the City at nine parks.
                                            Neiohborhood Parks
                                            The City contains a significant number of well-distributed
                                            public and private neighborhood parks that are primarily passive
                                            in nature.     The following criteria are considered when
                                            developing neighborhood parks:
                                                A parcel size of approximately five acres, with
                                                approximately half of the acreage in relatively flat terrain to
                                                minimize grading for play areas and parking. The sites
                                                should have both adequate street access and preferably
                                                connections to the trail system;
                                                The parks, although passive in nature, should include level
                                                areas for active sports play, practice fields or multi-purpose
                                                fields as appropriate. The parks should also include
                                                playgrounds, tot lots and picnic areas; Each park should be
                                                designed with rest room facilities, drinking fountains,
                                                signage, and security lighting designed to be compatible
                                                with surrounding residences;
                                                Parking provisions should be adequate to serve the activities
                                                and not infringe upon the surrounding neighborhood's
                                                parking demands; and
                                                Each park should be designed with handicap accessibility.
         May 7, 2002                                                          San Juan Capistrano
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                            Parks & Recreation Element
                                            The City will continue to implement its policy of providing
                                            well distributed small public neighborhood parks to serve the
                                            local communities within San Juan Capistrano. San Juan
                                            Capistrano will also maintain its current policy regarding the
                                            provision, operation and maintenance of private parks by
                                            homeowners associations as a way of augmenting the
                                            distribution of public neighborhood parks within the City. The
                                            City will also continue to implement the Quimby Act which
                                            requires parkland dedication of five acres per 1, 000 residents or
                                            an in-lieu fee payment as a required condition for approval of a
                                            residential subdivision.
                                            Community Parks
                                            The City currently has two major community parks, the C.
                                            Russell Cook Park and the San Juan Capistrano Community
                                            Center and Sports Park totaling approximately 73 acres. One
                                            additional community park is planned in the northwest portion
                                            of the City on a site located north of J unipero Serra Road
                                            between the railroad and Camino Capistrano. This northwest
                                            open space site is depicted on Figure PR-1. Community parks
                                            are intended to serve as the major active recreational sites
                                            within the City. The following criteria are considered when
                                            developing community parks:
                                            •   Large, multi-purpose open grass fields, ten acres in size, to
                                                be used for community events, open space, multi-purpose
                                                play areas or informal recreation;
                                            •   Active recreational facilities, including lighted and
                                                unlighted softball and baseball diamonds, soccer I football
                                                fields, basketball courts, volleyball courts, and tennis
                                                courts;
                                            •   Concessions and snack bar facilities;
                                            •   Permanent restrooms and maintenance storage facilities;
                                            •   Picnic sites and barbecues, including group picnic areas;
                                            •   Community building and outdoor stage or amphitheater;
                                            •   Adequate off-street parking with handicap accessibility;
                                            •   Nature center, with a nature trail, possible blind persons
                                                trail;
         May 7, 2002                                    15                 San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com

          Parks & Recreation Element
                                                 Trail staging area for biking, hiking and equestrian
                                                 connections to trail system;
                                                 Security lighting designed not to intrude on surrounding
                                                land uses;
                                                Possible day camp for group use, with the ability to have
                                                overnight camping or special events; and
                                                Passive areas with wooded glens and fields for strolling and
                                                picnicking.
                                            The City will continue to implement its policies regarding the
                                            expansion, provision, maintenance and funding of parks in
                                            order to expand the recreational opportunities at its community
                                            parks.
                                            Reoional Park
                                            The County of Orange and the City of San Juan Capistrano
                                            identify the development of the Prima Deshecha County
                                            Regional Park on the site of the existing Prima Deshecha landfill
                                            located in the southeastern hills of the City. Although full
                                            closure of the landfill is not expected until 2064, portions will
                                            be closed prior to 2064-. The City will continue to work with
                                            the County in establishing earlier phased development as
                                            portions of the landfill are closed. Activities that may be
                                            incorporated at this site include open field play and active
                                            recreation provisions, a golf course, camping facilities, picnic
                                            and barbecue facilities. County and Regional Parks are not used
                                            to meet the parkland requirement standard.
         May 7, 2002                                                         San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                                Parks & Recreation Element
                                            Joint Use Parks
                                            There are currently two active recreational park sites within the
                                            City which are owned by the Capistrano Unified School District
                                            and hold joint use agreements with the City - Buchheim Field
                                            and Marco Forster Junior High School. As indicated on Table
                                            PR-2, recreational opportunities at Buchheim Field include
                                            unlighted Little League and softball fields and unlighted soccer
                                            fields. The Marco Forster Junior High School site totals ten
                                            acres, including two lighted soccer I football fields, one
                                            unlighted soccer I football field and two lighted tennis courts.
                                            Additionally, the City also has a joint use agreement with
                                            Capistrano Valley High School, which is outside of the City
                                            limits, for the use of their gymnasium and pool facilities. The
                                            City will continue its policy of entering into joint use
                                            agreements with both private and public schools located in and
                                            adjacent to the City in order to expand the recreational
                                            opportunities available to City residents.
                                            Private Recreational Facilities
                                            There are three types of private recreation within the City -
                                            golf courses, equestrian centers and athletic clubs. The
                                            majority of these facilities, though privately owned, are open to
                                            the public subject to a user fee. These provide for a
                                            variety of local recreational needs including golf, horseback
                                            riding, swimming, racket sports, court sports and aerobics. In
                                            addition, many of the homeowners associations provide
                                            neighborhood recreational facilities within their units,
                                            consisting of pools, courts and parkland. Although these
                                            facilities are not available to all City residents, they provide an
                                            important level of recreation provision. The City will continue
                                            to implement its policies and programs which encourage the
                                            provision and maintenance of private recreational facilities and
                                            affordable equestrian centers.
                                            Community Services Facilities
                                            The Community Services Department currently uses four
                                            primary facilities at which it offers a variety of programs: a) the
                                            San Juan Capistrano Community Center and Sports Park; b) the
                                            Old Fire Station which contains the Nydegger Building and the
                                            Lacouague Building; c) the LaSala Community Room annex of
                                            the County library; and d)Hot Springs Dance Hall located
                                            immediately north of Descanso Park. A variety of senior and
                                            youth-oriented activities, classes and special events are held in
                                            these facilities. The Community Services Department also
                                            offers classes and programs at privately owned facilities,
         May 7, 2002                                     17                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Parks & Recreation Element
                                            schools, parks and concessions throughout the City. Through
                                            the Community Services Department, the City will continue to
                                            implement and fund programs to expand community services
                                            facilities and programs. The City will also continue to
                                            implement a program to publicize community services and
                                            recreational activities.
                     Trails Network         The City has in place an extensive hiking, biking and equestrian
                                            trail network. The following trails and bike routes comprise
                                            the trail system:
                                            •    General Plan Trails: These are the main trails, usually 20
                                                 feet wide, and in most cases are maintained by the City.
                                            •    Feeder Trails: These are dead end trails, 10 feet wide,
                                                 serving equestrian zoned neighborhoods. These trails are
                                                 usually maintained by the adjacent homeowners association.
                                                 Bicycle Routes: These are paved and consist of three
                                                 types.
                                                 Class 1: A route separated from a roadway such as the
                                                 route along the east side of Rancho Viejo Road, or along the
                                                 levees of San Juan and Trabuco Creeks. These routes are
                                                 also used by pedestrians and, in some areas, equestrians.
                                                 Class 2: A separate lane within a roadway such as along
                                                 Camino Capistrano, north of Junipero Serra Road.
                                                 Class 3: A route within a roadway designated by signage
                                                 only.
                                            This trails network is depicted on Figure PR-1. The system is
                                            held together by trails along San Juan, Trabuco and Oso
                                            Creeks. Complementing these is an irregular web of trails
                                            moving through the community and into the ridgelines
                                            surrounding the City. The City will continue to work with the
                                            County and surrounding jurisdictions to provide links to the
                                            regional trail network. The City will also continue to provide
                                            and maintain the various trails in order to provide trail loops
                                            and increased access to open space.
         May 7, 2002                                    18                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com

                                                                               Parks & Recreation Element
                                            A unique component of the recreational trail system is the
                                            City's Historic Walking Tour. This self guided tour links the
                                            City's main historic sites through a programmatic historic
                                            pedestrian trail through San Juan Capistrano's village core. The
                                            City will continue to maintain and publicize this historic
                                            pedestrian trail as a means to increase recreational opportunities
                                            within the City.
                 Equestrian Lifestyle       San Juan Capistrano's rural environment has been and continues
                                            to be enhanced by its equestrian facilities. Such facilities offer
                                            a unique form of recreation for both children and adults. This
                                            unique relationship between a horse and a person also has
                                            become a recognized form of physical therapy for those with
                                            disabilities. The General Plan makes provisions for the
                                            continuation and expansion of opportunities for equestrian
                                            stables and support facilities in order to maintain and protect
                                            this valuable asset to the quality of life of the community.
                  Neighboring Cities        Due to San Juan Capistrano's range of parks, recreational and
                                            community service facilities and activities, the City experiences
                                            a large number of non-residents using City facilities. Since
                                            these non-residents do not help to support the provision and
                                            maintenance of these facilities through tax revenues, the City is
                                            in effect subsidizing the surrounding jurisdictions' recreational
                                            opportunities. The City will develop and implement a program
                                            which distributes the costs of building and maintaining
                                            recreational facilities to the actual users with credit to City
                                            residents for past and current payment for providing facilities
                                            through Measure D bonds. The City will also coordinate with
                                            adjacent cities and agencies to study the feasibility of more
                                            equitably distributing the cost of building and maintaining
                                            recreational facilities among actual users.
         May 7, 2002                                    19                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com







































                                                                                                               Land Use Element
                                                                                               Table of Contents
         Section
         Introduction
                 Purpose of the Land Use Element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .            . .  1
                 Scope and Content of the Land Use Element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                . .  2
                 Related Plans and Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .        ·. .  2
                 Relationship to Other General Plan Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .               .  .  6
         Issues, Goals and Policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
                 Balance of Land Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . 8
                 Control and Direct Growth . . . . . . . . .         . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . 9
                 Population Distribution and Open Space .            . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  . 9
                 Economic Development . . . . . . . . . . . .        . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    10
                 Community and Neighborhood Character                . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .   11
                 Related Goals and Policies . . . . . . . . . .      . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    12
         Land Use Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
                 Balance of Land Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    14
                 Control and Direct Growth . . . . . . . . . .         . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    34
                 Population Distribution and Open Space . .            . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    38
                 Economic Development . . . . . . . . . . . . .        . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    39
                 Community and Neighborhood Character .                . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  .   41
         December 14, 1999                                                                     San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com

         Land Use Element
                                                      List ofTables
         Table                                                                                                                   Page
         LU -1  Related Goals and Policies by Element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
         LU-2   Land Use Classification System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
         LU-3   Planned Communities: Allowable Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
         LU-4   Development Capacity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
                                                     List of Figures
         ~~                                                                                                                      P~e
         LU-1   LandUsePolicyMap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       16
         LU-2   Floor Area Ratio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
         LU-3   Planned Communities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
         LU-4   Historic Town Center Master Plan Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
         LU-5   Los Rios Precise Plan Area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
         LU-6   Central Redevelopment Project . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
         December 14, 1999                                        ii                         San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                                          Land Use Element
                                                                                       Introduction
                                            The Land Use Element is a guide to land use planning within
                                            the City of San Juan Capistrano and affects many of the issues
                                            addressed in the other General Plan elements. The Land Use
                                            Element identifies the type and location of future land uses
                                            within the City. The specific land uses and their location within
                                            the community in turn affect the remaining General Plan
                                            elements. For example, the location and type of land uses
                                            outlined in the Land Use Element affect the circulation system
                                            that is identified in the Circulation Element, and the open space
                                            facilities identified in the Land Use Element affect the
                                            Conservation & Open Space Element policies. The land uses
                                            identified in the Land Use Element also reflect community's
                                            goals for its future form and character.
                     Purpose of the         The community's desire to preserve its rich history and control
                   Land Use Element         future development resulted in the City incorporation in 1961.
                                            As a city, state law requires that San Juan Capistrano prepare
                                            and adopt a General Plan as a tool to manage growth and
                                            development. The Land Use Element is a mandatory element
                                            or chapter of the General Plan.
                                            The purpose of the Land Use Element is to describe present and
                                            planned land use activity which has been designed to achieve the
                                            community's long-range goals for the future. The Land Use
                                            Element identifies the proposed general distribution, location,
                                            and extent of land uses such as open space and recreation,
                                            residential, commercial, industrial, and public/ institutional.
                                            The element consists of text, maps, and diagrams which outline
                                            the future land uses within the City and how these uses are
                                            integrated with the other General Plan elements and policies.
                                            The Land Use Policy Map is a particularly important feature of
                                            the element since it shows the location, and types of
                                            development within the City. The Element also describes the
                                            intensity or density of development planned for the
                                            community. The Land Use Element also addresses the
                                            relationship between development and environmental quality,
                                            potential hazards, and social and economic objectives.
                                            The Land Use Element of the San Juan Capistrano General Plan
                                            represents the City's desire for long-range changes and
                                            enhancements of land uses. The current Element and its
         May 7, 2002                                                          San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Land Use Element
                                             policies form a continuation with policies and goals to create a
                                             future in which the traditional character of the City is preserved
                                            and enhanced by new development. Finally, the goals and
                                            policies contained in this Element establish the constitutional
                                            framework for future land use planning and decision making in
                                            San Juan Capistrano.
                  Scope and Content         The Land Use Element complies with the requirements of the
                         oftheLand          General Plan Land Use Element mandated in Government
                        Use Element         Code Section 65302(a). The Element is comprised of three
                                            sections: 1) Introduction, 2) Issues, Goals and Policies, and 3)
                                            the Land Use Plan. In the Issues, Goals and Policies section,
                                            major land use issues are identified and related goals and
                                            policies are established to address these issues. The goals,
                                            which are overall statements of the community's desires, are
                                            comprised of broad statements of purpose and direction. The
                                            policies serve as guides for reviewing development proposals,
                                            planning facilities to accommodate anticipated growth, and
                                            accomplishing community development strategies. To achieve
                                            the goals and policies, a logical, organized land use pattern is
                                            established in the Plan with standards for future community
                                            development. The Plan contains the Land Use Policy Map
                                            which graphically identifies the planned land uses within San
                                            Juan Capistrano. The land use designations are described,
                                            including the type and density of allowed uses, and a statistical
                                            summary of the future land use composition is provided.
                                            Neighborhood areas which may involve more focused planning
                                            efforts are also identified. Specific implementation programs
                                            for the element are located in the General Plan Implementation
                                            Program (Appendix A).
                  Related Plans and         There are a number of related plans and programs that are
                           Programs         considered in the formulation, adoption and implementation of
                                            local land use policy. Related plans and programs are both local
                                            and regional in nature. Regional planning agencies, such as the
                                            Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG),
                                            recognize that planning issues extend beyond the boundaries of
                                            individual cities. Efforts to address regional planning issues
                                            such as air quality, transportation, affordable housing and
                                            habitat conservation have resulted in the adoption of regional
                                            plans. The form and distribution of development in San Juan
                                            Capistrano are affected by regional plans. Relevant local and
                                            regional plans related to the Land Use Element are discussed
                                            briefly in the following sections.
         May 7, 2002                                     2                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                                        Land Use Element
                                            California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and
                                            Guidelines
                                            The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was
                                            adopted by the state legislature in response to a public mandate
                                            for thorough environmental analysis of projects that might
                                            affect the environment. The provisions of the law and
                                            environmental review procedure are described in the CEQA
                                            Statutes and the CEQA Guidelines which were amended in
                                            1998. Implementation of CEQA ensures that during the
                                            decision making stage of development, City officials and the
                                            general public will be able to assess the environmental impacts
                                            associated with private and public development projects.
                                            City of San Juan Capistrano Zoning Ordinance
                                            San Juan Capistrano adopted its first Zoning Ordinance 1961
                                            and adopted the current Zoning Ordinance and related Zoning
                                            Map in 1975. The ordinance has since been updated to
                                            incorporate changes to the General Plan and within the
                                            community.        The Zoning Ordinance is the primary
                                            implementation tool for the Land Use Element. Together, the
                                            Zoning Ordinance and Zoning Map identify specific types of
                                            land use, intensity of use, and development and performance
                                            standards applicable to specific areas and parcels ofland within
                                            the City.
                                            Historic Town Center Master Plan
                                            The Historic Town Center Master Plan was adopted by the City
                                            in 1995 to address the specific needs of the downtown area.
                                            The Master Plan contains goals and policies for the downtown
                                            area based on the opportunities and constraints that were
                                            identified during the planning process. These goals and policies
                                            provide direction on how the General Plan should be
                                            implemented in the historic downtown center.
                                            Los Rios Precise Plan
                                            The Los Rios Precise Plan was adopted in February 1978 and is
                                            in the process ofbeing revised. The Precise Plan addresses the
                                            special planning needs identified by the community for the
                                            historic Los Rios District. The Plan provides goals, policies and
                                            specific development standards for future development in the
                                            Los Rios Precise Plan area. Implementation of the Precise Plan
                                            is consistent with the goals and policies contain within this
                                            General Plan.
         May 7, 2002                                    3                   San Juan Capistr~o General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Land Use Element
                                            City of San Juan Capistrano Redevelopment Plan
                                            The City of San Juan Capistrano created a Community
                                            Redevelopment Agency in 1983 in accordance with the
                                            California Community Redevelopment Law to eliminate blight
                                            within the designated redevelopment project area. With the
                                            adoption of Assembly Bill 1290, the Community
                                            Redevelopment Agency has prepared a five year
                                            implementation plan in 1994 for the San Juan Capistrano
                                            Central Redevelopment Project Area. This plan was updated
                                            in 1997. The Redevelopment Plan is one of the tools that the
                                            City utilizes to implement policies included in the Land Use
                                            Element.
                                            County of Orange Coastal Sage Scrub Natural
                                            Communities Conservation Planning (NCCP)
                                            The Coastal Sage Scrub N CCP was established to form a
                                            regional habitat planning and management system to address the
                                            long- term viability of sensitive plant and animal species
                                            (particularly the California gnat catcher, catus wren and orange-
                                            throated whiptail lizard) in the coastal sage scrub of Orange
                                            County. The NCCP establishes the framework for the
                                            establishment of a biological habitat reserve, and growth is
                                            allowed to continue to occur within this framework. The
                                            Orange County NCCP for the Southern California region is
                                            based on voluntary and collaborative participation among
                                            property owners, local governments, state and federal agencies
                                            and environmental organizations.
                                            SCAG Growth Management Plan
                                            The SCAG Growth Management Plan recommends methods to
                                            direct regional growth to minimize traffic congestion and better
                                            protect environmental quality. The goals of the Growth
                                            Management Plan include balancing jobs and housing. While
                                            SCAG has no a!J.thority to mandate implementation of its
                                            Growth Management Plan, principal goals have implications for
                                            the land use composition of San Juan Capistrano. The SCAG
                                            goals are generally reflected throughout all of the General Plan
                                            elements, including the Land Use Element.
                                            South Coast Air Quality Management Plan
                                            The South Coast Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP)
                                            mandates a variety of measures to improve air quality. To
                                            comply with the AQMP, the Land Use Element organizes land
         May 7, 2002                                    4                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                                             Land Use Element
                                            uses in relation to the circulation system, promotes commercial
                                            and industrial land uses with convenient access to
                                            transportation, and provides a balanced Land Use Plan that
                                            promotes a favorable relationship between jobs and housing.
                                            Orange County Growth Management Element
                                            The purpose of the Orange County Growth Management
                                            Element is to ensure that the transportation system and other
                                            public facilities are adequate to meet the current and projected
                                            needs of Orange County.                The Element establishes the
                                            following major policies:
                                            1.        Development Phasing: Development will be phased
                                                      according to Comprehensive Phasing Plans (CPPs)
                                                      adopted by the County. Phasing is limited to roadway
                                                      and public facility capacities;
                                            2.        Balanced Community Development: Development will be
                                                      balanced to encourage employment oflocal residents,
                                                      and both employment and employee housing in the
                                                      County, as well as in individual Growth Management
                                                      Areas (GMAs);
                                            3.        Trcifjlc Level if Service: Future development creates the
                                                      need for improvements to major intersections
                                                      significantly impacted by growth, and a developer fee
                                                      program is included to pay for improving affected
                                                      intersections on a pro-rata basis;
                                           4.         Traffic Implementation Programs: The Element requires
                                                      that all new development provide necessary
                                                      transportation facilities and intersection improvements
                                                      as a condition of development approval; and,
                                            5.        Public Facility Plans: The Element requires
                                                      comprehensive public facility plans for fire,
                                                      sheriff/police and library services. New development
                                                      participates on a pro-rata basis.
                                            Implementation of the Orange County Growth Management
                                            Element involves the establishment of: 1) Growth Management
                                            Areas (GMAs) to implement Comprehensive Phasing Plans, 2)
                                            Facility Implementation Plans to address the financing of public
                                            facilities for each GMA, 3) County-wide implementation and
                                            evaluation of compliance with development phasing and
                                            improvements, and 4) traffic improvements/public facility
         May 7, 2002                                      5                       San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Land Use Element
                                            development agreements. San Juan Capistrano is located in
                                             GMAs 9 and 11.
                     Relationship to        According to state planning law, the Land Use Element must be
                      Other General         consistent with the other General Plan Elements. Each element
                      Plan Elements         is independent and all the elements together comprise the
                                            General Plan. All elements of the General Plan are interrelated
                                            to a degree, and certain goals and policies of each element may
                                            also address issues that are the primary subjects of other
                                            elements. The integration of overlapping issues throughout the
                                            General Plan elements provides a strong basis for
                                            implementation of plans and programs, and achievement of
                                            community goals.
                                            The Land Use Element relates very closely to all of the other
                                            General Plan elements. This element establishes the planned
                                            land use pattern for San Juan Capistrano based on the historic
                                            formation of the City and the community's vision of the future.
                                            Alternatively, the other General Plan elements ensure that
                                            infrastructure and public facilities are available to accommodate
                                            planned land uses, and that the unique qualities of San Juan
                                            Capistrano are safeguarded and enhanced.
                                            For example, the Housing Element of the General Plan
                                            provides the basis for establishing housing stock that meets the
                                            affordability requirements and other special needs of the
                                            community. The Circulation Element provides a Circulation
                                            Plan to accommodate increased traffic from planned
                                            development. The use of alternative transportation modes and
                                            reduction of automobile trips are addressed in the Circulation
                                            Element to meet the transportation demands from new
                                            development, and to mitigate the impact of development on
                                            regional air quality and traffic conditions.
                                            A number of the areas are designated for parks and open space
                                            on the Land Use Policy Map for recreational and aesthetic
                                            purposes. The Parks & Recreation and Conservation & Open
                                            Space Elements provide policy and plans to maintain and
                                            enhance existing parks and recreational facilities and to develop
                                            new facilities to meet new demand from population growth.
                                            Conservation & Open Space policy is also designed to protect
                                            natural resources.
                                            Land uses designated in the Land Use Element are also affected
                                            by the Cultural Resources Element which provides the basis to
                                            protect and preserve cultural resources which may otherwise be
                                            negatively affected by new development. The Community
         May 7, 2002                                    6                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                                         Land Use Element
                                            Design Element also is designed to promote the traditional
                                            character of the community by creating design guidelines for
                                            new development identified in the Land Use Element.
                                            The Safety, Floodplain Management, and Noise Elements
                                            ensure that planned land uses identified in the Land Use
                                            Element are compatible and will not result in public safety
                                            hazards or exposure of people to excessive noise.
                                            As development continues in San Juan Capistrano, utilities and
                                            public services must be available for new businesses and
                                            residents. The Public Facilities & Utilities, and Growth
                                            Management Elements address the availability of utilities and
                                            services for planned development including law enforcement,
                                            fire protection, public schools, community centers, libraries,
                                            water, sewer, electricity, natural gas, flood control, solid
                                            waste, telephone, cable and transportation facilities. These two
                                            elements assure that adequate utilities and services are available
                                            for planned development identified in the Land Use Element.
         May 7, 2002                                   7                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Land Use Element
                                                             Issues, Goals, and Policies
                                            The Land Use Element addresses future land use within the
                                            community. The Element focuses on how vacant land will be
                                            allowed to develop, as well as how certain developed land may
                                            be redeveloped for other use. The principal goal should be to
                                            preserve the character of a small, rural, village-like community
                                            with abundant open space.
                                            Six major issues are addressed in the goals, policies and
                                            implementation actions of the Land Use Element. These major
                                            issues include: ( 1) balancing land uses within the City to ensure
                                            that revenue generation matches · service provlSlon
                                            responsibilities; (2) controlling and directing future growth
                                            within the City so that the community character is preserved;
                                            (3) protecting open space areas to protect the public safety and
                                            the visual quality of the community; (4) promoting economic
                                            development within the community; and (5) enhancing and
                                            preserving the character of existing neighborhoods. Each issue
                                            and the related goals, policies and implementing actions are
                                            identified and discussed in the following section.
                         Balance of         San Juan Capistrano is primarily a residential community.
                          Land Uses         While the City requires revenue generated by commercial and
                                            industrial uses to support the needs of the existing community,
                                            these non-residential land uses must be compatible with the
                                            existing community. Land uses such as open space areas can be
                                            used to buffer residential areas from non-residential uses. Land
                                            use designations can also limit the types of industrial and
                                            commercial activities which may occur to those which are most
                                            compatible with residential areas. The City is also fortunate
                                            that it is located between Disneyland and Legoland and has the
                                            Mission to attract tourists traveling between the two larger
                                            attractions.
                                            Land Use Goal 1: Develop a balanced land use pattern to
                                            ensure that revenue oeneration matches the City's
                                            responsibility for provision and maintenance of public
                                            services and facilities.
         May 7, 2002                                     8                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com

                                                                                         Land Use Element
                                            Policy 1.1: Encourage a land use composition in San Juan
                                            Capistrano that provides a balance or surplus between the
                                            generation of public revenues and the cost of providing public
                                            facilities and services.
                                            Policy 1.2: Encourage commercial, tourist-oriented, and
                                            industrial development that is compatible with existing land
                                            uses within the City to improve the generation of sales tax,
                                            property tax, and hotel occupancy tax.
                                            Policy 1.3: Encourage mixed commercial and residential use
                                            projects in the Mission District downtown area to conserve land
                                            and provide additional housing opportunities and population to
                                            support commercial services and retail sales.
                        Control and         San Juan Capistrano, as well as the surrounding region, has
                      Direct Growth         experienced substantial growth over the past 25 years. New
                                            development brings change, and a changing community
                                            character. While recognizing that change is inevitable, the
                                            community is still able to plan and guide future development so
                                            that it complements the existing community, and enhances the
                                            existing character and themes found in San Juan Capistrano.
                                            Land Use Goall: Control and directfuturenrowth within
                                            the City to preserve the rural villaoe-like character of the
                                            community.
                                            Policy 2.1: Continue controlling growth through the
                                            implementation of the City's residential growth management
                                            program.
                                            Policy 2.2: Assure that new development is consistent and
                                            compatible with the existing character of the City.
                                            Policy 2.3: Ensure that development corresponds to the
                                            provision of public facilities and services.
           Population Distribution          Land use density varies depending upon the ability of the
                     and Open Space         specific land to support residential development. Development
                                            in the flat lands in the valley floor, if located outside of the
                                            floodplain, creates lower risks to residents in comparison to the
                                            hillsides which are subject to landslide and erosion. As a result,
                                            higher densities of population could be allocated to those areas
                                            posing lower risks.
         May 7, 2002                                     9                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Land Use Element
                                            Land Use Goal3: Distribute additional population within
                                             the City based on risk factors.
                                            Policy 3.1: Confine higher density land uses to the valley areas
                                            outside of the floodplain.
                                            Policy 3.2: Limit density of development in the hillsides,
                                            floodplains, and other high risk areas.
                                            Open space and natural features provide visual quality in San
                                            Juan Capistrano. Open spaces also can protect community
                                            safety by limiting development in, high risk areas such as
                                            hillsides and floodplains. The quality of life can also be
                                            maintained by preserving areas which contribute to the
                                            community in an open space capacity, such as groundwater
                                            recharge and recreational areas.
                                            Land Use Goal4: Preserve major areas of open space and
                                            natural features.
                                            Policy 4.1: Preserve areas of natural hazards, such as landslides
                                            and floodplains, which would jeopardize the public health and
                                            safety.
                                            Policy 4.2: Implement land and open space-rights acquisition
                                            programs to allow for the long-term preservation of open space
                                            resources.
                                            Policy 4.3: Preserve designated ridgelines and the immediate
                                            adjacent area to maintain the open space character of the
                                            community.
                           Economic         SanJuan Capistrano has preserved its historic downtown central
                      Development           business disti-ict. The area provides a focal point for the
                                            community, and is pedestrian-friendly which allows people to
                                            walk from destination to destination. Unfortunately, recent
                                            economic studies indicate that locally served retail is overbuilt
                                            and can not be supported. Past changes in the economic
                                            environment has encouraged strip development outside of the
                                            core commercial area. This type of development, which
                                            typically serves a local market, threatens the viability of the
                                            existing downtown commercial area. The location of regional
                                            related retail generally occurs outside the historic downtown
                                            and could change the visual character of the community. To
                                            preserve the viability of the downtown area, and to preserve
                                            the character of San Juan Capistrano, the community should
         May 7, 2002                                   10                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                                         Land Use Element
                                            carefully encourage commercial development within the central
                                            business district.
                                            Land Use Goal S: Encourage commercial development
                                            which serves community needs and is located in the existing
                                            central business district.
                                            Policy 5.1: Encourage the location and retention of businesses
                                            within the downtown Mission District.
                                            In a recent report by Keyser Marston Associates, San Juan
                                            Capistrano was found to have an oversupply of commercial uses
                                            serving the local community. With the small local population,
                                            these commercial centers are underutilized, and many are not
                                            well maintained, which has a negative visual impact on the
                                            community.
                                            Land Use Goal 6: Enhance or redevelop underperjorming
                                            commercial centers.
                                            Policy 6.1: Allow for the transitiOn of the oversupply of
                                            commercial land use to other economically viable revenue
                                            producing land uses.
                     Community and          San Juan Capistrano has experienced substantial residential
           Neighborhood Character           growth over the last 25 years. The City contains a number of
                                            distinct neighborhoods defined by natural and man-made
                                            physical features, including San Juan, Oso, and Trabuco
                                            Creeks, steeply sloped areas defining the west and east portions
                                            of the community, Interstate 5, and the railroad line.
                                            Recognition of these areas can encourage more focused
                                            neighborhood-level planning and improvements in the future,
                                            particularly in older neighborhoods.
                                            Land Use Goal7: Enhance and maintain the character of
                                            neighborhoods.
                                            Policy 7.1: Preserve and enhance the quality of San Juan
                                            Capistrano neighborhoods by avoiding or abating the intrusion
                                            of non-conforming buildings and uses.
                                            Policy 7.2: Ensure that new development is compatible with
                                            the physical characteristics of its site, surrounding land uses,
                                            and available public infrastructure.
         May 7, 2002                                   11                   S!ln Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Land Use Element
                                            Policy 7.3: Utilize programs for rehabilitation of physical
                                            development, infrastructure and undergrounding of utilities
                                            within the City to improve community neighborhoods.
                                            Policy 7.4: Protect the existing population and social character
                                            of older areas subject to rehabilitation and redevelopment.
                     Related Goals          The goals and policies described in the Land Use Element are
                        and Policies        related to and support subjects included within other General
                                            Plan elements. In turn, many goals and policies from other
                                            elements directly or indirectly support the goals and policies of
                                            the Land Use Element. These supporting goals and policies are
                                            identified in Table LU-1.
         May 7, 2002                                    12                  San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                                                Land Use Element
                                                     Table LU-1
                                     Related Goals and Policies by Element
                                                               Land Use Issue Area
          General Plan          Balance of   Control and        Population      Economic           Community
          Elements              Land Uses    Direct             Distributio     Development        and
                                             Growth             nand Open                          Neighborhood
                                                                Space                              Character
          land Use                                                                                                    ':
          Housing
          Circulation           1.1          l.I
          Safety                                                l.I,1.2
          Conservation & Open   6.4-                            1.1, 1.2, 1.3,  3.I                5.I
          Space                                                 2.2, 2.3, 4-.I,
                                                                5.2, 5.3
          Noise                                                                                    I. I, 1.2, 2.I,
                                                                                                   2.3, 3.I, 3.2
          Cultural Resources                                                                       1.2, 1.3
          Community Design                   1.2, 2.I           1.1, 3.I, 3.2,                     I. 2, 2.I
                                                                3.4-
          Growth Management     I.I, 1.2,    1.1, 1.2, 1.3                                         1.1, 1.2, 1.3
                                1.3, 3.I
          Parks & Recreation                                    1.9, 3.I
          Public Facilities &   1.2, 2.2,    1.2, 2.2, 3.2,                     7.3                1.2, 2.2, 3.2,
          Utilities             3.2,4-.I,    4-.I, 5.I, 6.I,                                       4- .I, 5. I, 6. I,
                                5.I, 6.I'    7.I                                                   7.I
                                7.I
          Floodplain Management                                                 1.2, 2.2, 3.2,
                                                                                4-.I, 5.I, 6.I,
                                                                                7.I
         May 7, 2002                                        13                    Sa~ Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Land Use Element
                                                                                 Land Use Plan
                                            San Juan Capistrano is a City where land use decisions are
                                            affected by the community's desire to preserve and protect its
                                           historic character and large areas of open space. The nature and
                                            character of existing development, the desire for greater
                                            economic development, planned infrastructure capacity' and
                                            concerns for environmental sensitivity all have an influence on
                                           the development ofland use policy and planning for future land
                                            use.
                                           Natural and human made corridors located through the
                                            community also affect land use planning in SanJuan Capistrano.
                                            The City's creeks, roadways and railway form constraints to
                                            development, but also provide opportunities for land use.
                                            While limiting development in the floodplain, the creeks
                                            provide recreational opportunities and add to the character of
                                            San Juan Capistrano. The roadways and railway create physical
                                           baiTiers and are sources of noise, but they also provide access to
                                           the City and carry customers to the commercial uses located
                                           along the major roadways.
                                           The Land Use Plan describes the approach that will be used to
                                           build upon the community's history of sound planning. The
                                            Plan addresses the issues identified in the previous section of the
                                            Element. The goals and policies described in that previous
                                            section provide the basis for the Plan and are supported by
                                            approaches to maintain an advantageous balance among land
                                           uses, control and direct growth, reduce the risk to new
                                           residents from natural hazards while preserving open space,
                                           promote viable commercial development, and preserve existing
                                            neighborhood character.
                         Balance of         The variety ofland uses within San Juan Capistrano affects the
                          Land Uses         important balance between the generation of public revenues
                                            and the provision of public facilities and services. Achieving
                                            and maintaining a balance ofland uses can ensure fiscal stability
                                            and also create a desirable community in which people can
                                            work, shop, reside and recreate.
                                            The majority of San Juan Capistrano is developed, and limited
                                            vacant land is available for future new development. As a
                                            result, future growth will occur with the development of the
                                            few remaining       vacant    parcels      of land      and     the
                                            redevelopment of
         May 7, 2002                                   14                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                                          Land Use Element
                                            currently developed parcels. The Land Use Plan identifies the
                                            land uses for these parcels which will create a land use
                                            composition that provides a balance between the generation of
                                            public revenues and the cost of providing public facilities and
                                            services.
                                            Implementation of the Land Use Plan will also assist in creating
                                            a balance between the number of jobs and housing units within
                                           the City. A balance between jobs and housing allows some
                                            people to live and work within the same community. This
                                           results in a reduction of traffic, thereby reducing the level of air
                                            pollution and improving the quality of life for the community.
                                            San Juan Capistrano is located within a housing rich sub-region.
                                           The City has identified vacant or underutilized parcels that are
                                           appropriately located for employment generating uses. The
                                            City will implement the Land Use Plan to assure that a balance
                                           ofland uses occurs, maintaining fiscal stability and an improved
                                           jobs/housing balance.
                                           Land Use Classification System
                                           The Land Use Policy Map (Figure LU-1) illustrates the various
                                           types and distribution of land uses planned for San Juan
                                            Capistrano. The land use classification system is presented in
                                           Table LU-2 and includes 28 land use designations. These land
                                           use designations identify the types and nature of development
                                           allowed in particular locations depicted on the Land Use Policy
                                           Map.
                                           The residential category includes seven designations that allow
                                           for a range of housing types and densities. The non-residential
                                            categories include a variety of designations, such as
                                            neighborhood commercial, general commercial, industrial
                                            park, light industrial, quasi-industrial, and office/research park
                                           to promote a wide range of revenue- and employment-
                                           generating businesses. Other non-residential designations
                                           include public/institutional and open space & recreation to
                                           provide for public uses and open space.
         May 7, 2002                                    15                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                                                                                                                                                    LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     GOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MISSION VIEJO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SAN JUAN CAPISTRANO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LU 5.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WILDWOOD LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LAND USE MAP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             P&I                                                                                                LU 2.1                                       L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HIL                                                                                                                                OO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LD                                                                                                                                                                             D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PA                                                            LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CI                                 RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R                      D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 COU                                                                                                                                                                               OO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NTR                                                                                                                                                                W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 9.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CITY OF MISSION VIEJO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ED                                                  CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LU 2.4                                                                                               W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ORANGE COUNTY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AL                                            Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LL                                                                                                                                                                                                      SA                                             MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RD                                                                                                                                                               NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               WO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PEP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ERW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MHD                                                                                  SO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OOD                                                                                                                                                            EW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GE                                                      LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ED                                                                                                                                                                                                            OO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             μ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LN                                                     AP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D                                                                              KIM                                                                                                                                 D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TE                                                                                              BER                                                                                                            W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          OT                                                                                                                LY                                                                                                     OO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LN                                           OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SP                                                                                                                                                                                  AN                                    NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LU 2.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OOD                                                                                                                                        WO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 D                                            WY                              LN                                             DO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BAY                                                                      LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OT                                                                                                                                   ACA                                                                                                                   EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SP                                                                                                                                          LAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      REL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         WOO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D LN                                       EVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                D                                                                                                                                                                                                 RG                                                                                 RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TE                                                                                                                                                                                                               RE                                           RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           OT                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SP                                                                                                                                                                                   RD                                                                          EGE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LU 2.1                                                                                                                                                                                               AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CAMINO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   WY                                                                                                                                                                     R RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BU                                                                                                                                                                                    BR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LL                                                                                                                                                                                OO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       KFI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ELD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DR                                                                                         GOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        WO                                                                              CREE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AGE                                                                                             K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LN                                                                                                                          LU 2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VILL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LAKEWOOD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RD                               SM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OK                                                   A RD                                            LU 1.0                                                            VLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ETR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LU 2.4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LN         OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SH                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MHD                                                                   AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              YB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    WI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ARCH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MO                                                                                                OR                                                                                                                                                                                                          VLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N                                                                                         DS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           INA                                                                       AB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      W
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VIST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A POIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       UC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          O                                                                                                                          LU 1.0                                                                           LU 2.1                                                                                       DO MINION WY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LAND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HIGH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IMPE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GOS                                                                              LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LU 1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LU 2.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SCALE: 1" = 750'
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LU 2.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GOS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CAPIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CIR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MLD                                                                                                              TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SIL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Feet
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           H                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   I NG                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LU 5.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BUCK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          P&I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 2.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LDIM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RIA                                                                                                         REGEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LU 2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0                                                                                                                                                                   1,500                                                                                                                                                                              3,000                                                                                                                                    4,500
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LU 9.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            L DR                                                                                                       CY CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LU 2.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DLER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CREEK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           IDGE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                H                                                       LD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HILL SID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             HIG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GOS                                                                                AG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E CIR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LU 9.9                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             YA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LU 2.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LD                                                                                   GOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SPS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CK RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SILVER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   T
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ES                                                DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LEBA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IRON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ON                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LU 1.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SADD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BEND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DI                                   SPU                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MISS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BR                                       R RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                    T CIR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ION                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              WP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LU 2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LU 1.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HIL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VIE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LU 2.0                                                                                                          R                                                                                                                                         NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HOR                                                                                                                     VLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GOS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VLD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OLINK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RS                                                                                               SH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E                                                                                               OE                       LU 2.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              METR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LU 4.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LU 1.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       O/RP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             OSR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RD                                                     LU 2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VLD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 4.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LU 1.0                                                                                                                                    LU 2.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IVO                                                                                                                                                     GE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  FE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GOS                                                                                            ET
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RID                                                     LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A                                                                                                                                                O/RP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GOS                                                                                                                                       MD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RS                                                                                                              NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ORANGE COUNTY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SO ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LU 9.9                                                                                                                                SCRR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SPS                                                                                                                                                                                         LU 2.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LU 2.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VIA                                                                                                                                                                                                            GOLD EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VHD                                                                                                            LU 3.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          FE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S                                    MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TI VO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LU 3.1                                                                                                                                                                               A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MAL AS                             PIN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        M                                 LU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 5.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ACF                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       TA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LU 2.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 9.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LU 9.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TOP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HILL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NO                                                           PC                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CAMI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LU 5.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LU 1.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PL                                                                                                                                                               DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               P&I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 4.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OSR                                                                                                                              PAS EO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           FO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                X
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ELE GAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LU 2.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CAL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LU 2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TOYON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       OSO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PASE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          UIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BELLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PIST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NQ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          VLD                                                                                       WOOD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             UB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        O ARCO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ING
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NDO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VIA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NO                                                LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CHU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ECA                                    LU 2.4                                                                                                                                                    LU 1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           IN TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OSO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MHD                                                                                                                                                       GOS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 1.7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HIL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     L DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 2.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RSTA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 2.2                                                                                                                                                                       ZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LU 2.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DE         LU 2.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ENZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             HD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LE                                                                                               ZAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VIEJO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LLE                 E SAU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           STEE PLE CHAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CALL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CLU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LU 9.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HUNT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SIEGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IPE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PASEO DIANA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MIRAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VIA ERRECARTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CALLLA LA BOMBA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LN                                                                             LM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PA                                                                                                                                      ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OT                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GOLF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LU 4.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VIS                                                      VILLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ASC                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LU 2.2                                                                                                                                     LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TEGA                                                                                                              MLD                                                                                                                                                                                                    LU 1.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AVENIDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            QI                                                                                                               LU 1.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CAL                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               OSR                                                                    PAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TA                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LU 2.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LE SAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VIS                                                                                                                                                              BON                                                                   TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VIA           EO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VALENCIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SC ANA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VIA ESTENGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DIEG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CAL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NID                                                             O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A                                                                                              VIA PERLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DOV                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PASEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LU 2.5                                                                                                                                                                   LU 2.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LU 1.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              COR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VIA                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MAD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LU 2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LU 1.1                                                                                               MHD                                                                                                          O                                                                                                                             OSR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ERA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ICO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A
    LAGUNA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ORR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EDA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VIA                                                                                                                                VIA RUBI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              OSR                                                                                                                                                                        VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EL SOC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BOV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DA                                                     VLD   DA                      SU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      HAC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TOMAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SANTA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ONIO                                                                                                                                    SANTO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VIA SOLANA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ANT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LE SAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IEN                LLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CAL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ROSALIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 SONO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 1.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 2.1                                AR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ES
    NIGUEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RIEL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CALLE RAQUEL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                IST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CALLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LE SAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HARM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VIA                                                                                                                                                           AL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LU 2.0                                     PA            AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              B
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  OSR                                                                             CAL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LA                                                                                                                                                                                    ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ONY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LIM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SAN PEDRO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DE                                                                      HALL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AN                                               PL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LU 2.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VLD                                                        RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               VIA LOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PAJAROS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 5.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LL                                                                                 CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DE                                                                                                                 Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LU 1.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               HW
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CALLE BELMONTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LU 2.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VIA CORDOVA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LE SAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LUIS                        CAL JUAN                                                                                         LU 2.3                                                                                                    VICE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  P&I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MLD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       HIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SAN                                                                                              MD                                                                                     VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NP                                                                              CA                        O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LU 2.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    BE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LF                                          DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      M                PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SE                             FA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                JIT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CALLE DEL CAMPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SE                                                                                    VIA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RA                                                            IN                 A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MHD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VIA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OR                               RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        YO                                                                                                                                                                                            K
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CU AR T EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         D                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VILLA CLARA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MA                                                                                  PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         IO                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PRIO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NCIS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RI                                                     SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     A                                           MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CORTE MONTECITO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LU 2.1                                                                                                                                                                                  CAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LE SAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RD                                                                                                     LU 3.0                                                                                   LU 2.1                                                RATO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LU 2.2              DE LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LU 2.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A                                                                      CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              BU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   YSI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PASEO DIOSA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              A                                           MA                                                                                                  VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NC                                                                                                                                                              MLD                      ROSA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VIA SONORA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LA ZANJA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GUA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DO                          PICO                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               VIA PARRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OLINK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            EO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        JA ST                                                                                                                                                                                    DAL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      WO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CALLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LA ZAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RANC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       UPE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LU 2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LU 5.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 METR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               S LN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LA                         MIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RIO                                                           EPS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RES             DO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          JU                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PASEO CAMPEON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 1.0                                                                                                                                         CALLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VLD                                                 LAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          O                                ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SA                            LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GOS                                                                                                                                    LU 1.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    UA                        NC                    VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AN                                 PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SUNDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LU 3.1                                                                                  EL                                                                     HO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        JU                                                                                                                                  A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GU                                                                                                     GOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A MARI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PASEO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PAS EO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CALIZ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LA CALERA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NCE DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LE     BAR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          VIA SANT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LA MANTANZA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TA BAR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LU 2.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LU 5.0 LU 2.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OLD                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 2.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LU 2.3                          RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LU 2.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GOS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       WINDSONG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ZO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CERRITOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LU 2.4                                                                         MD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MINO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SAN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LU 5.0                                                             P&I    MHD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LU 1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LU 5.0                                                                                                                                                                            MD                                                                                                                                 MHD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  WY                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MHD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               N RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PAS DU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GOS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      P&I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            P&I                                                                                                                                  RE                                                                                                                                                  GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            JUA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SCRR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CAL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LU 4.4                                OR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LA VIST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ACJACHEMA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LU 4.4                                                                                                                                                             O/RP                                    TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LE LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A                                                                                                                                                                  EMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SA GOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CAL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ACJ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ACH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     O/RP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PATA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LU 2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ISIM                                                                                                                                                          RE                                                                    LU 1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VIE                                                          LU 3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DE                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AL                                                                                                                                                                                               LU 9.6                                                                                                                JO                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LU 2.0                                                                                                                                                                                             GOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VLD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NIDA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    GOS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NO              NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VIA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PC                                                                                                                                                  GA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LU 2.1                                                                                                                                 VLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N JOS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   IN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GOS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LU 5.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AVENIDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LU 5.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LU 5.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CR                                               TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LU 5.1                                                                                                                           LU 3.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LU 1.3                                                                                                                                                                     EPS                                                                                                                                                                                                       AVEN                                         XO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ES                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P&I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TE                                                                                                                                                                                                             RIT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LU 9.8                                                                                                                                                                              P&I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IDA                                    QUI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NO                    CP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LI                                                                                         RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LOBO                                                                                                                                                                     EPS                                                                                                                              GC                                                                                                                                                                                          LU 3.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LOS RIOS ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ITA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EV                                                                                TA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SP/PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UA                                                                                                                                                                                                                AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SPRING ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LU 5.0                                                                                                                                           PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           DEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                                                                                                                           BE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CA                                                              LU 2.1                                                                                                                                                   Z                                                                                                                        ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A                          RK          LU 1.2                                                              RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                              ND                                                                                                                                     VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TE                                                                                                                                                                                                                 IPA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RAMOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LU 3.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LU 3.1                                                                  LU 2.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         P&I                                                                                                         DO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BO                                                                                                                                   LD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NP                                                                                                                                                                                                     VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PA AB EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      IS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VIA ALAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VIA ANA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GC                                                                                                                                                                                          Y                                                                                                                        GC                                                                      VHD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SANT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ORTEGA                                                                                                                   HW                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  YN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EZ                                   LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CAL                                                                                                                                           AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ST                                                                                                                                                                                       LU 5.3                                                                                                                                                            LU 4.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PASEO TERRAZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          VIS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RIO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           YO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ACF                                                                                 RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CAMINO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LU 2.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RO                          IP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                          LIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                             DA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 5.3                                                                              AR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 INO                                                                 LU 2.2                                          SAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                    A
                                                                                                                                                                                                     DE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MD          LAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TO                    MLD                                                                                                                          REMO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MANCHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                        CA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CA                                                                     DE                                          ST                           LU 9.8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ACF                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AVE                                                                                                                                                                                       DOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          C AT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PASEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 YORBA ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LLE                                                       BE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ING
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        O
                                                                                                                                                                                                          LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  E                                                                                                                                                                                     UA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VIA                                                                              LU 1.0 SP/PP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 4.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CAMI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     AG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OBISPO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VIA                                                  NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LU 2.4                                                                               LU                                                            GOS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           IP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ERO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              RUEDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LU 2.3                            PUNT                                                                         LU 2.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FORSTER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MHD                                                                                             NA
                                                                                                                                                                                                        EV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LU 2.1                                                                          RD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   O    ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LABRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BR INO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                     A
                                                                                                                                                                                                          ITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LU 3.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LU 1.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SE  RO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MD                                                                                    VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LD                           RO                                                                             LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           MAM
                                                                                                                                                                                             EN
                                                                                                                                                                                               ID                                            A           P    ER                                                                             LD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CALLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LA                                 VIA                                                                                                                                                                     ESTA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LU 2.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GOS
                                                                                                                                                                                      AV                                                EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EL                       O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CAL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NCIA       FIER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TURA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RAD
                                                                                                                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DE                                                                                                                                                PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MI S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 INA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VLD                                                                                               O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NTA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NE                  DA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SAG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       SE
                                                                                                                                                  LIND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RO                                                                                                                                                                       CA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O                              PA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LLE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        RA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PA LE TA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PA                                  DE SEO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     WIN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FLO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VIA BELARDES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CAPISTRANO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 QU
                                                                                                                                               DE                                                                                                        TA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ON
                                                                                                      EE                                   VIA                                     LU 2.2                                                                   NI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A                                                                                                                                   EB                                                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CALLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LU 2.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VIO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RES                                           INA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LU 2.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LU 2.4                                                                 VIA MADR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LU 2.2                                                                                                                                            LU 2.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PASEO
                                                                                                 TR                                                                                 MLD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             HD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TIR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PASE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LD                                      S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    REYNALDA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      L                                                                                                                                                                                                                               O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MHD                                                                                                        MLD                                                                                                                                               VLD                                                                                                       RO                                                                          ALE
                                                                                    PEP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ST                                                                                                                                                       DE                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LA                                                                                                                                              SE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ND                                                         CO
                                                                                       PER                                                                                                                                                                   DO                                                                                                                                                                                            VIA                                                                  LU 5.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A                                                 EO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CAR                                                                                                                                                                                                     DE                                                                                                                                                                     OBISPO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PL                                                                                                                                                                                                                           AN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               VIA
                                                                                                                                                                  CALLE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VIL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AN                                            P&I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 1.0                                                                                                                                                                                      CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LU 9.6                                                                                                                                                LU 1.1                                                                                                                       NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LA                                                    LAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AZ SEO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PAS ESTABL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              UI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GOS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A                                                                               AL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VIA                                                                                                          VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VIA CARLOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SE                                                                                                                                                       NA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PC                                                                                                                                                    OSR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SEDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               JU                                                                                                                                                                                      O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LU 3.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PLO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VIA BUEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PA                                                                                                                                          VIA                                                                                                                                                                                                    OLI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VIA ALICIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LU 2.4                                                   NA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VIA SALAMANCA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LU 2.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LU 1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MHD                                                                     IA                                                                                                        PAS    PAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EO                                                                                                                                                      TO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             A                                                                                                                                                                               ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IV                                                                                                               PAM                                                                                                                      VIA                   ADA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GOS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CAMINO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PAS PALMA
                                                                                                                               CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TO                                                            DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OL                                                                                                                        ELA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      K                                                                                                                               MHD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 9.6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               VIE NTE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RSTA
                                                                                                                                    OK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LE                                                      A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DO
                                                                                                                                         LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RO                                                                                                                                                                     VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IN TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PAS TARAZONIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 2.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 2.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AVENIDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               E                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 9.6                                                                                                                                 ARA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LU 5.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LU 3.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LA PALOMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            VIA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PAS
                                                                                                               LU 2.0                                                                                                              LD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LU 2.0                                   ACF                                                  LU 5.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LU 4.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IDA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EG                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LOS AMIGOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ERN
                                                                                                                VLD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GC                                                             LU 3.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              PAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        VLD                                   LU 1.0                                                  P&I                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ST                                                                                                                                                                              QI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               JU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    INO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LU 1.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              GC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  QU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      OSR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             VIA S
                                                                                                     PA
                                                                                                          SE
                                                                                                            O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GOS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SE                                                                                                                                                                                                             VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ON                                                                                             DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           L                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CO
                                                                                                                         DE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         YO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AVENIDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VIA CALLEJON
                                                                                                                                    LA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RIO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              S
                                                                                                                                               PA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VIA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LA
                                                                                                                                                    Z
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LU 2.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LU 5.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       N O                                                                            VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            TA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LU 2.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ACF                                                      SAADER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VA
                                                                 SPINN
                                                                      AKER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MHD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AVENIDA                          PADRE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           O                   CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   COS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A
                                                       NAU
                                                             S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RL                                                          BA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                VIA                                                                                                                                                                                                               VLD                                      CAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ST                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CA
                                                          TILO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LE
                                                                                                                                                  DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E                                                   A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LU 4.4                                                                                  LU 2.4                                                   VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CH A                                                 PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               UN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                O/RP                                                                                     MHD                                     E                  UE                                         DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LU 1.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PINO
                                                ERR
                                                   A                                                                                                                  DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             IP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LL                             LIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 A                   PO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LU 1.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        N
                                      CAR
                                                                                           T CT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AZ                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OSR                                                                                                             NN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           A                                                                                                                              VE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OSR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ROND                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     S
                                         RET                                             KOU
                                                                                                                                   CT
                                                                                                                                                              R
                                                                                                                                                            MME                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LU 1.0                                                                                                        LU 5.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LU 2.2                                            RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VE                                                                                                             PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        S          TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RM
                                                           FAT                                                                 SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VIA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              A
                                                           CT HOM                 LOO                                     YG
                                                                                                                              LA
                                                                                                                                                      DJA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      GOS                                                                                                           P&I                                                                                                                                  CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                A                                            ER                                                                                                                                                  MLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NA
                                                                                                                         SP                       N                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IQU                                                                                                                                                   CA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PASE
                                                                                                                                           WI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VIA                                                 CH                                                                                                                                                VIA                                                                                                                 FIE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LU 4.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LU 2.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                O SIEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 STA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NO
                                      DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PAS                                                                                                                                                                   RA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PAS                     PAS
                                                                 VIA
                                                                                          INEZ
                                                                                                               RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AGB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MHD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CAP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PAS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LIND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                EO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ERO                                                                                                          L
                                                                         LU 2.3                                                                                                    OB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SCRR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EO                                                                RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LU 2.3
                                                                                                                                                                                      ISP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ENA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PAS                                                                      BA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                      PUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PASE
                                         PLE
                                                                          MD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PILA DEGRACIA
                                                                                                                                                            RD                            O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MD
                                                                                                                                                         A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VIA CORRIZO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LITA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PASE                        LU 2.2                                                                       CAST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VIA DEL MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LAGUNA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TOS
                                                                                    SAGE                                                              LM                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ILE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          O TOLU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DEL ZURA
                                                                                                                                                  CA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PASE
                                                                                                                          LN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SAN                                     MAR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MLD
                                                                                                                                           LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 5.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LOS                                       DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LA                                                                                                                     PASEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CALL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LOMITA
                CARR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MA
                                                  DAN
                                                     A
                                                                                                 DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EPS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PAS TOSCANA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VIA                                        NTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 9.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 NOVIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AMAD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 VIA                            R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PINA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          TA
                                                                      MES
                                                                         A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 1.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VIVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PASEO                                                                                                                                                            VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RED
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DEL                                    ER
                    RETE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        OS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          UC
 CIT                                                                                                  DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                TIA                                                                                    OND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MIM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          INO
LA G Y O F
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             AC
                                                                             DEAD WOOD
                        RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        EO                                   A                                 DIMORA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               METR
                                    LN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CAL
NIG UNA
                                ALTA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TR                                                                                                      OY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LE                                                                                                                  LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              A                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         POR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      A
                                PINE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TILL                                                                                                              VAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   OLINK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NT
   UE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VIA                                                                                                       MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VIA
CIT L
                             CHARRO         DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MON                                                                             A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PA                                                                                                                                                                                                         VIA                              VIA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DANO
                                                                                                                                   DE
                                                                                                                                     L                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    EO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EN
    YO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VIA                                      PAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DR                             TR                         DEL
       F     DANA POINT                                                                                                                                                        CAMINO                                                                         DEL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LU 4.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RR                                                                                                                                                          LU 1.6                                                                                                                                                   CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A             VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DE                                                   CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NID                            AD                                                                     VI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CU A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AVION                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NA                                                              O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SE                                        NC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          EN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              A                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      QI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    NOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ALT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NO                                      TO                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AVENIDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A                                                                                                   RO               ST
                                                                                                                                                      LU 2.5 LU 4.1                                                                                          AVENIDA                               CABRILLO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LU 2.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LU 1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AVE                                                         VIA
                                                                                                                                                       HD      QI                                                                                                                                                                              AMO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VIA                                                                                                      DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DESCANSO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MHD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GOS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SIT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AVENID
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Y                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     O                                                                                                                  CALLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DEL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LU 2.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AVENIDA                                                                                                                                        TE
                                                                                                                       AVEN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MA
                                                                                                                           IDA                                                                                                                                                                                            MARIPOSA                                        VIA   MON
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LU 2.2                                                                                             RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LU 2.3                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LU 2.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   A
                                                                                                                                                                  PEDREGAL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              VIA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LU 2.1                                                                      MLD                                                                                           TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PLACIDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MARCOS
                                                                                                           OS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CA
                                                                                                          OR                                                  PAS COLONIAL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ELD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  AVENIDA
                                                                                                      ES
                                                                                                                                                                                            ROSAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AVENIDA OLIVERA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             MIGUEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LU 1.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PLA                                                                                                                                                                                  NID                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LU 1.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CALLE SAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EO
                                                                                               DEL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AVE                                                  VID
                                                                                                                                                                                            DEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NPY                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MO                                                                                                                                           MO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       RP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CALLE                                                                          RE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NTE                                                                                                                                 EO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         PAS
                                                                                         CALLE
                                                                                                                                         VIA                                                                               DEL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 4.1
                                                                                                                                                   LU 2.4                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LU 4.0                                                                                                                                                             LU 4.1                                                                                                                             RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  QI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                    MHD                                                                                                                                               LU 1.0                                                                                   IP                                                TO                                                                                                               QI                                                                                                                      VA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GOS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ORANGE COUNTY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           EC                                                                                                          AN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         GOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       GOS                                                                                                                            RF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PE                                                                                                          DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CITY OF SAN CLEMENTE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            C
                                                                                                                                                                                                            DR                                                                                                                                            AV ALL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            E
                                                                                                 MARINER                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LL                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VISTA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IA E                                                   CA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             M A R INA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 R
                                 BLUE FIN DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AVENIDA AEROPUERTO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MPA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          N ILLA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                SC                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  EO
                                  PASE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           PAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  RR
                                                                     PLUMA
                                                                                                                                                                            VIA   SOLIS
                                                                                                                   O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    A
                                      O PINTO                                                                  BLANC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                               LU 2.3                                                  LU 1.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                         EZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     RV                                                     TR
                                                                    LA
                                                                                                                                          SOLIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CE                                                            AN                                                                                                              LU 2.0
                                                                                                           PASEO                                                                MD                                                      NP                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SE
                                                                                                 CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CA                                                                                                                                        VLD
                                                                                                                                                                        MONO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PA
                                                                                                                                         VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ST
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      VIA MAJOR
                                                                                                   LLE
                                                                                                                                                                                        MOLIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PASEO CELESTIAL
                                                                                                                                         JARD                       PASEO
                                                                                                                                                                                             OS                                                                                                                                           LU 4.0
                                                                                                                                             INE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 2.1
                                                                                                                                                                                    PASEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ALIPAZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     OLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TE        MIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TA      O                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LU 2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         VLD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              IN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MIR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 1.0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LU 2.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  GOS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MLD                                                 NZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             LA                                                                                                  ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ERA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 1.0
             DANA POINT                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VALLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CALLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 AG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           UA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MIRAMA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.0, GENERAL OPEN SPACE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      4.0, INDUSTRIAL PARK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            UI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             TR A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PASEO                                                                                                                                                                       A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     PA                                 AD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          S EO R E TI R
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LU 4.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         QI                                                                   LU 4.1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     LU 4.3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AVENID A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CA L I
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      FO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.1, OPEN SPACE RECREATION                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4.1, QUASI INDUSTRIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                QI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                STON                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             I DAD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ET ERN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.2, NEIGHBORHOOD PARK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               IA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     EH                                ILL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          PASEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ARMON                                                                                                                                                     PAS E O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    VIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   4.2, AGRI-BUSINESS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PASEO BAJA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SCRR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              P U E R TO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       LU 9.6                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NIDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                LU 1.0                                                     DEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CALLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        DO                                                                                                   KIL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.3, COMMUNITY PARK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4.3, LIGHT INDUSTRIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PASEO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 RO                                                                                                                                                                                BR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GOS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           KIL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                OC                                   SS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NO                                       BL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LIM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          DO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          KIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LU 2.2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   L                                AM                                                                                                        N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ON                                                       AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      EY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LN                               OR                                MM                             LN                                           LN                                    GT                              ICK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             N
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    RR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Y
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OCEANA DEL MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ON                                                                                                                                          ER                                    LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.4, SPECIALTY PARK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4.4, OFFICE/RESEARCH PARK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 UA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LA                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SIN                                                                                                     KE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LN                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       DEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LN                                                                                                 LN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LN                             LN                                                                    LN                                                                            R                     S                                                         MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   JO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AG                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MA                     LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 DO                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             METR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LITA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  VIA                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   R                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FIC                         MB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 CI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 OLINK                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  PES CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CONNEMARA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       PA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            EO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PASE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     O INF IN ITA                                                                                                                                     CALL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 E                                 DE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 2.0                                                                                                                                                      DR                                                                                                                                                                                                                           LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          AS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.5, REGIONAL PARK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DIV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     INI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               D
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         LL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             E                                                   CO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           NE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       VLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5.0, PUBLIC & INSTITUTIONAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VIA                                                                 LU 2.2                                                                                                 JO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        LU 1.2                                                                                                                                                                            S
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 2.2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MLD                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.6, NATURAL OPEN SPACE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MLD                                                                                                                                                       AVE NIDA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             CAL IFOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              NIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         OR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          A
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           RE                                   BA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RAMBLAS                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CAMINO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5.1, EXISTING PUBLIC SCHOOLS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              DA                                                                                            GO                             LA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     VIL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1.7, RECREATION COMMERICAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   RS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          MAR                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PAS DL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LU 2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   HD                                                                                        TA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LAS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               LU 2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5.3, ASSISTED CARE FACILITIES
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        D VIS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CAMINO                                                                                                                                                            LU 2.1                                                     VLD                                                                                                                                         LU 1.0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GOS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      LD                                                                                       PAS PEREGRINO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.0, VERY LOW DENSITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 2.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SPECIAL STUDY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 LU 4.1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CIT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.1, LOW DENSITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   QI                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         YO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 FS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PLANNED COMMUNITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CIT     AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                YO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   FD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C LE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ME
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.2, MEDIUM LOW DENSITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      AN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NT E                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SPECIFIC PLAN/PRECISE PLAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            OIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                T                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2.3, MEDIUM DENSITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SAN CLEMENTE                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2.4, MEDIUM HIGH DENSITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.5, HIGH DENSITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2.6, VERY HIGH DENSITY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3.0, NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3.1, GENERAL COMMERCIAL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             PUBLISHED: 1/27/2015


         Land Use Element
                                                                          Table LU-2
                                                         Land Use Classification System
                   MaborLand                      ·Dwelling            Aver~e                             Land Use Designation and
                 Use roupings                      Units Per           Dwelhng                               Summary Description
                                                  Gross Acre           Units Per
                                                   Range or              Acre or
                                                  Maximum              Average
                                                  Floor Area          Floor Area
                                                   Ratio( a)           Ratio(b)
           Commercial                           0.25:1               0.20:1·            3.0 Neighborhood Commercial- Retail, office, and service-
                                                                                        oriented business activities serving a local community area and
                                                                                        population.
                                                .50:1                0.30:1             3.1 General Commercial- Retail, office, and service-oriented
                                                                                        business activities serving a community-wide area and population
                                                                                        or broader market.
          Industrial                            0.40:1               0.30:1             4.0 Industrial Park- Light industrial and manufacturing uses.
                                                                                        Allowable uses include wholesale businesses, light manufacturing
                                                                                        and assembly, research and development, warehousing and
                                                                                        storage, and distribution and sales,
                                               0.40:1                0.30:1             4.1 Quasi-Industrial- Light industrial and manufacturing uses,
                                                                                        including those allowed in the Industrial Park designations. Also
                                                                                        allows variety of regional and sub-regional commercial activities,
                                                                                        such as vehicle sales and large box retail.
                                               0.10:1                0.05:1             4.2 Agri-Business- Agricultural crop production and sales, and
                                                                                        animal breeding, boarding, raising and training.
                                               0.40:1                0.30:1             4.3 Light Industrial - Light industrial and manufacturing uses.
                                                                                        Allowable uses include research & development light
                                                                                        manufacturing and processing, offices, warehousing and storage,
                                                                                        and high technology production.
                                               0.40:1                0.25:1             4.4 Office/Research Park - Single-tenant and multi-tenant offices,
                                                                                        including legal, medical, financial, administrative, R&D,
                                                                                        corporate and general business.
                            (
          Public/                              0.40:·1               O.f-5:1       !    5.0 Public & Institutional- Schools, churches, fire stations,
          Institutional                                                            I    community centers, utility substations, and office complexes.
                                               0.30:1                0.25:1        \    5 .I Existing Public Schools - Existing public schools.
                                               0.30:1                  '
                                                                     0.25:1             5.2 Potential Public Schools - Future public schools.
                                               0.40:1                o.4'o:l            5.3 Assisted Care Facilities - Specialized care and housing
                                                                                        facilities for seniors and persons requiring special medical
                                                                                        housing.
          Special                              Varies                Varies      I
                                                                                 I
                                                                                        Special Study- Areas that have unique features, environmental
                                                                                        conditions, and/or development constraints requiring special
                                                                               I        regulations or standards designed to address or preserve those
                                                                                        conditions.
                                               Varies                Varies    I        Specific Plan/Precise Plan · Areas governed by a specific plan or
                                                                                        precise plan adopted prior to development.
                                                                               '
                                               Varies                Varies             Planned Community - Denotes large areas of land under single or
                                                                                        common ownership for detailed planning and development for
                                                                                        residential, commercial, industrial, public/institutional, recreation
                                                                                        and open space uses.
          (a) Maximum allowable level of development standard for individual parcels ofland.
          (b) Assumed overall average level of developmel).t. Since the development which has occurred to date has not reached the maximum
               allowed level of density or intensity on every parcel of land, future development is expected to be less than the maximwn on a city-wide
               basis. Therefore, an average level of density/intensity is used when projecting: 1) total future dwelling units/population for residential
               development; and 2) future square footage for non-residential development where floor area is used as a measurement of building
               intensity.
         May 7, 2002                                                                 18                          San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com

                                                                                           Land Use Element
                                             Land Use Density and Intensity
                                            This Element uses certain terminology to describe the 28 land
                                            use designations. The term density is used for residential uses
                                            and refers to the population and development capacity of
                                            residential land. Density is described in terms of dwelling units
                                            per gross acre ofland (du/ gross acre).
                                            Development intensity, which.applies to non-residential uses,
                                            refers to the extent of development on a parcel of land or lot
                                            (i.e., the total building square footage, building height, the
                                            floor area ratio, and/ or the percent oflot coverage). Intensity
                                            is often used to describe non-residential development levels;
                                            but, in a broader sense, intensity is also used to express overall
                                            levels of both residential and non-residential development
                                            types. In this Element, floor area ratio and building square
                                            footage are used as measures of non-residential development
                                            intensity.
                                            Floor area ratio (FAR) represents the ratio between the total
                                            gross floor area of all buildings on a lot and the total area of that
                                            lot. The FAR controls the intensity of use on a lot. FAR is
                                            determined by dividing the gross floor area of all buildings on
                                            a lot by the land area of that lot. For example, a 20,000 square
                                            foot building on a 4-0,000 square foot lot yields a FAR of
                                            0.50:1. A 0.50:1 FAR allows a single story building which
                                            covers most of the lot, or a two- story building with reduced lot
                                            coverage. Figure LU-2 depicts the calculation of FAR.
                                            State General Plan law requires that the Land Use Element
                                            indicate the maximum densities and intensities permitted
                                            within the Land Use Plan. The land use designations shown on
                                            the Land Use Policy Map are described in detail in this Element.
                                            Table LU-2lists each of the land use designations shown on the
                                            Land Use Policy Map and provides a corresponding indication
                                            of maximum density or intensity of development. Maximum
                                            allowable development on individual parcels ofland is governed
                                            by these measures of density or intensity. 1he table also
                                            includes the average overall level of development within each
                                            land use designation within the planning area. These average
                                            levels of development represent an anticipated overall density
                                            and intensity of development for the planning area and are,
                                            therefore, less than the absolute maximum allowed for an
                                            individual parcel ofland. For various reasons, many parcels in
                                            the community have not been developed to their maximum
                                            density or intensity and, in the future, maximum development
         May 7, 2002                                    19                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Land Use Element
                                            as described in this Element can be expected to occur only on
                                            a limited number of parcels.
                                                                                           In a zone district with a maximum
                                                                                                FAR of 0.50c1, the maximum
                                                                                     allowable floor area of a building on a
                                                                                           40,000 sq. ft. lot would be 20,000
                                                                                                 sq. ft. (20,000 sq. ft. divided
                                                                                               by 40,000 sq. ft. equals 0.50).
                                                                                        NOTE< Varlatlone may OCC<Jr ~ upper noora are
                                                                                          Slapped back from ground level lot coverage.
                                                                                                Gross Building Area (All Floors)
                                                                  Floor Area Rallo (FAR) -
                                                                                                           Lac Area
                                                                                                                Figure LU-2
                                                                                                       Floor Area Ratio
                                            The overall future development of the City is anticipated to
                                            occur at the average level of density or intensity indicated in
                                            Table LU-2. Development at an intensity or density between
                                            the average and maximum levels can occur only where projects
                                            offer exceptional design quality, important public amenities or
                                            benefits, or other factors that promote important goals and
                                            policies of the General Plan.
                                            Land Use Designations
                                            All land in the San Juan Capistrano planning area is assigned to
                                            one of the 28 land use designations described below:
                                            Open Space &_Recreation Desionations
                                            1.0 General Open Space: The General Open Space
                                            designation is general in nature and provides for the possible
                                            combined development of several of the uses or the individual
                                            development of one of the uses specifically identified by the
                                            other open space and recreation designations.                                         The
                                            determination of site-specific uses is based on more detailed
                                            studies during review of development applications. The
                                            maximum intensity of development is a floor area ratio of
                                            0.20:1 and the average intensity of development is a floor area
                                            ratio of 0.0001:1.
         May 7, 2002                                   20                          San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                                         Land Use Element
                                            1.1 Open Space Recreation: The Open Space Recreation
                                            designation provides for outdoor recreational facilities,
                                            including golf courses, swimming schools, tennis clubs,
                                            equestrian clubs, and caretaker facilities. The maximum
                                            intensity of development is a floor ratio of 0. 10:1 and the
                                            average intensity of development is a floor area ratio of
                                            0.005:1.
                                            1.2 Neighborhood            Park:     The Neighborhood Park
                                            designation provides for well distributed small neighborhood
                                            parks to serve residential areas in the immediate vicinity. These
                                            parks will be either public or private and will include areas for
                                            active sports play, tot lots, picnic areas, support facilities and
                                            caretaker facilities. The maximum intensity of development is
                                            a floor area ratio of 0.10: 1 and the average intensity of
                                            development is a floor area ratio of 0.005: 1.
                                            1.3 Community Park: The Community Park designation
                                            provides for major active recreation sites, including large
                                            multipurpose fields for community events and informal
                                            recreation, sports fields and courts, concessions,
                                            maintenance I support facilities and caretaker facilities. The
                                            maximum intensity of development is a floor area ratio of
                                            0.05:1 and the average intensity of development is a floor area
                                            ratio ofO.Ol: 1.
                                            1.4 Specialty Park: The Specialty Park designation provides
                                            for unique or specialized forms of recreational activities, such
                                            as community event space, outdoor amphitheater, or nature
                                            study center, as well as support/ caretaker facilities. The
                                            maximum intensity of development is a floor area ratio of
                                            0.20:1 and the average intensity of development is a floor area
                                            ratio of0.05:1.
                                            1.5 Regional Park: The Regional Park designation provides
                                            for future use of the Prima Deshecha landfill as phases are
                                            closed and available for active and passive recreational
                                            development. Activities that may be developed include
                                            multipurpose sports fields and courts, a golf course, picnic
                                            areas, camping facilities, concessions, maintenance/ support
                                            facilities and caretaker facilities. The maximum intensity of
                                            development is a floor area ratio of 0.01:1 and the average
                                            intensity of development is a floor area ratio of 0.001:1.
         May 7, 2002                                    21                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Land Use Element
                                            1.6 Natural Open Space: The Natural Open Space
                                            designation provides for natural open space land that separates
                                            developed areas from one another, preserves natural features
                                            like creeks, ridgelines or hillsides, or includes natural hazards
                                            like landslides. This designation includes approximately 449
                                            acres located in the southern portion of the City. Within this
                                            area is a designated ridgeline that is continuous and generally is
                                            oriented in a east/west direction, including two connected
                                            spine ridgelines. Since a portion of the designated ridgelines are
                                            located in close proximity to the common boundary with the
                                            adjacent General Open Space, all areas within 200 feet of this
                                            ridgeline are considered Natural Open Space. The maximum
                                            intensity of development is a floor area ratio of0.01: 1 and the
                                            average intensity of development is a floor area ratio of
                                            0.0001:1. Development is limited to those structures which
                                            are directly related to maintenance and caretaking of the natural
                                            open space.
                                            1.7 Recreation Commercial: The Recreation Commercial
                                            designation provides for indoor recreational activities, including
                                            bowling, cinemas, gymnasiums and similar activities, as well as
                                            outdoor activities such as golf courses, tennis clubs, athletic
                                            fields and support/ caretaker facilities. The maximum intensity
                                            of development is a floor area ratio of0.40: 1 and the average
                                            intensity of development is a floor area ratio of 0.1: 1.
                                            Residential Desisnations
                                            Future development ofland within residential designations shall
                                            be designed to fit into the general topography of the parcel, so
                                            as to appear to be a part of a natural setting. For the purposes
                                            of designing projects within residential designations, specific
                                            topographical features noted in this and other elements of the
                                            General Plan for preservation shall be accommodated.
                                            Developments are encouraged to use clustering of units to
                                            promote the retention of open space for scenic purposes, as
                                            well as to preserve ridgelines, unique topographic features and
                                            sensitive natural habitat areas. In implementing this provision,
                                            a slope formula will be considered for future development
                                            standards that will reduce the density of development for
                                            steeper slopes within the residential land use designations.
                                            In the zoning ordinances which are prepared to implement this
                                            plan, it is anticipated that more than one zoning district
                                            designation may apply to any of the residential categories.
         May 7, 2002                                    22                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                                        Land Use Element
                                            2.0 Very Low Density: The Very Low Density residential
                                            land use designation provides for the development of very low
                                            density single-family dwellings and accessory buildings and is
                                            generally located in hillside areas. Uses such as mobile and
                                            modular homes, second single-family units, guest houses,
                                            public facilities, and others which are compatible with and
                                            oriented toward serving the needs of very low density single-
                                            family neighborhoods may also be allowed.
                                            The Very Low Density residential land use designation has been
                                            assigned to areas within the City that have unique or significant
                                            hillside features such as ridgelines, creeks, slopes, sensitive
                                            habitat areas or mapped landslides. This designation has a
                                            density range from zero to a maximum of 1.0 unit per acre.
                                            The maximum density of this land use designation may be
                                            exceeded to complement General Plan Housing Element policy
                                             in accordance with the density bonus provisions of Section
                                            65915 of the California Government Code.
                                            2.1 Low Density: The Low Density residential land use
                                            designation provides for the development of low density single-
                                            family dwellings and accessory buildings. Uses such as mobile
                                            and modular homes, second single-family units, guest houses,
                                            public facilities, and others which are compatible with and
                                            oriented toward serving the needs of low density single-family
                                            neighborhoods may also be allowed.
                                            This designation allows a maximum of 2. 0 dwelling units per
                                           gross acre. The maximum density of this land use designation
                                           may be exceeded to complement General Plan Housing
                                            Element policy in accordance with the density bonus provisions
                                            of Section 65915 of the California Government Code.
                                            2.2 Medium Low Density: The Medium Low Density
                                            residential land use designation provides for the development
                                            of medium low density single-family dwellings and accessory
                                           buildings. Uses such as mobile and modular homes, second
                                            single-family units, guest houses, churches, schools, family day
                                            care homes, public facilities, and others which are compatible
                                            with and oriented toward serving the needs of medium low
                                            density single-family neighborhoods may also be allowed.
                                            This designation allows a maximum of 3.5 dwelling units per
                                            gross acre ofland. Development under this designation should
                                            maintain a medium low density character. The maximum
                                            density of this land use designation may be exceeded to
                                            complement General Plan Housing Element policy in
         May 7, 2002                                   23                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Land Use Element
                                            accordance with the density bonus provisions of Section 65915
                                            of the California Government Code.
                                            2.3 Medium Density: The Medium Density residential land
                                            use designation provides for the development of medium
                                            density single-family detached and attached dwelling units,
                                            mobile home parks, duplexes and multi-family dwellings, such
                                            as townhomes and condominiums, as well as accessory
                                            buildings. Uses such as mobile and modular homes, second
                                            single-family units, guest houses, churches, schools, family day
                                            care homes, public facilities, and others which are compatible
                                            with and oriented toward serving the needs of medium density
                                            single-family neighborhoods may also be allowed.
                                            This designation allows a maximum of 5. 0 dwelling units per
                                            gross acre ofland. Development under this designation should
                                            maintain a medium density character. The maximum density
                                            of this land use designation may be exceeded to complement
                                            General Plan Housing Element policy in accordance with the
                                            density bonus provisions of Section 65 915 of the California
                                            Government Code.
                                            2.4 Medium High Density: The Medium High Density
                                            residential land use designation provides for the development
                                            of medium high density single-family detached and attached
                                            dwelling units, mobile home parks, duplexes, and multi-family
                                            dwellings, such as townhomes and condominiums, as well as
                                            accessory buildings. Uses such as mobile and modular homes,
                                            second single-family units, guest houses, churches, schools,
                                            family day care homes, public facilities, and others which are
                                            compatible with and oriented toward serving the needs of
                                            medium high density single-family neighborhoods may also be
                                            allowed.
                                            This designation allows a maximum of 8.0 dwelling units per
                                            gross acre ofland. Development under this designation should
                                            maintain a medium high density character. The maximum
                                            density of this land use designation may. be exceeded to
                                            complement General Pla11; Housing Element policy in
                                            accordance with the density bonus provisions of Section 65915
                                            of the California Government Code.
         May 7, 2002                                   24                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com

         Land Use Element
                                             Commercial Designations
                                            3.0 Neighborhood Commercial: The Neighborhood
                                            Commercial land use designation provides for a variety of
                                            retail, office, and service-oriented business activities serving a
                                            local community area and population. Other uses that are
                                            determined to be compatible with primary uses, such as public
                                            facilities, may also be allowed. Neighborhood commercial land
                                            uses serve local areas and generally include professional and
                                            business offices, retail and commercial services, and public
                                            facilities.   Site development standards for this land use
                                            designation encourage smaller projects and provide for
                                            appropriate setbacks, parking, landscaping, buffering from
                                            residential land use areas and other features which create well-
                                            designed, attractive projects. The maximum intensity of
                                            development is a floor area ratio of 0. 25: 1 and the average
                                            intensity of development is a floor area ratio of 0.20:1.
                                            3.1 General Commercial: The General Commercial land use
                                            designation provides for a variety of retail, office, and service-
                                            oriented business activities serving a community-wide area and
                                            population, as well as broader market area. Other uses that are
                                            determined to be compatible with primary uses, such as public
                                            facilities, may also be allowed. General Commercial land uses
                                            serve local, as well as broader market areas and generally
                                            include professional and business offices, retail and commercial
                                            services.     Site development standards for this land use
                                            designation encourage larger tenant projects and provide for
                                            appropriate setbacks, parking, landscaping, buffering from
                                            residential land use areas and other features which create well-
                                            designed, attractive projects. The maximum intensity of
                                            development is a floor area ratio of 0.50:1 and the average
                                            intensity of development is a floor area ratio of 0.30:1.
                                            Adjacent to Mission San Juan Capistrano in the area identified
                                            as the historic downtown, the maximum and average floor area
                                            ratio shall be considered for the whole area and not for
                                            individual parcels.
         May 7, 2002                                    26                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                                          Land Use Element
                                            Industrial Designations
                                            4.0 Industrial Park: The Industrial Park designation provides
                                            for a variety oflight industrial and manufacturing uses that are
                                            non-polluting and which can co-exist compatibly with
                                            surrounding land uses.         Uses allowed do not in their
                                            maintenance, assembly, manufacturing or operations create
                                            smoke, gas, dust, sound, vibrations, soot or glare to any degree
                                            which will be obnoxious or offensive to persons residing or
                                            conducting business in the City. Such activities are to be
                                            conducted within the building.
                                            Allowable uses include research & development, light
                                            manufacturing and processing, offices, warehousing and
                                            storage, high technology production, and related uses. Other
                                            uses that are determined to be compatible with primary uses
                                            may also be allowed. The maximum intensity of development
                                            is a floor area ratio of 0.40:1 and the average intensity of
                                            development is a floor area ratio of 0. 30: 1.
                                            4.1 Quasi-Industrial:        The Quasi-Industrial designation
                                            provides for a variety oflight industrial and manufacturing uses,
                                            including limited regional and sub-regional commercial
                                            activities that are non-polluting and which can co-exist
                                            compatibly with surrounding land uses. Uses allowed do not
                                            in their maintenance; assembly, manufacturing or operations
                                            create smoke, gas, dust, sound, vibrations, soot or glare to any
                                            degree which will be obnoxious or offensive to persons residing
                                            conducting business in the City.
                                            Allowable uses include research & development, light
                                            manufacturing and processing, large single tenant distribution
                                            and sales, automobile sales and leasing, offices, warehousing
                                            and storage, high technology production, and related uses.
                                            Other uses that are determined to be compatible with primary
                                            uses may also be allowed.          The maximum intensity of
                                            development is a floor area ratio of 0.40: 1 and the average
                                            intensity of development is a floor area ratio of 0.30:1.
         May 7, 2002                                   27                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Land Use Element
                                            4.2 Agri-Business: The Agri-Business designation provides
                                            for the production and sales of agricultural crops. Allowable
                                            uses include field and row crops, orchards and vineyards,
                                            nurseries, greenhouses and hydroponic gardens, as well
                                            as animal breeding, boarding, raising and training. A single
                                            family home associated with the primary uses is also allowed.
                                            Other uses that are determined to be compatible with primary
                                            uses may also be allowed.        The maximum intensity of
                                            development is a floor area ratio of 0.10:1 and the average
                                            intensity of development is a floor area ratio of 0. 05 0: 1 .
                                            4.3 Office/Research Park: The Office/Research Park
                                            designation provides for single-tenant and multi-tenant offices
                                            that include professional, legal, medical, financial,
                                            administrative, research & development, corporate and general
                                            business offices and other supporting uses. Also included are
                                            small convenience or service commercial activities intended to
                                            meet the needs of the on-site employee population. Other uses
                                            that are determined to be compatible with primary uses may
                                            also be allowed. The maximum intensity of development is a
                                            floor area ratio of 0.40: 1 and the average intensity of
                                            development is a floor area ratio of0.25: 1.
                                            Public/ Institutional Designations
                                            5.0 Public & Institutional: The Public & Institutional
                                            designation provides for schools, churches, fire stations,
                                            community centers, utility substations and office complexes.
                                            Other uses that are determined to be compatible with primary
                                            uses may also be allowed.         The maximum intensity of
                                            development is a floor area ratio of 0.+0: 1 and the average
                                            intensity of development is a floor area ratio of 0. 25: 1. The
                                            Land Use Element identified approximately 186 acres for Public
                                            & Institutional land uses which include provisions for private
                                            schools (grades K -12).
                                            Future proposed amendments to the Land Use Element and
                                            Land Use Policy Map for private schools should only be
                                            considered if it is demonstrated that such a facility will be for
                                            the general public benefit and will not impact the financial
                                            viability of the City.
                                            5.1 Existing Public Schools: The Existing Public Schools
                                            designation provides for existing public schools. Other uses
                                            that are determined to be compatible with primary uses may
                                            also be allowed. The maximum intensity of development is a
                                            floor area ratio of 0.30:1 and the average intensity of
                                            development is a floor area ratio of0.25:1.
         May 7, 2002                                    28                 San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                                         Land Use Element
                                            5.2 Potential Public Schools: The Potential Public Schools
                                            designation provides for potential public schools.           This
                                            designation is not associated with a specific parcel ofland, but
                                            indicates a general area in which a future school may be located.
                                            The maximum intensity of development is a floor area ratio of
                                            0.30:1 and the average intensity of development is a floor area
                                            ratio of0.25: 1.
                                            5.3 Assisted Care Facilities: The Assisted Care Facility
                                            designation provides for limited special public/institutional
                                            facilities that provide specialized care for seniors and persons
                                            requiring special medical housing. Allowable uses include
                                            senior assisted care housing, nursing homes, and other
                                            specialized housing of a similar nature. The maximum intensity
                                            of development is a floor area ratio of 0.40:1 and the average
                                            intensity of development is a floor area ratio of 0.40:1.
                                            Special Desionations
                                            Special Study: The Special Study designation overlays the
                                            base land use designation of properties that have unique physical
                                            features, environmental conditions and/ or other development
                                            constraints requiring special regulations or standards designed
                                            to address or preserve those conditions. Such properties may
                                            be developed for land uses other than those provided for under
                                            the land use designation currently assigned to that parcel. For
                                            such properties, preparation of a development plan by a project
                                            proponent, including special regulations or standards addressing
                                            the relevant features, conditions and/ or constraints is required
                                            and will be considered by the City Council in determining
                                            whether to approve a requested general plan amendment and
                                            zone change.
                                            Specific Plan/Precise Plan: The Specific Plan/Precise
                                            designation provides for areas governed by a specific plan or
                                            precise plan adopted prior to development. The maximum
                                            intensity of development will be determined based on the land
                                            uses and associated acres identified in the specific or precise
                                            plan.
         May 7, 2002                                     29                  San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Land Use Element
                                            Planned Communities
                                            San Juan Capistrano contains four areas designated as Planned
                                            Community (depicted in Figure LU-3). The purpose of the
                                            Planned Community designation is to allow for the utilization
                                            of innovative land planning and building design. The Planned
                                            Community designation allows for flexibility in the design of a
                                            development project which may not be available with the other
                                            land use designations. Table LU-3 summarizes the designated
                                            land uses for each of the four Planned Communities and
                                            identifies the land use mix allowed for each Planned
                                            Community. The percentage mix ofland uses for the planned
                                            communities serves as a guideline for developers, but may be
                                            modified with the approval of the City.
                                            Development Capacity
                                            The Land Use Plan for San Juan Capistrano includes average
                                            levels of residential and non-residential development, where all
                                            land in the planning area is developed according to the Plan.
                                            The average levels of development establish a capacity for the
                                            Land Use Plan that is expressed as estimates of total dwelling
                                            units, total population, and total square footage of non-
                                            residential development in the future.
                                            Table LU-4 summarizes the development capacity of the Land
                                            Use Plan. This table provides a breakdown ofland uses within
                                            San Juan Capistrano for purposes of identifying the estimated
                                            development capacity of the Land Use Plan.
                                            The degree to which the estimated capacity exceeds projected
                                            population is referred to as "overage". Some overage is
                                            desirable to make allowances for inevitable small pockets of
                                            undevelopable land, to allow for difficulty in recognizing
                                            development trends in completely vacant areas, to allow for
                                            unforeseen need for public utilities, and to recognize that some
                                            owners will maintain their land in an undeveloped state beyond
                                            the time span of the Plan. The Southern California Association
                                            of Governments (SCAG) has recommended that Plan capacity
                                            not exceed approximately 1. 20 to 1. 25 times the projected
                                            population.
                                            The measurement of capacity is accomplished by dividing the
                                            difference between maximum population capacity of the Plan
                                            by the projected population. For the San Juan Capistrano
                                            planning are, the maximum population capacity of the Plan is
                                            approximately 38,520 and the projected population is
                                            approximately 36,440, resulting in a capacity of 1.06.
         May 7, 2002                                    30                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
 Land Use Element
                                          IZJ            City Boundary
                                          ~ Sphere of Influence
                                          I.!!.:......J
                         Mission
                          VlttJo
                                          Source: Cotton/Be/and/Associates, Inc.
  Oso Ranch
  Planned
  Community
      Laguna
      Niguel
                                                                                 .
                                                                                 \
                                                                                   \
                                                                                    \
                                       ,..........                                   \
                                 ,..,.                 i~.----.   _,. ·---·-·~. ..l
                                             Son Cl..mente
     PadficOcean
                                                                     Figure LU-3
0            l/2  1 Mile                 Planned Communities
December 14, 1999                                        San Juan Capistrano General Plan

Land Use Element
                                           Table LU-3
                                    Planned Communities:
                                   Allowable Uses Guideline
               Planned Community                    Allowed Land Use Mix Guidelines
                 Crystal Cathedral Ministries 80% Public Institutional (includes retreat center)
                        Planned Community     20% Assisted Care Facility (may include a
                                              wellness center. Maximum floor area ratio for
                                              Public Institutional will not be allowed unless the
                                              project offers exceptional benefits to the
                                              community.)
             Oso Ranch Planned Community      40% Public Institutional
                                              30% Affordable Family/Senior Housing
                                              30% Medium Density Residential
          Pueblo Serra Planned Community      100% Office/Research Park (with support
                                              accessory uses such as hotel, food services,
                                              etc.)
      Whispering Hills Planned Community      100% Very Low Density Residential
       Forster Canyon Planned Community         5% Low Density Residential
            (Pacifica San Juan): 257.0 acres  26% Medium Low Density Residential
                                              10% Medium Density Residential
                                                3% High Density Residential
                                                6% Office/Research Park
                                                8% Open Space Recreation
                                              39% General Open Space
                                                4% Public Institutional
      Distrito La Novia-San Juan Meadows        7% General Commercial
           Planned Community: 153.8 acres       3% High Density Residential
                                              44% Open Space Recreation
                                              28% Low Density Residential
                                              18% Natural Open Space
                                                 
November 2, 2010                               32                     San Juan Capistrano General Plan

                                                                                                                        Land Use Element
                                                                        Table LU-4
                                                              Development Capacity
                     Land Use Designations'                 Acres *       Expected       Dwell in        Square     Average       Population'
                                                                          DUs per         gUnits          Feet       Persons
                                                                        acre or FAR                                    Per
                                                                                                                    Dwell in                     --
                                                                                                                     gUnit            .- -- /
             Open Space & Recreation
                 General Open Space                           1,552           0.0001:1                       6,795
                 Open Space Recreation                           648               FAR                     141' 134
                 Neighborhood Park                                29     0.005:1 FAR                         6,316
                 Community Park                                  134     0.005:1 FAR                        58,370
                 Specialty Park                                    3      0.01:1 FAR                         6,534
                 Regional Park                                   579      0.05:1 FAR                        25,221
                 Natural Open Space                             449      0.001:1 FAR                         1,956
                 Recreation Commercial                            10          0.0001:1                      43,560
                                                                                   FAR
                                                                            0.1:1 FAR
             SUBTOTAL                                         3,404                                        289,886
             Residential
                 Very Low Density Residential                 1,488             1 dulac       1,488                                           4,330
                 Low Density Residential                        408            2 dulac          816                                           2,375
                 Medinm Low Density Residential                  604         3.3 dulac        1,993                                           5,800
                 Medium Density Residential                     438          4.5 dulac        1,971                                           5,736
                 Medium High Density Residential                 528         7.5 dulac        3,960                                         11,524
                 ~h Density Residential                          107          17 dulac      . 1,819                                           5,293
                    ordable Family /Senior Housing                19          25 dulac·         475                                           1,382
             SUBTOTAL                                         3,592                          12,522                       2.91              36,440
             Non-Residential
                 Neighborhood Commercial                          33      0.20:1   FAR                     287,496
                 General Commercial                              115      0.30:1   FAR                   1,502,820
                 Industrial Park                                 133      0.30:1   FAR                   1,738,044
                 Quasi- Industrial                               168      0.30:1   FAR                   2,195,424
                 Agri-Business                                    74      0.05:1   FAR                     152,460
                 Light Industrial                                 36      0.30:1   FAR                     470,448
                 Office/Research Park                             74      0.25:1   FAR                     805,860
                 Public & Institutional                          186      0.25:1   FAR                   2,025,540
                 Existin~ Public Schools                          49      0.25:1   FAR                     533,610
                 Assiste Care Facilities                          25      0.40:1   FAR                     435,600
             SUBTOTAL                                           889                                     10,147,302
             Special
                 Special Study                                     7             Varies
                 Los Rios Specific Plan                           31              Varies
             SUBTOTAL                                             38
             Roadways                                            787
             Freeway                                             265
             TOTAL                                            8,975                          12,522     10,437,188                          36,440
           DUs or du =dwelling units
           FAR = Floor Area Ratio
           *  Does not include the 93 acres located in the City's sphere of influence.
           Growth for the 93 acre sphere of influence is based on expected FARs identified above:
           Public & Institutional- 65 acres- 707,850 square feet
           Assisted Care Facility- 16 acres- 278,784 square feet
           General Open Space - 3 acres
           Roadways - 9 acres
           1
             A 10% reduction in acreage has been made to account for undeveloped and recently subdivided areas, and areas served by private roads.
           2
             Persons per dwelling unit is calculated based on average persons per dwelling unit of 2.91
         May 7, 2002                                                             33                        San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com

         Land Use Element
                       Control and          The City of San Juan Capistrano has experienced great levels of
                     Direct Growth          growth over the years. To preserve its historic village
                                            atmosphere, and provide sufficient levels of public services to
                                            new development and residents, growth in the City should
                                            continue to be controlled. Controlled and directed growth will
                                            allow new development to occur without negatively affecting
                                            San Juan Capistrano's unique character that existing residents
                                            enjoy.
                                            Controlling growth in San Juan Capistrano is not a recent idea.
                                            The City adopted a Residential Growth Management Program
                                            in 1976 which limits the number of residential building permits
                                            granted each year to 400. This policy will continue to be
                                            implemented to manage the future development of the
                                            remaining developable lands within the planning area. Revision
                                            and enforcement of the Zoning Ordinance to allow density or
                                            intensity up to the maximum level allowed by the General Plan
                                            for projects which include important benefits or amenities will
                                            encourage the goals and policies of the General Plan.
                                            The approximate 9. 5 -acre parcel located at the southeast corner
                                            of Valle Road and San Juan Creek Road has been designated as
                                            a location for a hotel and convention facility. This facility must
                                            be designed and located consistent with Specific Plan 8 2-09.
                                            The City has identified the Historic Town Center as an area
                                            with important historical and social value worth protecting.
                                            Figure LU-4 depicts the area contained within the Historic
                                            Town Center Master Plan. The Master Plan establishes a
                                            "blueprint" to guide development in the downtown that
                                            implements the goals contained in the General Plan.
                                            Implementation of a town center revitalization plan will
                                            encourage a diversity of commercial and service uses which
                                            balance the community's commercial need with those of
                                            tourism-based development while maintaining fiscal and
                                            economic viability. The City will continue to implement a
                                            town center revitalization plan to provide additiopal housing
                                            opportunities and population to support these commercial
                                            services and retail sales.
                                            Another area identified within the community for special
                                            planning is the historic Los Rios neighborhood. The Los Rios
                                            Precise Plan District contains some of the oldest structures in
                                            the County and, and the Rios Adobe may be the oldest,
                                            continually-inhabited residence in California. Figure LU-5
                                            depicts the location of the Los Rios Precise Plan planning area.
                                            The original Los Rios Precise Plan was adopted in 1978, and the
                                            City is in the process of revising the Plan. The revised Precise
         May 7, 2002                                    34                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial. version http://www.fineprint.com
Land Use Element
                                               ()
                                        --->0
                                               3
                                        L---·=r r-----__J
                                                0
                                                nt----~
                              L-----Ie
                                               '"0
                                                 ~!"------/
                                                 ..,
                                                 0
                                                 :I
                                                  0 t.___-~-
                               L---1
                             Del Obispo St.
IZJ Master Plan Boundary
Source: Cio/ rfSan juan Capistrano Historic
          Town Center Master Plan, (june 1995)
                                                                           Figure LU-4
                                                             Historic Town Center
0            250         500 Feet                                 Master Plan Area
December 14, 1999                                                San Juan Capistrano General Plan

                                                                  Land Use Element
lZ]       Precise Plan Boundary
Source: Ciry if Son Jucm Capistrano
        Los Rios Precise Plan, (February 1978)
                                                                 Figure LU-5
0          250         SOD Feet                Los Rios Precise Plan Area
December 14, 1999                                      San Juan Capistrano General Plan
                                                                                         Land Use Element
                                            Plan will allow the District to evolve, while preserving the
                                           essence of the area; its historical diversity and rural character.
                                           The City will continue to implement the Los Rios Precise Plan
                                           to preserve the viability of the Los Rios area and the entire
                                           downtown area.
                                           Oso/Trabuco Creek Properties
                                           In the northwesterly portion of the City, approximately 70 acres
                                           of land located north of the intersection of Oso and Trabuco
                                           Creeks is identified as a Special Study area. These properties are
                                           presently designated for Agri-Business and have been used for
                                           farming purposes for over 20 years. The California Department
                                           of Conservation identifies these properties as Prime Farmland,
                                           meaning the properties provide the best combination of physical
                                           and chemical features to sustain long-term production of
                                           agricultural crops. In addition to farming, the Agri-Business
                                           designation allows animal breeding, boarding, raising and
                                           training, nurseries, and a single family home on each legal
                                           parcel. The properties currently have no access to public roads.
                                           With their physical position between the two creeks, portions of
                                           the properties are within the inundation area of a 100- year flood.
                                           The properties have experienced loss of land adjacent to the
                                           creeks in recent years as development upstream has resulted in
                                           greater water volumes and velocities along Oso and Trabuco
                                           Creeks.
                                           As much as the San Juan Capistrano area, these properties are
                                           located within a high fire hazard area and are susceptible to
                                          wildland fire. With several recorded prehistoric and historic
                                           archaeological resources in the same general area, the properties
                                           also have potential for such resources to be present.
                                           Recognizing the unique physical and environmental conditions
                                           of these properties, the Special Study designation overlays the
                                          base Agri-Business designation. These properties may be
                                          developed for land uses other than Agri-Business in the future
                                          following preparation of a development plan, including special
                                          regulations or standards addressing the physical features,
                                          environmental conditions, and development constraints
                                          identified above and any others that may be identified through
                                          the environmental review process specified by the California
                                          Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and its Guidelines. The
                                          development plan will then be considered by the City Council in
                                          determining whether to approve a requested general plan
                                          amendment and zone change.
         May 7, 2002                                   37                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Land Use Element
                                          The Community Design and Public Services & Utilities Element
                                          also identify additional implementation programs which target
                                          the compatibility of future development and redevelopment
                                          within the City and the provision of sufficient levels of public
                                          services and utilities.
           Population Distribution        The Land Use Element identifies where the future growth in
                     and Open Space       population will occur in the City. Future growth in areas which
                                          are susceptible to natural hazards, such as the floodplain and the
                                          hillsides where flooding and landslides occur, has been limited
                                          through the use of natural open space easements, and the
                                          designation oflower intensity land uses in these high risk areas.
                                          In addition to preserving open space areas for safety issues, the
                                          City of San Juan Capistrano has identified the preservation of
                                          open space as an important factor for preserving the open space,
                                          rural character that the residents of San Capistrano enjoy.
                                          Approximately 40 percent of the City is designated for open
                                          space, creating an island of undeveloped, natural beauty in the
                                          urbanized southern Orange County region. The preservation of
                                          ridgelines is especially important as these areas are visible from
                                          all parts of the community and create a natural boundary
                                          between San Juan Capistrano and its neighbors.                 The
                                          Conservation & Open Space Element identifies programs for the
                                          long-term protection of open space resources.
                                          The City Zoning Ordinance is one of the primary regulatory
                                          documents that is used to ensure land use compatibility and
                                          public safety.        The Ordinance contains standards for
                                          development, such as allowed uses, setbacks, parking and
                                          landscaping, that are designed to promote compatibility and
                                          public safety. In addition to the Zoning Ordinance, the City
                                          Subdivision Ordnance and grading regulation are important
                                          regulatory tools to control the subdivision ofland and alteration
                                          ofland in preparation for development. To protect the safety of
                                          the community and preserve the natural open space character of
                                          the City, San Juan Capistrano will review and amend, when
                                          necessary, its Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance and
                                          grading regulations to ensure that they are consistent with new
                                          state legislation and' court decisions and provide the required
                                          level of protection for the community.
                                          Systematic enforcement of the City's ordinances and regulations
                                          and monitoring of development within and around the
                                          community will be used to maintain the public safety and quality
                                          of life. Development monitoring by the City can be used to
                                          ensure that City facilities and services are able to provide
                                          sufficient levels of public services to new development, ensuring
                                          the public safety.
         May 7, 2002                                   38                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                                         Land Use Element
                           Economic        The promotion of the City's historic, village character is
                      Development          important to the residents of San Juan Capistrano. This historic
                                           character is centered around the central business district which
                                           traditionally has formed the focal point for the community,
                                           bringing people together as they shop and visit the areas
                                           surrounding the Mission. Preserving and improving the image
                                           of the central business district requires attracting and retaining
                                           commercial businesses which are compatible with the
                                           community and serve the community's needs for a downtown
                                           area, as well as assuring that these businesses succeed.
                                           Concentrating commercial activities within the central business
                                           district also discourages the creation of new strip commercial
                                           developments outside of the downtown area that would change
                                           the character of the community.
                                           In 1998, the City of San Juan Capistrano commissioned a study
                                           by Keyser Marston Associates, Inc. and Linda Congleton
                                           Associates to prepare a economic strategy for the City. The
                                           resulting Market Based Economic Strategyidentifies implementation
                                           programs which will allow for the transition of underperforming
                                           commercial uses to viable revenue producing uses and increase
                                           outreach to the business community. To position the community
                                           for a successful transition to the 21st century, the City will
                                           implement the economic strategies outlined in the Keyser
                                           Marston report.
                                           The Community Redevelopment Agency is also involved with
                                           economic development within the City, and will continue to
                                          implement the Redevelopment Plan for the Central
                                           Redevelopment Project. Figure LU-6 depicts the Central
                                           Redevelopment Project area which includes the downtown area.
                                          The Community Redevelopment Agency's goals include: the
                                           elimination ofblight conditions in the Redevelopment Project
                                          Area; the prevention of recurrence of these blight conditions;
                                          the improvement or construction of public services and infra-
                                          structure and the improvement of the Project Areas
                                          environment; the implementation of the Redevelopment Plan;
                                          and the encouragement and fostering of economic development
                                          within the Project Area.
         May 7, 2002                                    39                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                      Land Use Element
                                                     Central Redevelopment Project
                                          ~          City Boundary
                               M/ulon     I. •••··1  Sphere oflnffuence
                                VIejo
           .                              Source: Cir;y cj San juan Capistrano
                                                    Cammunir;y Redevelopment Agency
            '1
            1
             I
         ·"   ·~
                 )
                  \
                   .)
                  .}                                                .
                 I_
    Laguna
     Niguel         \
                     J•
                                                                     \
                .I·                                                   \.
        //                                                               \
                                                                           \
     i                                                                        \
                                                                               \
                                                                                \.
                                                                                  \
                                                                                    \
                                      / .
                                         ;·,
                                                    .._           .  ·-·-·~ . ..l
                                                                                      \
                                                         ·--~
   Pacific Occron
                                                                    Figure LU-6
                                        Central Redevelopment
0            1/1        I Mile                                                  Project
December 14, 1999                                     San Juan Capistrano General Plan

                                                                                        Land Use Element
                                          Other programs which will be implemented by the City to foster
                                          economic development within th€'-- community include
                                          implementing programs that attract and support businesses
                                          within the community. Information will be actively distributed
                                          to members of the business community through the use of
                                          newsletters and the Internet. Assistance with the permitting
                                          process and permit streamlining will be implemented to speed
                                          the process of applying and receiving City permits and reduce
                                          the business cost associated with long delays.
                     Community and        With the substantial growth that San Juan Capistrano has
                      Neighborhood        experienced over the last 25 years, it is important for the City to
                           Character      assure that new development complements and conforms with
                                          the existing community character. This assures that the historic
                                          character of the City is preserved and existing neighborhoods are
                                          not negatively affected by new development. Older
                                          neighborhoods within San Juan Capistrano may also require
                                          additional rehabilitation to improve their visual character.
                                          The City will work with the Community Redevelopment
                                          Agency to implement the Redevelopment Plan to improve
                                          neighborhoods within the Central Redevelopment Project. In
                                          addition, a graffiti removal and prevention program will be
                                          implemented to avoid the negative impacts of graffiti on
                                          communities and incentives to encourage rehabilitation will be
                                          offered. The Community Design and Public Service & Utilities
                                          Elements include implementation programs which assure that
                                          new development within the community is compatible with the
                                          existing neighborhood, and that public service providers will be
                                          able to provide sufficient levels of service to the new
                                          development.
         May 7, 2002                                  41                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com



























































                                                                                    Conservation & Open Space Element
                                                                                                   Table of Contents
Section                                                                                                                                   Page
Introduction
        Purpose of the Conservation & Open Space Element . . . . . . . . .                           . .....     . . ...   . ...   . . ...   1
        Scope and Content of the Conservation & Open Space Element                                   . .....     . . ...   . ...   . . ...   1
        Related Plans and Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           . .....     . . ...   . ...   . . ...   2
        Relationship to Other General Plan Elements . . . . . . . . . . . . . .                      . .....     . . ...   . ...   . . ...   5
Issues, Goals and Policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
        Open Space Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
        Natural Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
        Agricultural Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
        Compatible Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
        Community Identity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
        Air Quality. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
        Water Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
        Human Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
        Related Goals and Policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Conservation & Open Space Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
        Open Space Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .           ...............               ....     13
        Natural Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .      ...............               ....     18
        Agricultural Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       ...............               ....     21
        Compatible Development & Community Identity . . . . . . . . . . .                            ...............               ....     22
        Air Quality. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ...............               ....     22
        Water Quality . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    ...............               ....     23
        Human Resources ........................... ·.. . . . . . .                                  ...............               ....     24
December 14, 1999                                                                                San Juan Capistrano General Plan

 Conservation & Open Space Element
                                                 List of Tables
Table                                                                                                                               Page
COS-1 Related Goals and Policies by Element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
                                                List of Figures
Figure                                                                                                                              Page
COS-1 Open Space Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
COS-2 Major Ridgelines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
COS-3 Parks, Trails and Recreational Facilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
COS-4 Vegetation Communities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
December 14, 1999                                          ii                             San Juan Capistrano General Plan
                                                                   Conservation & Open Space Element
                                                                                     Introduction
                                            Some of San Juan Capistrano's most valuable assets include the
                                            City's parks, creeks, agricultural land, hillsides, ridgelines and
                                            canyons. The Conservation & Open Space Element focuses on
                                            the protection and enhancement of open space and natural
                                            resources to ensure a high quality living environment for years
                                            to come.
                       Purpose of the       The San Juan Capistrano Conservation & Open Space Element
                     Conservation &         meets the state requirements for Conservation & Open Space
                 Open Space Element         Elements as defmed in Sections 65302(d) and 6530l(e) of the
                                            Government Code. According to these requirements, the
                                            Conservation Element must contain goals and policies to
                                            protect and maintain natural resources such as water, soils,
                                            wildlife and minerals, and prevent wasteful resource
                                            exploitation, degradation and destruction. The Open Space
                                            Element must contain goals and policies to manage open space
                                            areas, including undeveloped lands and outdoor recreation
                                            areas. Specifically, the Open Space Element must address
                                            several open space categories such as those used for the
                                            preservation of natural resources and managed production of
                                            resources, as well as open space maintained for public health
                                            and safety reasons. This last category of open space is also
                                            addressed in the San Juan Capistrano Safety Element. The
                                            subjects addressed under the Conservation Element and Open
                                            Space Element overlap one another substantially; therefore
                                            these elements have been combined for San Juan Capistrano.
                                            While air quality is not a state-mandated element, the South
                                            Coast Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) requires air
                                            quality to be addressed in General Plans. Air quality is included
                                            as a sub-element of the San Juan Capistrano Conservation &
                                            Open Space Element in order to fulfill AQMP requirements.
                                            The purpose of the air quality sub-element is to reduce
                                            pollutant levels through stationary source, mobile source,
                                            transportation and land use control, and energy conservation
                                            measures.
                  Scope and Content         The Conservation & Open Space Element expresses community
              of the Conservation &         goals to protect environmental resources and open space.
                 Open Space Element         Resources addressed in this element include parks, open space
                                            and agricultural lands, natural resources and features such as
                                            groundwater, creeks and drainage channels. Because everyday
         Revised May 7, 2002                                                San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Conservation & Open Space Element
                                            activities in San Juan Capistrano affect air quality outside of the
                                            City boundaries, regional air quality issues are also addressed in
                                            this element.
                                            The Conservation & Open Space Element is comprised of three
                                            sections: 1) Introduction; 2) Issues, Goals and Policies; and 3)
                                            the Conservation & Open Space Plan. In the Issues, Goals and
                                            Policies section, com~unity open space needs and resource
                                            management issues are identified, and corresponding goals and
                                            policies are established.        The goals, which are overall
                                            statements of the City desires, are comprised of broad
                                            statements of purpose and direction. The policies serve as
                                            guidelines for planning recreational facilities, enhancing the
                                            natural amenities of San Juan Capistrano, and minimizing the
                                            environmental effects of planned development.
                  Related Plans and         There are a number of existing plans and programs that directly
                             Programs       relate to the Conservation & Open Space Element. These plans
                                            and programs have been enacted through federal, state and local
                                            action, and are administered by agencies or special districts.
                                            Federal laws pertaining to the protection of significant
                                            resources include the Endangered Species Act of 1973 and the
                                            National Environmental Policy Act. Other related plans and
                                            programs are described below.
                                            The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
                                            The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1991 was
                                            adopted to make public areas, including parks and play areas,
                                            accessible to all persons. All playground equipment, trails and
                                            facilities described in the Conservation & Open Space Element
                                            must be usable by all adults and children with disabilities under
                                            ADA.
                                            California Endangered Species Act
                                            The California Endangered Species Act ( CESA) (Fish & Game
                                            Code §§2050, et seq.) generally parallels the main provisions of
                                            the Federal Endangered Species Act and is administered by the
                                            California Department of Fish and Game (DFG). CESA
                                            prohibits the "taking" of listed species except as otherwise
                                            provided in State ·law. Any future development or
                                            redevelopment in San Juan Capistrano that has the potential to
                                            affect wildlife will be subject to the restrictions contained in the
                                            CESA.
         Revised May 7, 2002                             2                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com

                                                                    Conservation & Open Space Element
                                             Federal Endangered Species Act
                                             The Federal Endangered Species Act (FESA), administered by
                                             the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, applies to impacts to
                                             federally listed species, or habitat occupied by federally listed
                                             species. Federally listed species are likely to occur within the
                                             riparian habitat of the City's floodplains. FESA Section 9
                                             forbids specified acts that directly or indirectly harm listed
                                             species. Section 9 also prohibits "taking" any species of wildlife
                                             or fish listed as endangered. These restrictions apply to all
                                             federal agencies and all persons subject to United States
                                            jurisdiction.
                                             California Environmental Quality Act and Guidelines
                                            The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was
                                            adopted by the state legislature in response to a public mandate
                                            for thorough environmental analysis of projects impacting the
                                            environment. The provisions of the law and environmental
                                            review procedures are described in the CEQA statutes and
                                            Guidelines. CEQA will continue to be instrumental in ensuring
                                            that the environmental impacts · associated with local
                                            development projects are appropriately assessed and mitigated.
                                            U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California
                                            Department ofFish and Game Regulations
                                            Both the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and California
                                            Department of Fish and Game have regulations to protect
                                            wildlife resources. Special permits are required for the
                                            alteration, dredging, or activity in any lake or stream, as well as
                                            other activities that may affect fish and game habitat. Both
                                            agencies also regulate impacts to sensitive plant and animal
                                            species. Future development in San Juan Capistrano potentially
                                            affecting wildlife habitat will be subject to the regulations of
                                            both of these federal and state agencies.
                                            National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
                                            (NPDES)
                                            Under the NPDES Storm water permit issued to the County of
                                            Orange and the City of SanJuan Capistrano as a co-permittee,
                                            all development and significant redevelopment must be
                                            implemented with run-off pollution control measures known as
                                            Best Management Practices (BMPs). Proposed development
                                            projects (both public and private) within San Juan Capistrano
                                            must incorporate structural and non-structural BMPs to
         Revised May 7, 2002                             3                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com

          Conservation & Open Space Element
                                             preclude significant water quality impacts from non-point
                                             source pollutants. The County Drainage Area Master Plan
                                             identifies acceptable BMPs and methods to incorporate BMPs
                                             into proposed projects.
                                            South Coast Air Quality Management Plan
                                             The South Coast Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP)
                                            mandates a variety of measures to reduce traffic congestion and
                                            improve air quality. These measures include the requirements
                                            that each jurisdiction develop an air quality component within
                                            its General Plan.
                                            County of Orange General Plan Resources Element
                                            The County of Orange General Plan Resources Element
                                            includes an inventory of the County-wide resources such as
                                            wildlife, energy, water, air and open space. The element also
                                            includes goals, policies and programs for development,
                                            management, preservation and conservation of the County
                                            resources.      This element provides sources of regional
                                            information affecting San Juan Capistrano and identifies
                                            resource policies arid programs that apply to the unincorporated
                                            portion of the planning area.
                                            County of Orange Master Plan ofRegional Riding and
                                            Hiking Trails
                                            The County of Orange Master Plan of Riding and Hiking Trails
                                            includes an inventory of existing and proposed trails, and
                                            standards and criteria for the provision of new trails. This plan
                                            also provides policies and programs to implement the future
                                            development and operation of the County-wide trails system to
                                            which San Juan Capistrano trails may link.
                                            County of Orange Coastal Sage Scrub Natural
                                            Community Conservation Program (NCCP)
                                            The purpose of the Coastal Sage Scrub NCCP is to protect
                                            sensitive plant and animal species (particularly the California
                                            gnatcatcher, cactus wren and orange-throated lizard) in the
                                            coastal sage scrub of Orange County. The N CCP establishes a
                                            regional habitat planning and management system, while still
                                            allowing growth and development to occur. The Orange
                                            County NCCP for the entire Southern California region is based
                                            on voluntary and collaborative participation among property
                                            owners, local governments, state and federal agencies and
                                            environmental organizations.
         Revised M.ay 7, 2002                           4                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                     Conservation & Open Space Element
                                             City of San juan Capistrano Open Space Master Plan
                                             In 1992 the City adopted an Open Space Master Plan. The
                                             purpose of the Open Space Master Plan is to preserve, protect
                                             and enhance open space uses, agricultural preserves,
                                             recreational facilities and trails within the City. The San Juan
                                             Capistrano Open Space Master Plan provides an inventory of
                                             existing and planned open space uses, as well as goals, policies,
                                             plans and programs to ensure the continued preservation,
                                             development and management of open space resources within
                                            the City. The goals, policies and plan contained in the Open
                                             Space and Conservation Element of this General Plan are the
                                             required legal documentation to be used when planning for
                                            open space and conservation uses within the City.
                                            MeasureD
                                            In April of 1990, a bond election was held for the purchase and
                                            preservation of approximately 140 acres of open land within the
                                            City, the measure was passed with an overwhelming majority -
                                            71 o/o of the voters. The passage of Measure D enabled the City
                                            to incur bonded indebtedness for acquisition oflands for parks,
                                            agriculture, open space, and related uses.
                        Relationship to     The Conservation & Open Space Element must be consistent
                          Other General     with the other General Plan elements and all elements of the
                         Plan Elements      General Plan are interrelated to a degree. Certain goals and
                                            policies of each element may also address issues that are the
                                            primary subjects of other elements. The integration of
                                            overlapping issues throughout the General Plan elements
                                            provides a strong basis for the implementation of plans and
                                            programs, and achievement of community goals.                 The
                                            Conservation & Open Space Element most closely relates to the
                                            Land Use, Circulation, Parks and Recreation, and Floodplain
                                            Management Elements.
                                            The Land Use Element provides a planned land use pattern with
                                            the following general land use designation categories:
                                            Residential, Commercial, Industrial, Public/Institutional,
                                            Open Space & Conservation and Special. These community
                                            designations are applied to public and private land that is
                                            intended for open space and recreational uses. The designations
                                            are also applied to areas with high resource and aesthetic value
                                            for preservation purposes.
         Revised l\1ay 7, 2002                           5                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Conservation & Open Space Element
                                            Air quality, a major regional concern, is specifically addressed.
                                            in the Conservation & Open Space Element as well as the
                                            Circulation Element. The Circulation Element contains goals,
                                            policies and plans related to improving the local street system
                                            to maintain efficient traffic flow and increasing the use of
                                            alternative transportation within the City. These policies and
                                            plans support the achievement ofimproved regional air quality.
                                            Open space, existing and planned parks, and recreational
                                           facilities are also addressed in the Parks & Recreation Element.
                                            The goals, policies and plans within the Parks & Recreation
                                            Element also serve to preserve, maintain and enhance the City's
                                           open space and natural resources.
                                           The existing open space and natural resource opportunities in
                                            the City's floodplains are addressed in the Floodplain
                                            Management Element. Goals, policies and plans within the
                                            Floodplain Management Element serve to minimize potential
                                           hazards within the floodplains, as well as enhance and maintain
                                           the open space and recreational opportunities that exist within
                                           these areas.
         Revised May 7, 2002                             6                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                    Conservation & Open Space Element
                                                            Issues, Goals, and Policies
                                            San juan Capistrano possesses valuable assets in the form of its
                                            natural open space, parkland and agricultural land.
                                            Conservation and enhancement of these assets can be
                                            accomplished by addressing certain issues affecting the City.
                                            Eight major issues are addressed by the goals, policies and plan
                                            in the Conservation & Open Space Element. These major
                                            issues include: 1) preserving and enhancing open space
                                            resources; 2) protecting and preserving important natural
                                            resources; 3) preserving existing agriculture; 4) preventing
                                            incompatible development; 5) maintaining community scale
                                            and identity; 6) improving air quality; 7) protecting water
                                            quality; and 8) utilizing and enriching the City's human
                                            resources. Each issue and the related goals and policies are
                                            included in this section of the Conservation & Open Space
                                            Element.
               Open Space Resources         San Juan Capistrano has a significant amount of dedicated or
                                            use-restricted land. These visual resources create interest, and
                                            are landmarks that communicate a sense of place in the
                                            community. These resources need to be preserved and
                                            enhanced to maintain the natural physical and visual quality of
                                            San Juan Capistrano.
                                            Conservation &. Open Space Goall: Preserve and enhance
                                            open space resources.
                                            Policy 1.1: Identify remaining areas which should be preserved
                                            and enhanced as open space resources.
                                            Policy 1.2: Continue to implement land and open space-rights
                                            acquisition of appropriate properties to allow for the long- term
                                            preservation of open space resources.
                                            Policy 1.3: Identify and implement funding programs to
                                            maintain open space lands.
                  Natural Resources         San Juan Capistrano contains important ecological and
                                            biological resources such as the rivers and creeks, natural plant
                                            and wildlife habitats, and the wildlife which inhabit them. In a
         Revised May 7, 2002                            7                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Conservation & Open Space Element
                                            region of great growth and urbanization, these resources are
                                            constantly under threat of encroachment by new development.
                                            To preserve these important resources for future generations,
                                            and to preserve the quality of life in the community that these
                                            resources contribute, these important ecological and biological
                                            resources need to be protected.
                                            Conservation &. Open Space Goal 2: Protect and preserve
                                            important ecolooical and biolooical resources.
                                            Policy 2.1: Use proper land use planning to reduce the impact
                                            of urban development on important ecological and biological
                                            resources.
                                            Policy 2. 2: Preserve important ecological and biological
                                            resources as open space.
                                            Policy 2.3: Develop open space uses in an ecologically
                                            sensitive manner.
                                            Policy 2.4: Continue to designate the City as a bird sanctuary
                                            to preserve and protect the populations of all migratory birds
                                            which serve as a prime resource to the character and history of
                                            the community.
                         Agricultural       San Juan Capistrano has historically been an agricultural
                            Resources       community, with its rich valley soils. While much of the land
                                            used for agriculture has been developed into urban uses, there
                                            are remaining private parcels which continue in agricultural
                                            production. These agricultural areas help to preserve the
                                            traditional rural character of the community, maintain open
                                            space, and reduce congestion within the City.
                                            Conservation &. Open Space Goal 3: Preserve existino
                                            aoricultural activity.
                                            Policy 3.1: Implement economic programs that promote the
                                            long-term viability of designated agricultural parcels within the
                                            City.
                                            Policy 3.2: Reduce the negative impacts resulting from urban
                                            uses and neighboring agricultural uses in close proximity.
                          Compatible        Areas in SanJuan Capistrano are subject to floods, liquefaction,
                         Development        and landslides, as well as other hazards. Designating these areas
                                            for open space or limiting development can reduce the risk to
                                            public health and safety. Areas which contain important
         Revised May 7, 2002                            8                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineorint.com
                                                                   Conservation & Open Space Element
                                            historical and ecological resources should also be protected to
                                            protect the heritage and character of the community.
                                             Conservation &. Open Space Goal4: Prevent incompatible
                                            development in areas which should be preservedfor scenic,
                                            historic, conservation, or public safety purposes.
                                            Policy 4.1: Assure incompatible development is avoided in
                                            those areas which are designated to be preserved for scenic,
                                            historic, conservation, or public safety purposes.
                                            The preservation of land for agricultural, ridgelines, scenic,
                                            historic, conservation, public safety, and open space helps to
                                            maintain community identity. These areas provide open vistas
                                            and variety in the scenic quality of San Juan Capistrano.
                                            Conservation &. Open Space Goal 5: Shape and auide
                                            development in order to achieve efficient arowth and
                                            maintain community scale and identity.
                                            Policy 5.1: Encourage high-quality design in new development
                          Community         and redevelopment to maintain the low-density character of the
                               Identity     City.
                                            Policy 5.2: Ensure that new development integrates and
                                            preserves areas designated for scenic, historic, conservation, or
                                            public safety reasons.
                                            Policy 5.3: Ensure that no buildings will encroach upon any
                                            ridgeline designated for preservation.
                          .A.ir Quality     Air quality within the Souu~ Coast air basin does not presently
                                            meet state and federal standards. Cooperation among all
                                            agencies in the basin is necessary to achieve desired
                                            improvements to air quality.         San Juan Capistrano can
                                            participate and contribute its share in those efforts by proper
                                            planning for land use, transportation, and energy use.
                                            Conservation &. Open Space Goal 6: Improve air quality.
                                            Policy 6.1: Cooperate with the South Coast Air Quality
                                            Management District and Southern California Association of
                                            Governments in their efforts to implement the regional Air
                                            Quality Management Plan.
         Revised May 7, 2002                            9                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
          Conservation & Open Space Element
                                             Policy 6.2: Cooperate and participate in regional air quality .
                                             management planning, programs, and enforcement measures.
                                             Policy 6.3: Implement City-wide traffic flow improvements.
                                             Policy 6.4: Achieve a greater balance between jobs and
                                             housing in San Juan Capistrano.
                                             Policy 6.5: Integrate air quality planning with land use and
                                             transportation planning.
                                             Policy 6.6: Promote energy conservation and recycling by the
                                             public and private sectors.
                         Water Quality       San Juan Capistrano contains three creeks which are subject to
                                            various sources of pollution within the community. To protect
                                            the public safety, as well as these natural resources, the water
                                            quality needs to be monitored and protected.
                                             Conservation &. Open Space Goal 7: Protect water quality.
                                            Policy 7.1: Coordinate water quality and supply programs with
                                            the responsible water agencies.
                                            Policy 7.2: Encourage the production and use of recycled
                                            water.
                                            Policy 7.3: Conserve and protect watershed areas.
                     Human Resources        San Juan Capistrano has many homeowner associations,
                                            community groups, and business groups which represent
                                            important resources for accomplishing long-term community
                                            goals. These groups often include volunteer leaders and
                                            workers who have a distinct understanding of their
                                            neighborhoods. These significant human resources may be used
                                            to establish and achieve community goals.
                                            Conservation &. Open Space Goal 8: Encouraoe active
                                            citizen involvement to establish and achieve community
                                           ooals.
                                            Policy 8.1: Solicit citizen participation during the early stages
                                            of major public and regulatory programs.
                                            Policy 8.2: Develop appropriate vehicles, such as newsletters,
                                            information brochures, cable television programming and
         Revised I\1ay 7, 2002                         10                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                  Conservation & Open Space Element
                                            announcements, and other methods, to communicate important
                                            information to the population of San Juan Capistrano.
                        Related Goals       The goals and policies described in L~e Conservation & Open
                          andPolides        Space Element are related to and support subjects included
                                            within other General Plan elements. In tum, many goals and
                                            policies from the other elements directly or indirectly support
                                            the goals and policies of the Conservation & Open Space
                                            Element. These supporting goals and policies are identified in
                                            Table COS-1.
         Revised May 7, 2002                           11                 San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Conservation & Open Space Element
                                                                         Table COS-t
                                                 Related Goals and Policies by Element
                                                                           Conservation & Open Space Issue Area
          General Plan       Open               Natural             Agricultura           Compatible               Community           Air     Water    Human
          Elements          Space               Resource            I                     Developmen               Identity            Quality Quality  Resource
                             Resource           s                   Resources             t                                                             s
                            s
          Land Use           3.2, 4.1'          4.1                                       1.2, 4.3, 7.1,           1.2, 4.3, 7.1,
                            4.2, 4.3                                                      7.2                     7.2 .
          Housing
          Circulation
          Safety             1.3                1.3                                                                                    2.1              3.4, 4.2
                                                                                                     .
                                                                                                                 ~·~
                         ·.'''                                         . > ,..  '·
                                                           ,·~~~                               <i~
                                        CC:·
                                                      '·",                                                Y;_,,,
                                             I'
          Conservation
                                                                                    ~·I'
          & Open Space          .:
                                                                 ,.
                                                                             ·'  .    1(,     -~ ·"'  . ' -~~:f. ~~ '..";~ ~;~·: .. •;
          Noise
          Cultural
          Resources
          Community          1.1, 3.1,          1.1, 3.1,                                                                                               1.3
          Design             3.2                3.2
          Growth
          Management
          Parks and          1.2,  1.3,                                                                                                                 1.8
          Recreation         2.1'  2.2,
                            2.3,   2.6,
                             2.7,  3.1,
                             3.2
          Public                                                                                                                                        4.1
          Facilities and
          Utilities
          Floodplain         1.1,  1.2,         1.1, 1.2,
          Management         1. 3, 1.4,         1.3, 1.4,
                            2.1'   2.2,         2.1' 2.2,
                             3.1'  3.2          3.1' 3.2
         Revised May 7, 2002                                                       12                                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com

                                                                    Conservation & Open Space Element
                                              Conservation &. Open Space Plan
                                            A distinct combination of physical setting, agricultural land,
                                            creeks and natural open space provide a unique identity for San
                                            Juan Capistrano. The Conservation & Open Space Plan
                                            establishes ari approach to protect and preserve these assets.
                                            The Plan addresses the Conservation & Open Space issues
                                            identified in the previous section. The related goals and policies
                                            serve as the basis of the Plan and are supported by approaches
                                            to protect and enhance natural resources. The Conservation &
                                            Open Space Implementation Program is an extension of this
                                            plan and contains specific programs to achieve environmental
                                            goals related to natural resources and open space.
               Open Space Resources         Open Space is an important community amenity. San Juan's
                                            open space resources include privately-owned open space and
                                            recreation facilities, public parks, publicly-owned open space,
                                            privately-owned golf courses, easements to the City, Prima
                                            Deshecha Regional Park, private and public equestrian facilities,
                                            creeks and drainage ways, and agricultural land. In addition to
                                            providing opportunities for recreation and leisure, open space
                                            and parkland enhance aesthetics and community character. This
                                            section of the Conservation & Open Space Element describes
                                            the strategy to maintain and enhance open space resources
                                            within the City.
                                            Designated Open Space
                                            Land for preservation of open space and proVIsion of
                                            recreational opportunities is included in three Open Space
                                            Designations in the Land Use Element: General Open Space,
                                            Open Space Recreation, and Natural Open Space. These land
                                            use designations account for approximately 2, 649 acres ofland
                                            within the City, or 30 percent of the total acreage within the
                                            City. The location oflands designated as open space within the
                                            City is depicted on Figure COS-t .
                                            The General Open Space designation provides for a
                                            combination of open space and recreational uses. The Open
                                            Space Recreation category allows for the preservation of open
                                            space and outdoor recreational facilities including golf courses,
                                            tennis clubs and equestrian clubs. Land within the Natural
                                            Open Space category is generally maintained as natural open
                                            space with minimal improvements and facilities. Many of the
                                            City's natural landform features and open space resources,
                                             such
         Revised May 7, 2002                            13                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
  Conservation & Open Space Element
                                                       General Open Space         -        Specialty Park
                                       ffi:i~~;;.:~:{j Natural Open Space         !iillill Regional Park
                                       I~??HI          Open Space Recreation      -        Recreational Commercial
                                       f~g$ggiJ        Neighborhood Park          -        Agri-Business
                                       ~               Community Park
                                                                                           City Boundary
                                                                                  ~ Sphere of Influence
                                                                                  ~
                                                                   .Scrn Clement.
         E9 · -. .
    Pacilk Ol;eg-;········· ...
                                                                                     Figure COS-I
0           1/2                 I Mile                          Open Space Resources
December 14, 1999                          14.                              San Juan Capistrano General Plan

                                                                     Conservation & Open Space Element
                                             as the ridgelines and floodplains are protected under theN atural
                                             Open Space and General Open Space designations. The
                                             General Plan Designated Ridgelines are depicted in Figure
                                             COS-2.
                                             In order to preserve and enhance the City's open space
                                            resources, the City will implement a program that supports the
                                            joint-venture use of open space areas to reduce City
                                            maintenance costs and increase City revenues for maintaining
                                            historic resources, natural open space and parks and
                                            recreational facilities. The City will also coordinate with public
                                            and private organizations to provide revenue generating open
                                            space uses such as golf courses and environmental banking sites
                                            to generate revenue to protect important open space resources.
                                            Designated Parkland/Recreation Commercial
                                            The Land Use Element provides five parks and recreational land
                                            use designations which serve to protect and utilize open space
                                            resources within the City. These five designations cover
                                            approximately 755 acres of land within the City and include:
                                            Neighborhood Park, Community Park, Specialty Park, Regional
                                            Park and Recreation Commercial. Lands designated for park
                                            and recreational use are depicted on Figure COS-1. The Parks
                                            & Recreation Element provides a complete inventory and
                                            description of existing and planned parks, equestrian facilities,
                                            recreational facilities, and trails within the City. Figure COS- 3
                                            illustrates the location of existing and planned parks, equestrian
                                            facilities, recreational facilities and trails within the planning
                                            area. The City's plan to maintain and expand these recreational
                                            areas and trails is also described in the Parks & Recreation
                                            Element.
                                            Prima Deshecha County Regional Park
                                            The single largest open space area of the City, located at the
                                            southerly boundary of the City and depicted on Figure COS-I
                                            represents the proposed Prima Deshecha County Regional
                                            Park. Leading from this site are various hiking, bicycling and
                                            equestrian trails, also identified on Figure COS-3. The City
                                            will continue to monitor the County's management of the site
                                            evaluating the long-term ability to meet the required plans and
                                            standards for future use of the site as a regional park. The City
                                            will also update the Open Space Master Plan to ensure the
                                            proper planning for the proposed Prima Deshecha County
                                            Regional Park.
         Revised May 7, 2002                             15                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
  Conservation & Open Space Element
                                       0           Major Ridgelines
                                       0           City Boundary
                                       I. •••" "I  Sphere of/nf/uence
                                       Source: O!f rf San Juan Capistrano General Plan
                                         \       (March 1993)
                                           \
                                       /~
                                         ··~    .,.
                    '•
                                                             Figure COS-2
0        1/2      I Mile                            Major Ridgelines
December 14, 1999                   16             San Juan Capistrano General Plan

                                              Conservation & Open Space Element
                        Bike Routes                         Rt!leretltional Tmlls
                        1......--1   Bike Path Class 1      ,...,..........., Hlking/Equestrian/Mtn.
                                                                              Bike Trail {Unpaved)
                        r:-;-;1
                        t..:..::._j Bike Lane Class 2       [a                  Hiking/Equestrian/Min.
                                                                                Bike Trail Feeder 'Trail
                        1. •J
                            4 ..     Bike Route
                                     (Sign Only)
                                                            j4 "' "' 6     I    Not Owned or Maintained
                                                                               by City
                        j " " ~c.; 1 Proposed Bike          12}               Proposed Trail
                                     Route
                                                                 0             Park Facility (Numbers
                                                                               correspond to list provided
                                                                               in Table PR-2)
                                                             1,... '"I          City Boundary
                                                             I. •••••1          Sphere oflnfluence
                                                             Source: 09' if San Juan Capistrano,
                                                                              Recreational Trails '?[SanJuan
                                                                              Capistrano Map
                                                                   Figure COS-3
                                                         Parks, Trails and
0       V2        I MUe                        Recreational Facilities
December 14t 1999       17                             San Juan Capistrano General Plan

          Conservation & Open Space Element
                                             Creeks and Floodplains
                                             The City's creeks - San Juan Creek, Trabuco Creek and Oso
                                             Creek and creekbeds are important open space resources within
                                             the community. The creeks and associated floodplain areas
                                             provide recreational opportunities as well as valuable open
                                             space for preservation of important biological resources and
                                             riparian habitat. The preservation and ecltancement of the
                                             City's creeks and floodplains is addressed in the Floodplain
                                             Element of this General Plan.
                                             Open Space Master Plan
                                             In June of 1992, the City adopted an Open Space Master Plan
                                            that consisted of three major parts: a) an open space land use
                                            concept; b) a community parks and recreation component; and
                                            c) an agricultural management component. The Open Space
                                            and Land Use Concept section of the Plan establishes a long-
                                            term overall direction for open space land and community
                                            facilities within the City. Within the Community Park and
                                            Recreation section there are elements that define direction and
                                            use of remaining open space sites within the City. The
                                            Agricultural Management section of the Open Space Master
                                            Plan provides direction for the continued use and preservation
                                            of various types of agricultural lands, marketing of produce,
                                            educational/interpretive features, and other operational
                                            considerations. The City will update and implement the Open
                                            Space Master Plan to ensure proper preservation, maintenance
                                            and management of open space, recreation resources, and
                                            agricultural activity in the City.
                  Natural Resources         Biological Resources
                                            San Juan Capistrano lies within both the Coastal and Southern
                                            Subregions of the County of Orange Natural Community
                                            Conservation Plan and Habitat Conservation Plan (N CCP).
                                            Due to the extensive amount of open space and floodplain
                                            areas, a variety of biological resources exist within the City.
                                            Important vegetation communities located in San Juan
                                            Capistrano include coastal sage scrub (a majority of which is
                                            located within the NCCP permanent reserve system) and
                                            extensive riparian habitat along the major creeks.
                                            Characteristic species of coastal sage scrub include California
                                            sagebrush and several species of sage and buckwheat. Riparian
                                            habitat includes trees, shrubs and herbs growing along
                                            watercourses and water bodies, including herbaceous riparian,
                                            riparian scrub and riparian forest. Riparian areas are variable,
                                            but frequently consist of willow I mulefat scrub along
         Revised May 7, 2002                            18                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version htto://www.fineprint.com
                                                                   Conservation & Open Space Element
                                            intermittent and perennial lowland streams. These existing
                                            vegetation areas are depicted on Figure COS-+.
                                            Sensitive wildlife species identified or likely to occur in San
                                            Juan Capistrano include the southwestern arroyo toad,
                                            southwestern pond turtle, the coastal California gnatcatcher,
                                            and least Bell's vireo.       The southwestern arroyo toad,
                                            southwestern pond turtle and ieast Beii 's vireo are iikely to
                                            occur along the City's creeks and streambeds. The coastal
                                            California gnatcatcher inhabits sage scrub almost exclusively
                                            and breeding season begins as early as mid-February and
                                            extends into August. Sensitive species data indicates the
                                            presence of approximately 50 California gnatcatcher territories
                                            within areas of coastal sage scrub in SanJuan Capistrano, east of
                                            Interstate 5 .
                                            Other protected species expected to use San Juan Capistrano
                                           habitat areas include American badger, mountain lion and mule
                                           deer. These species are generally found in grasslands,
                                           woodlands, open scrub and mountain meadow habitats.
                                           Wildlife Corridors
                                           Based on NCCP surveys, biologists believe that a number of
                                           species, including California gnatcatcher, coyote, fox and
                                           others use the Oso and Trabuco Creeks and adjacent lands as
                                           corridors for movement between the Coastal and Southern
                                           Subregional N CCP open space areas. In addition to the
                                           biological corridors and core areas, an extensive area of
                                           grassland and scrub in the southern portion of San Juan
                                           Capistrano supports numerous sensitive species. Although
                                           constrained, this area provides some measure of connectivity to
                                           additional less disturbed habitats to the east.          Despite
                                           alterations, San Juan Creek also provides connectivity from
                                           eastern off-site habitat areas to the southern San Juan
                                           Capistrano grasslands and scrub areas.
                                           All sensitive species and habitat are protected by the California
                                           Environmental Quality Act and are subject to regulation by the
                                           U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the California Department
                                           of Fish and Game. The City is also a participant in Orange
                                           County's Natural Community Conservation Planning (NCCP)
                                           effort which serves to protect important biological resources.
                                           The City will continue to assess development proposals for
                                           potential impacts to significant natural resources pursuant to
                                           the California Environmental Quality Act, Natural
                                           Communities Conservation Plan and associated federal
                                           regulations.
         Revised May 7, 2002                           19                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FmePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
ConseiVation & Open Space Element
                                       Scrub                -          Watercourse
                                  -    Grasslands           ~          Agriculture
                                  -Riparian                 HHHHI      Developed
                                  -    Lake/Reservoirs      B          Disturbed
                                                            0          City Boundary
                                                            I. ••••·1  Sphere of Influence
                                                            Source: Coun9' if Orange Plannjng and
                                                                     Services Deportment, Mappina
                                                                    from Aerial Phocogroph ( J99 8)
    LGgC~na
    Nlgu-'
---:  I
         ...__
   Podlic~··· ........
                       '····.•.
                                                                  Figure COS-4
0                                         Vegetation Communities
December 14, 1999                   20                 San Juan Capistrano General Plan

                                                                   Conservation & Open Space Element
                                             Landform Features
                                             Nat ural landform features are located throughout the City and
                                            include the hillsides and ridgelines surrounding the City,
                                            canyons, creeks, and prominent trees. Before development is
                                            approved, the City will assess development proposals for
                                            potential impacts to important geologic and scenic landform
                                            features, watershed areas, ridgeli.nes, soils and potential erosion
                                            problems. This will be considered in the assessments for
                                            possible preservation.
                          Agricultural      San Juan Capistrano has historically been an agricultural
                             Resources      community with its rich valley soils providing a wide variety of
                                            agricultural crops. The City recognizes the many inherent
                                            benefits of maintaining agricultural land uses in the community.
                                            Agriculture helps to preserve a rural character, maintain open
                                            space,      and reduce further degradation of the natural
                                            environment. Currently, farming activities within the City
                                            occur on parcels as small as one acre, to parcels over 150 acres
                                            in size. Agricultural uses include orchard and truck crops,
                                            rangeland, horticulture growing areas, feed and livestock
                                            production. Figure COS-1 depicts the location of existing
                                            agricultural lands in the City.
                                            Approximately 70 acres of land within the City are designated
                                            as Agri-Business. Parcels designated as Agri-Business are
                                            depicted on Figure COS-1. The Agri-Business land use
                                            designation provides for the production and sale of agricultural
                                            crops, including but not limited to row crops, orchards,
                                            vineyards and nurseries. The City currently owns and through
                                            contracts with the private sector, actively farms 28 acres ofland
                                            designated as Agri-Business. The City will continue to operate
                                            this farm as a food production site, as well as an example of the
                                            importance of farming in the City's history.
                                            The City's Open Space Master Plan contains an Agriculture and
                                            Open Space Management section that establishes a strategy of
                                            incentives to preserve and protect the City's remaining
                                            agricultural resources as identified in Figure COS-1 . Equestrian
                                            uses are also addressed in the Agriculture and Open Space
                                            Management section of the Open Space Master Plan. The
                                            development and preservation of equestrian uses is provided for
                                            within open space area in the planning area. These uses provide
                                            a source of income to operate and maintain open space
                                            resources. The City will update the Agriculture and Open
                                            Space Management section of the Open Space Master Plan
                                            when it updates the Open Space Master Plan.
         Revised May 7, 2002                             21                  San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FtnePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
          Conservation & Open Space Element
           Compatible Development           Preservation of the various open space areas can shape and-guide
           and Community Identity           future development, control the direction and timing of
                                            growth, provide buffers between conflicting land uses, and
                                            establish continuous corridors between major open space areas.
                                            Development of the City's open space resources such as the
                                            major ridgelines and floodplain areas is discouraged in order to
                                            ensure that development integrates and preserves areas
                                            designated for scenic, conservation or public safety reasons.
                                            City review of land use proposals also encourages high quality
                                            design in new development in open space areas in order to
                                            maintain the low-density character of the City.
                          Air Quality      The City of San Juan Capistrano is located within the South
                                            Coast Air Basin, a non-attainment area for federal and state air
                                           quality standards for ozone and state standards for particulate
                                           matter less than ten microns in diameter (PM 10). The City
                                           lies within the South Coast Air Quality Management District
                                           Source Receptor Area 21 . At present there is no active
                                           monitoring station in Area 21- Capistrano Valley as ozone and
                                           carbon monoxide measurements were made at San Juan
                                           Capistrano for a period of time during the 1970s and 1980s, but
                                           pollution levels were much lower than in other parts of the air
                                           basin and monitoring was therefore discontinued. The nearest
                                           monitoring station is the El T oro station in the Area 19-
                                           Saddleback Valley Monitoring Area.
                                           Motor vehicles are the major source of regional emissions
                                           throughout the air basin and within San Juan Capistrano. No
                                           major point source emitters such as heavy industrial uses are
                                           located within the City. The City will work with the South
                                           Coast Air Quality Management District and the most recent Air
                                           Quality Management Plan to improve the regional
                                           transportation system and regional air quality.
                                           Energy conservation is another strategy for improving air
                                           quality. Pollutants are generated by the combustion of fossil
                                           fuels to produce electricity, and by the combustion of natural
                                           gas. Reducing energy usage decreases the amount of pollutants
                                           generated. Energy requirement can be diminished through
                                           innovative architectural design, building construction,
                                           structural orientation and landscaping.
                                           The City will promote energy conservation by implementing
                                           state Title 24 energy performance requirements through
                                           building codes. In addition, the relationship between project
                                           design and future energy requirements will be considered when
                                           reviewing proposals for new development. Promotion of
                                           utility company incentive programs to retrofit existing
                                           development
         Revised May 7, 2002                           22                  San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FmePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http:l/www.fineprint.com
                                                                  Conservation & Open Space Element
                                            with energy efficient lighting, air conditioning and heating
                                            systems can be beneficial. Energy will be conserved in public
                                            buildings and the provision of electric charging vehicle areas
                                            will be encouraged in new public and private developments.
                      Water Quality         Both local and regional water resources are important to the
                                            City. Urban activity in San Juan Capistrano affects regional
                                            water resources as weB as iocal sources. 'rhe City purchases
                                           imported water for distribution. The supply of imported water
                                           is limited and conservation efforts are needed to ensure
                                           adequate emergency storage and future supply.               Water
                                           conservation will be encouraged in the City in the following
                                           ways:
                                                    •  Expanding the production of reclaimed water and
                                                       developing new use for reclaimed water;
                                                    •  Requiring the use of drought resistant plant species
                                                       in landscaping for private and public areas,
                                                       including parks;
                                                    •  Establishing water        conservation     education
                                                       programs; and
                                                    •  Requiring the incorporation of water conservation
                                                       devices, including low-flush toilets, flow restriction
                                                       devices and water conserving appliances, in new
                                                       development, public projects and rehabilitation
                                                       projects.
                                           The City's three surface creeks, San Juan Creek, Oso Creek
                                           and Trabuco Creek, as well as their tributaries are subject to
                                           pollutants and sediment carried in runoff. The pollutants in
                                           urban runoff include landscape pesticides and fertilizers,
                                           automobile products and degreasers. Urban pollutants degrade
                                           water quality and impact wildlife and plants dependent on
                                           aquatic habitat. The City is a co-permittee with the County of
                                           Orange in the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
                                           (NPDES) program, which is designed to reduce pollutants in
                                           runoff. According to the NPDES permit, all new development
                                           projects and substantial rehabilitation projects will be required
                                           to incorporate Best Management Practices (BMPs) as identified
                                           in the County Drainage Area Master Plan (DAMP).
                                           Implementation ofBMPs in San Juan Capistrano will enhance
                                           water quality in surface creeks.
         Revised May 7, 2002                          23                   San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FmePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com

          Conservation & Open Space Element
                                           The City will continue to monitor water quality and construct
                                           needed infrastructure improvements as identified in the City's
                                           Water Master Plan and the Army Corps of Engineers San Juan
                                           Creek Watershed Manaaement Study.
                      Human Resources      The history of the SanJuan Capistrano community is marked by
                                           a diverse population and a variety of cultures, active public
                                           involvement and concern for civic issues. The City considers
                                           these human resources a valuable asset to be enhanced and
                                           continually cultivated. Making information accessible to all
                                           groups within the community will support public involvement
                                           and stimulate community interest. Various media approaches
                                           include newsletters, informational brochures, cable television
                                           programming, radio and newspaper announcements, and
                                           presentations to community groups. Citizen input will be
                                           actively solicited during the early stages of major public or
                                           private development projects and regulatory programs.
         Revised l\ltay 7, 2002                       24                 San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FmePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com




































                                                                                              Comn1unity Design Element
                                                                                              Table of Contents
Section                                                                                                                               Page
Introduction
        Purpose of the Community Design Element . . . . . . . .                    . . . . . ..  . . . . . . . . . . ..  . . . . . . ..  1
        Scope and Content of the Community Design Element                          . . . . . ..  . . . . . . . . . . ..  . . . . . . ..  1
        Related Plans and Programs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .       . . . . . ..  . . . . . . . . . . ..  . . . . . . ..  1
        Relationship to Other General Plan Elements . . . . . . .                  . . . . . ..  . . . . . . . . . . ..  . . . . . . ..  3
Issues, Goals and Policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
        Image and Identity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
        Related Goals and Policies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Community' Desigt1 Plan . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
        Image and Identity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
December 14, 1999                                                                            San Juan Capistrano General Plan
Community Design Element
                                        List of Tables
Table                                                                                                                  Page
CD-1  Related Goals and Policies by Element . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
December 14, 1999                             ii                             San Juan Capistrano General Plan
                                                                                   Community Design Element
                                                                                           Introduction
                       Purpose of the       The Community Design Element addresses the conservation
                  Community Design          and enhancement of the visual quality of San Juan Capistrano's
                             Element        environment. During the past 25 years, the City of San Juan
                                            Capistrano, along with the southern Orange County region, has
                                            experienced rapid growth. New development creates pressure
                                            on the existing natural and human-created features that form
                                            the character of the community. The Community Design
                                            Element helps to protect and enhance the identity of the
                                            community by addressing: 1) the protection of the natural
                                            hillside and various views created by the hillsides; 2) the
                                            protection and enhancement of other natural features (e.g.,
                                            major creeks and floodplains); 3) the preservation and
                                            enhancement of the historical character of the community; 4)
                                            the harmonious incorporation of new development into existing
                                            public and private development; and 5) the maintenance of the
                                            community  · ' s "smaII -v1·11 age, ruraI atmosphere ".
                  Scope and Content         The Community Design Element is not a state-mandated
                   of the Comntunity        element, but is an important part of the San Juan Capistrano
                      Design Element        General Plan. The Element is comprised of three sections: 1)
                                            Introduction, 2) Issues, Goals and Policies, and 3) the
                                            Community Design Plan. In the Issues, Goals and Policies
                                            section, major issues related to preservation and enhancement
                                            of the community character of San Juan Capistrano are
                                            identified and related goals and policies are established to
                                            address these issues. The goals, which are overall statements of
                                            the community's desires are comprised ofbroad statements of
                                            purpose and direction. The policies serve as guides for
                                            preserving the identifying character of San Juan Capistrano.
                                            The Plan explains how the goals and policies will be achieved
                                            and implemented, while the General Plan Implementation
                                            Program, contained in Appendix A, identifies the specific
                                            implementation programs for this element.
                  Related Plans and         A number of existing plans and programs exist which directly
                           Programs         relate to the goals of the Community Design Element. Enacted
                                            through state and local action, these plans and programs are
                                            administered by agencies with responsibility for their
                                            enforcement. These plans and programs are described below.
         May 7, 2002                                                              San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com

          Community Design Element
                                            California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and
                                            Guidelines
                                            The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) was
                                            adopted by the state legislature in response to a public mandate
                                            for thorough environmental analysis of projects that might
                                            affect the environment. The provisions of the law and
                                            environmental review procedure are described in the CEQA
                                            Statutes and the CEQA Guidelines which were amended in
                                            1998. Implementation of CEQA ensures that during the
                                            decision making stage of development, City officials and the
                                            general public will be able to assess the environmental impacts
                                            associated with private and public development projects.
                                            Architectural Design Guidelines
                                            San Juan Capistrano adopted Architectural Design Guidelines
                                            in January 1991. These Guidelines were created to implement
                                            the General Plan goals and policies for the preservation and
                                            enhancement of the character of San Juan Capistrano. The
                                            Guidelines serve to assist architects, design professionals and
                                            developers in preserving and enhancing the special qualities and
                                            fabric of the community. Also the guidelines are intended to
                                            provide assistance to persons preparing development proposals,
                                            non-residential and higher density residential (eight dwelling
                                            units per acre) projects, within the City.
                                            Historic Depiction Program
                                            City Council Policy 606 established the City's Historic
                                            Depiction Program (HOP).           The HOP seeks to create
                                            architectural elements which provide historical context by
                                            emphasizing events, people and places which have been
                                            historically significant to the development of the community.
                                            The policy applies to .all non-residential projects including
                                            commercial, industrial, institutional and similar uses.
                                            City of San Juan Capistrano Zoning Ordinance
                                            The City's Zoning Ordinance contains ordinances that address
                                            design related issues such as design review for certain projects,
                                            sign review and tree preservation. Implementation of these
                                            ordinances works towards protecting and enhancing the visual
                                            character of the community.
         May 7, 2002                                    2                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                               Community Design Element
                     Relationship to        While the Community Design Element is not a state-mandated
                      Other General         element, state planning law does require that the Element be
                      Plan Elements         consistent with the other General Plan elements. Each of the
                                            elements forms an independent piece of the General Plan, yet
                                            all of the elements are interrelated to a degree. This
                                            interrelatedness and overlap between elements ensures that the
                                            community's goals are achieved through the policies and
                                            implementation programs contained in each of the elements.
                                            The Community Design Element is closely related to the Land
                                            Use, Conservation& Open Space, Safety, Housing and Cultural
                                            Resources Elements.
                                            The Land Use Element and Community Design Elements work
                                            together to mold the physical appearance of the community.
                                            The Land Use Element establishes the general type, location
                                            and amount of each land use within the City, while the
                                            Community Design Element guides the visual appearance of the
                                            development allowed under the Land Use Element. The Land
                                            Use, Conservation & Open Space, and Safety Elements also
                                            include policies to preserve large areas of open space which
                                            assist in the preservation of the rural and natural visual character
                                            of the community and benefit the safety of residents by limiting
                                            development in high risk areas.
                                            The Housing Element is also affected by the Community Design
                                            Element. The design criteria contained in the Community
                                            Design Element impose design constraints on residential
                                            development, especially in the hillside areas where the size and
                                            mass of residential development should be controlled to limit
                                            the visual impact. Since the character of the community is
                                            intertwined with the City's history, the Community Design
                                            Element helps to implement the Cultural Resources Element by
                                            establishing criteria for maintaining the historical integrity of
                                            the community.
         May 7, 2002                                     3                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
          Community Design Element
                                                           Issues, Goals, and Policies
                                            The visual character of San Juan Capistrano, a community
                                            within a beautiful valley surrounded by natural hillsides,
                                            distinguishes it from surrounding areas. This character is also
                                            established through the architectural styles of buildings and the
                                            community's historic features.
                                            Three major community design issues are addressed in the
                                            goals, policies and implementation actions of this Element.
                                            These major issues are related to the City's image and identity
                                            and include: (1) preserving and promoting those characteristics
                                            of the community which create a sense of place; (2) preserving
                                            the historical character of San Juan Capistrano; and (3)
                                            preserving and enhancing the natural features which contribute
                                            to the visual character of the City. Each issue and its related
                                            goals, policies and implementation actions are identified and
                                            discussed in the following section.
                  Image and Identity        San Juan Capistrano traditionally has had a strong identifiable
                                            sense of place. Large amounts of open space, a rural and village
                                            atmosphere, high-quality architectural design, and the historic
                                            character of the community identify San Juan Capistrano as its
                                            own distinct place. The City also has multiple entryways which
                                            can be enhanced to define this sense of place. Preservation and
                                            promotion of those features which contribute to this sense of
                                            place are important.
                                            Community Desion Goall: Encouraoe and preserve a sense
                                            of place.
                                            Policy 1.1: Preserve significant amounts ofland and important
                                            natural features for open space.
                                            Policy 1.2: Encourage high-quality and human scale design in
                                            development to maintain the character of the City.
                                            Policy 1.3: Encourage the participation by all members of the
                                            community in activities which promote the City and create
                                            local pride.
                                            The Mission and the Spanish history, as well as the Native
                                            American and Mexican heritage of San Juan Capistrano can be
                                            seen in its architecture and design. The scale of existing
         May 7, 2002                                    4-                  San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                             Community Design Element
                                            development reflects the City's small-village, rural past. To
                                            preserve the character of the City, new development will need
                                            to complement the historic theme of the City while meeting the
                                            needs of newer residents and business economic development.
                                            Community Desion Goal 2: Preserve the historic character
                                            of the community.
                                            Policy 2.1: Encourage development which complements the
                                            City's traditional, historic character through site design,
                                            architecture, and landscaping.
                                            San Juan Capistrano is surrounded by hills, with three creeks
                                            traversing the valley floor. These features, along with the large
                                            amounts of open space remaining within the City contribute to
                                            its character and provide visual quality for the community.
                                            Community Desion Goal 3: Preserve and enhance natural
                                           features.
                                            Policy 3.1: Limit development of important natural character-
                                            istics such as ridgelines, unique hillside features and creeks.
                                            Policy 3.2: Encourage the recreational use of natural features,
                                            such as hillsides and creeks.
                                            Policy 3.3: Preserve and enhance scenic transportation cor-
                                            ridors, including Interstate 5 and the railroad.
                                            Policy 3.4: Preserve important viewsheds.
                     Related Goals          The goals and policies described in the Community Design
                        and Policies        Element are related to and support subjects included within
                                            other General Plan elements. In turn, many goals and policies
                                            from other elements directly or indirectly support the goals and
                                            policies of the Community Design Element. These supporting
                                            goals and policies are identified in Table CD-1.
         May 7, 2002
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
         Community Design Element
                                                        Table CD-1
                                     Related Goals and Policies by Element
                                                              Community Design Issue Area
                          General Plan Elements                      Image and Identity
                          Land Use                           1.2, 2.2, 3.1, 3.2, 4.1,4.2, 4.3,
                                                             5.1, 7.1, 7.2, 7.3, 7.4
                          Housing
                          Circulation                        1.1, 3.1, 4.1
                          Safety                             1.2
                          Conservation & Open Space          1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 2.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4,
                                                             3.1, 3.2, 4.1, 4.1, 5.2, 5.3, 7.3
                          Noise                              1.1, 1.2, 2. I, 2.2, 2.3, 3.1
                          Cultural Resources                 1.1, 1.2,1.3
                                                                     ',{                ,>"        ',
                          Commtmity Design                                                  ,',,' ,,
                          Growth Management
                          Parks & Recreation                 2.1, 2.2, 2.3
                          Public Facilities & Utilities
                          Floodplain Management              1.1, 2.1, 2.2, 3.1, 3.2
         May 7, 2002                                        6                        San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
                                                                              Community Design Element
                                                               Community Design Plan
                                             The community of San Juan Capistrano is fortunate to contain
                                             many natural and human created features which form the City; s
                                            unique physical character. By addressing these features in its
                                             General Plan, the community has the unique opportunity to
                                             conserve and develop a series of interrelated environments that
                                            enhance the traditional character of the City. The Community
                                            Design Plan develops a design framework to guide future
                                            development and redevelopment to ensure continuity of the
                                            community's image and identity.
                Image and Identity          As stated in the introduction to this Element, the Community
                                            Design Plan helps to protect and enhance the image and identity
                                            of the community by addressing: 1) the protection of the
                                            natural hillsides and various views created by the hillsides; 2)
                                            the protection and enhancement of other natural features (e. g.,
                                            major creeks and floodplains); 3) the preservation and
                                            enhancement of the historical character of the community; 4)
                                            the harmonious incorporation of new development into existing
                                            public and private development; and 5) the maintenance of the
                                            community's "small-village, rural atmosphere". To address
                                            these issues, the Plan focuses in the following design factors:
                                                 Building materials, including roofing materials;
                                                 Building placement in terms of views both to and from
                                                surrounding areas;
                                                 Building height (form and mass of building structures);
                                                 The scale and form of already developed areas and their
                                                relationship to existing open spaces;
                                                 The use of landscaping;
                                                 The design and placement of other structures (signs,
                                                freeways, utility towers, etc.); and,
                                                The general treatment ofhillsides to create buildable sites.
                                            Using the above design factors as a basis, specific design
                                            considerations have been identified for specific areas and land
                                            uses within the community. These design considerations should
                                            be incorporated into the design of development proposals for
                                            the identified areas or land uses. By incorporating the following
                                            considerations into new development and redevelopment,
                                            impacts to the existing character and identity of the City will be
                                            minimized.
         May 7, 2002                                    7                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com
          Community Design Element
                                             The General Community
                                              Implementation of the following design criteria will ensure that
                                             development throughout the community includes the
                                             traditional historic, small- village themes which characterize the
                                             City:
                                             •    Compatibility of building materials with the natural and
                                                 existing human environment;
                                             •    Use of low building profiles;
                                             •    Discourage strip commercial development along arterial
                                                 streets;
                                             •    Use of visually pleasing roof materials, especially for
                                                 buildings in the valley areas visible from surrounding
                                                 hillsides;
                                             •   Use of open space to distinguish and separate different types
                                                 ofland use;
                                             •   Discouragement of large, sterile expanses of uses such as
                                                 large parking lots or storage yards;
                                             •   Use of landscaping;
                                             •   Sensitive treatment of the natural topography, including
                                                 ridgelines;
                                             •   Integration of pedestrian and bicycle trails into the open
                                                 space network;
                                             •   Inclusion of energy conservation measures in new project
                                                 design;
                                             •   Use of appropriate spaces or screening buffers between
                                                 conflicting uses; and,
                                             •   Sign controls .
                                             Mission District
                                             The following design criteria for the Mission District work to
                                             create a human-scaled downtown area which encourages people
                                             to walk and interact with each other in a rural, small town
                                             atmosphere:
                                             •   Consideration of the Community Design goals and policies
                                                 contained within the Historic Town Center Master Plan;
                                             •   Centralization of parking areas in more convenient locations
                                                 (not necessarily tied to each existing or proposed use);
                                             •   Well-designed pedestrian access for both new and existing
                                                 uses;
                                             •   Use of open space in the district to promote a small-scale,
                                                 rural atmosphere;
                                             •   Use of plazas, patios and arcades;
                                                 Compatibility of building materials;
         May 7, 2002                                                           San Juan Capistrano
PDF created with FinePrint pdfF actory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com

                                                                             Community Design Element
                                            •    Development of coordinated graphic designs for private and
                                                 public signs;
                                            •    Consideration of specialty design themes for certain
                                                 portions of the Mission District; and
                                            •    Building heights in the Mission District must not
                                                 overshadow the existing heritage; building heights shall be
                                                 kept to a minimum and should generally not exceed two
                                                 stories. Three story elements should only be considered if
                                                 the overall height would not exceed a common two-story
                                                 structure.
                                            Other Neighborhood Commercial Areas
                                            Understanding that not all commercial activity will occur
                                            within the downtown area, the criteria which follow will ensure
                                            that those neighborhood commercial centers located
                                            throughout the community blend into the environment and
                                            enhance the surrounding community:
                                            •   Emphasis on clustering commercial activities;
                                            •   Development of integrated centers, with emphasis on
                                                pedestrian access and useable open spaces;
                                            •   Building designs that are sensitive to view from all sides;
                                                Sensitivity to the natural contours of the site;
                                            •   Appropriate use of screening materials for peripheral areas;
                                            •   Adequate parking area landscaping; and
                                            •   Upgrading of existing commercial areas .
                                            Permanent Open Space
                                            With 40 percent of the City preserved for permanent open
                                            space, open space areas form a large part of the visual character
                                            of the community. The subsequent Permanent Open Space
                                            criteria help to preserve and protect this resource from
                                            surrounding development:
                                            •   Development of an integrated bicycle, pedestrian and
                                                equestrian trails system in open space areas;
                                            •   Imposition of strong design controls on uses adjacent to
                                                open space areas;
                                            •   Maintenance of Trabuco, San Juan and Oso Creeks in as
                                                natural a state as possible while protecting life and
                                                property; and;
                                            •   Development of incentives that encourage designs
                                                integrated with permanent open space features.
         May 7, 2002
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com

         Community Design Element
                                            Circulation Corridors
                                            With Interstate 5 bisecting San Juan Capistrano, and several
                                            major arterials traversing the City, the following criteria work
                                            to minimize the impacts of the circulation system on the
                                            surrounding community:
                                            •   Maintenance, where feasible, of open space alongside
                                                freeways;
                                            •   Use of sound barriers, and other sound attenuating
                                                elements along heavily traveled highways or other major
                                                transportation routes;
                                            •   Use of minimal street widths in hillside areas;
                                            •   Use of the following design standards for scenic highways or
                                                corridors: 1) prohibition of on-street parking except in
                                                certain designated areas; 2) undergrounding of utilities; 3)
                                                the use of rolled curbs, where feasible; 4) the extensive use
                                                oflandscaped parkways and median strips; 5) the extensive
                                                use of setbacks to soften urban developments; and, 6) the
                                                use of a variety of materials for sidewalks;
                                                Physical separation of vehicular and non-vehicular traffic in
                                                scenic corridors; and,
                                            •   Minimization of night lighting, particularly along Interstate
                                                5 and at the entry points to the City.
                                            Hillside Residential
                                            Surrounded by hillsides, the subsequent Hillside Residential '
                                            criteria provide guidelines which will preserve the visual
                                            character of the City, while allowing well-designed residential
                                            development to occur:
                                            •   Maintenance of a low, horizontal profile;
                                            •   Preservation of unique natural topographical features;
                                                Landform alterations in hillside areas shall be minimized to
                                                that which is necessary to blend any development into the
                                                natural environment while insuring public safety;
                                                Maximization of views and open space;
                                            •   Sensitivity to conflicting views from one unit to another;
                                                Discouragement of building masses that impact ridgeline
                                                views;
                                            •   Well-planned lot sizes in relation to the existing
                                                topography;
                                                Sensitive location of streets to the natural topography; and,
                                                Discouragement of street lighting except at selected
                                                intersections.
         May 7, 2002                                   10                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineorint.com

                                                                             Community Design Element
                                            Residential Valley Areas
                                            The valley floor contains the highest concentration of residential
                                            development, and also contains much of the community's
                                            historical and natural resources. The criteria which follow
                                            encourage the design of attractive residential communities
                                            which enhance the valley floors and encourage higher density
                                            residential development:
                                            •   Clustering of structures to maximize open space areas;
                                            •   Well-planned use ofboth one- and two-story structures;
                                            •   Use of curvilinear streets;
                                            •   Encouragement of more useable open spaces (both for
                                                active and passive uses);
                                            •   Encouragement ofhigh building design quality; and,
                                                Encouragement of large building masses, particularly in
                                                higher density areas.
                                            Industrial Developments
                                            Industrial development provides revenue sources for the
                                            community, but can also create large areas of hard surfaces
                                            which detract from the visual character of the community. The
                                            following Industrial Development criteria promote industrial
                                            designs which will be more compatible with the surrounding
                                            community:
                                                Use of large landscaped setbacks from heavily traveled
                                                streets;
                                            •   Use of high quality building materials;
                                            •   Appropriate screening of outdoor storage areas or
                                                equipment; and,
                                            •   Discouragement of industrial uses that typically fail to meet
                                                design standards.
         May 7, 2002                                   11                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com

         Community Design Element
                                             Scenic Corridors
                                             Major travelways including both vehicular and rail provide the
                                             public with a visual image of the quality oflife envisioned by the
                                             community. The following design criteria is provided to ensure
                                             that these scenic corridors are developed with a sense of care to
                                            aesthetic values:
                                                 Buffer to screen existing unslightly features outside of the
                                                 right-of-way.
                                            •    Use of innovative design features for bicycle, sidewalks,
                                                 equestrian trails, boundary walls, and parkways.
                                            •    Attention to building design features that are proposed
                                                 adjacent to a scenic corridor.
                                            Scenic corridors include designated arterials contained in the
                                            Circulation Element and the railroad corridor that passes
                                            through the City.
                                            Public Facilities
                                            Public development also contributes to the visual appearance of
                                            a city. The following design criteria ensure that public
                                            development will also benefit the community:
                                            •    Use of similar design standards as those imposed on private
                                                 developments;
                                            •    Use of appropriate landscape screening in large asphalt
                                                 areas, such as parking, tennis courts or playgrounds.
                                                 Encouragement of passive recreational facilities in public
                                                 areas; and,
                                                 Integration of public facilities with the streets cape.
                                            In addition to enforcing the design criteria identified above, the
                                            City will also develop a design and improvement plan which
                                            will follow themes found throughout the. community by
                                            enhancing visual characteristics, including landscaping and
                                            identification graphics, and physical improvements to lighting
                                            and major public thoroughfares and activity areas. The design
                                            and improvement plan will be based on the City's Capital
                                            Improvement Plan (CIP).
                                            The City will also implement its adopted Architectural Design
                                            Guidelines which serve to assist developers of non-residential
                                            and higher density residential (eight dwelling units per acre or
                                            more) in the design of their projects. Implementation of the
                                            Guidelines will create new development which enhances and is
                                            consistent with the existing visual fabric of the community.
         May 7, 2002                                                          San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com

                                                                              Community Design Element
                                            The City has adopted a Historic Depiction Program which it
                                            will continue to implement. The Historic Depiction Program
                                            is applied to all non-residential projects. The resulting
                                            architectural features which are incorporated into non-
                                            residential projects, reflect the City's past by emphasizing
                                            events, people and places important to the community.
                                            Implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act
                                            (CEQA) by the City will ensure that development proposals
                                            evaluated by decision makers in San juan Capistrano have been
                                            properly studied, and that the public is aware of the project's
                                            potential impacts to the environment, including the visual
                                            environment.
                                            Recognizing that the visual character of the community is not
                                            solely dependant on its buildings, but also on the surrounding
                                            landscape, the City will implement its landscaping standards
                                            and Street Tree Master Plan. Similarly, the City will assess
                                            proposed landform changes associated with new development
                                            to ensure that changes to environmental features will not result
                                            in negative environmental or visual impacts.
                                            Exterior Lighting
                                            To balance the goals of the General Plan to maintain a small-
                                            village, rural atmosphere, with the need to provide for the safe
                                            movement of vehicles and people, exterior lighting levels
                                            should be the minimum necessary to protect the public safety.
                                            Lighting in the community should meet the following design
                                            criteria:
                                            •    Within residential neighborhoods in hillside areas, street
                                                 lights should be minimized and located at street
                                                 intersections, curves in streets and at the end of cui-de-sacs.
                                            •    Within non-residential areas, both pedestrian and parking
                                                 lot lighting should be set at the minimum levels
                                                 recommended by the illuminating Engineering Society for
                                                 public safety.
                                            •    Recreation lighting should require special studies and
                                                 analysis to minimize light intrusion into adjacent
                                                 neighborhoods.
         May 7, 2002                                    13                    San Juan Capistrano General Plan
PDF created with FinePrint pdfFactory Pro trial version http://www.fineprint.com


