          GENERAL PLAN
City of Sierra Madre
                                This page left blank
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA       P a g e |2
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
GENERAL PLAN STEERING COMMITTEE
Denise Delmar, Chair
Kenneth Anhalt, Vice Chair
Colin Braudrick
Wendy Davis
Leslee Hinton
John Hutt
Ed Miller
Debora Sheridan
Teryl Willis
MaryAnn MacGillivray, City Council Liaison
John Capoccia, City Council Liaison
Gina Frierman-Hunt, Planning Commission Liaison
Kevin Paschall, Planning Commission Liaison
Danny Castro, Former Director of Planning & Community Preservation
Leticia Cardoso, Senior Planner - Planning & Community Preservation
Elaine Aguilar, City Manager
PLANNING COMMISSION
Manish Desai, Chair
Ken Goldstein, Vice-Chair
Matthew Buckles, Commissioner
Gina Frierman-Hunt, Commissioner
Kevin Paschall, Commissioner
William Pevsner, Commissioner
Bob Spears, Commissioner
CITY COUNCIL
John Capoccia, Mayor
Gene Goss, Mayor Pro-Tem
Rachelle Arizmendi, Councilmember
Denise Delmar, Councilmember
John Harabedian, Councilmember
CITY DEPARTMENTS
Planning and Community Preservation
Community Services
Public Works
Fire Department
Police Department
Library
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                 P a g e |3
COMMUNITY VOLUNTEERS
The City of Sierra Madre would also like to extend a special thanks to the many volunteers
who generously donated their time in various capacities during preparation of the General Plan
Update. These volunteers are listed below:
De Alcorn                                                       Seth Hanson
Pat Alcorn                                                      Leslee Hinton
Sharon Allen                                                    Gary Hood
Kenneth Anhalt                                                  Linda Hubbard
Anita Delmer,                                                   Gina Long
Denise Delmar                                                   Duncan MacGillivray
Margery Bourgeois                                               MaryAnn MacGillivray
Colin Braudrick                                                 Jacquie Mayo
Owen Braudrick                                                  Ed Miller
Caroline Brown                                                  Josh Moran
Carol Canterbury                                                Ian Nunley
John Capoccia                                                   Jerry Pearson
Marta Capoccia                                                  Deb Sheridan
Joe Catalano                                                    Glen Springer
Barbara Leigh Cline                                             Virginia Stafford
Bill Coburn                                                     Jeremiah Stegal
Jim Engle                                                       Oscar Stegal
Joe Feeney                                                      Melissa Thew
Erin Golightly                                                  Don Watts
Stefanie Golightly                                              Teryl Willis
John Herrmann                                                   Marian Woodford
ENVIRONMENTAL AND TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT
CONSULTANT
Jorge Estrada, Associate - PlaceWorks
Shannon Kimball, Project Manager – PlaceWorks
Woodie Tescher, Project Manager – PlaceWorks
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                    P a g e |4

                                                    Introduction
                                                    PURPOSE OF THE GENERAL PLAN
                                                    The City of Sierra Madre General Plan is a long-
                                                    range policy document which lays out the
                                                    framework for all future growth and development
                                                    within the City. The General Plan is the blueprint
                                                    that sets the basis for future policy decisions, in
                                                    that it organizes the desires of the Sierra Madre
                                                    community with respect to the physical, cultural,
                                                    economic, and environmental character of the
                                                    City.
Source: Seth Hansen
                                                    Most importantly, the Sierra Madre General Plan
                                                    is a community-based document that reflects the
                                                    community values and character as expressed in
                                                    its goals and policies, while also serving as a
                                                    technical document which provides information
                                                    about the City. The General Plan shall be used as
                                                    a guide by the City’s decision makers to achieve
                                                    the community’s vision and preserve the history,
                                                    character and shared values of the community for
                                                    future generations.
Source: Seth Hansen
                                 The General Plan is intended to be both a long‐term and a dynamic
                                 document, and must be periodically updated to respond to
                                 changing community needs. Unlike the housing element, which is
                                 required by State law to be updated every five years, a General Plan
                                 does not expire and is not required to have a specific time frame.
                                 Updating the General Plan is done to ensure that the plan is a
                                 reflection of the community’s values and goals. The update process
                                 also allows the City to reflect on challenges of the past years and use
                                 these experiences to shape new policy.
                                 STATE REQUIREMENTS
                                 California Government Code Section 65300 requires that each city
                                 and county within the state of California adopt a comprehensive,
                                 long-range plan to guide development. There are seven mandatory
                                 elements of a general plan – land use, housing, circulation, open
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                              P a g e |5

                        space, conservation, noise, and safety. The law does not require
                        that these elements be organized in a particular fashion, and it
                        allows local jurisdictions to include additional elements to address
                        local needs and objectives.
                        The content of each element is prescribed in the “State of California
                        General Plan Guidelines” published by the Governor’s Office of
                        Planning and Research (OPR).         Requirements for the Housing
                        Element are defined by the State Department of Housing and
                        Community Development (HCD). Requirements for the Noise
                        Element are defined by the Office of Noise Control of the California
                        Department of Health.
                        State required sustainability and greenhouse gas (GHG) reduction
                        goals and policies are denoted throughout the document by a green
                        leaf.
                        State law requires that the General Plan be internally consistent
                        across all elements.     It also requires that ordinances adopted
                        pursuant to the General Plan, such as the zoning ordinance and
                        subdivision ordinance, be consistent with the General Plan. The
                        decisions of the City should be logically guided by the General Plan.
                        ORGANIZATION OF THE GENERAL PLAN
                        In accordance with State Government Code Section 65302, this
                        General Plan contains all seven required elements organized in four
                        chapters addressing City issues in a logical way. Each element of
                        the General Plan contains background information and associated
                        goals and policies. Goals and policies represent the General Plan’s
                        foundation. A goal is an overall statement of community desires and
                        consists of a broad statement of purpose or direction. For each goal
                        in this General Plan, associated and more definitive policy
                        statements follow. A policy provides guidance to the City Council,
                        other City commissions and boards, and City staff in their review of
                        development proposals and other actions taken.                    The
                        Implementation Section is included at the end of the document,
                        along with an Appendix including a glossary and references.
                        The Land Use Chapter addresses the City’s built environment,
                        including land and economic development, historic preservation,
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e |6

                        housing and circulation. Since Sierra Madre is developed on a
                        foothill slope, as well as canyons and hillsides leading into the
                        Angeles National Forest, the Resource Management and Land Use
                        Chapters address hillside preservation. The Resource Management
                        Chapter also addresses co-existence with wildlife, dark sky, and
                        other conservation issues such as trees, water, waste management,
                        and air quality. The Hazard Prevention Chapter recognizes the
                        potential for wildfires, floods/landslides and seismic-related
                        hazards associated with the City’s location along the San Gabriel
                        Mountains foothill. The Community Services Chapter reflects the
                        independent character of Sierra Madre as a full-service city
                        providing its own police, fire, park and recreation, library and
                        public services, in addition to the numerous contributions made by
                        volunteer organizations to the cultural life and social needs of the
                        City.
                        The following chart shows the corresponding State-mandated
                        Elements for each chapter/section of the General Plan document:
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                      P a g e |7

GENERAL PLAN CHAPTERS                              STATE MANDATED ELEMENTS
Chapter One - Land Use
1. Land Use Designations                           Land Use, Open Space
2. Historic Preservation                           Land Use
3. Housing                                         Housing
4. Economic Development
5. Circulation                                     Circulation
Chapter Two - Resource Management
1. Hillside Preservation                           Conservation, Open Space
2. Co-existence with Wildlife                      Conservation
3. Dark Sky
4. Tree Preservation                               Conservation
5. Water Resources                                 Conservation
6. Waste Management/Recycling                      Conservation
7. Air Quality                                     Conservation
Chapter Three - Hazard Prevention
1. Fire Safety                                     Safety
2. Flood/Landslide                                 Safety
3. Seismic Safety                                  Safety
4. Noise                                           Noise
Chapter Four - Community Services
1. Law Enforcement                                 Safety
2. Recreation Services                             Open Space
3. Library Services
4. Community Cultural and Special Events
5. Transit                                         Circulation
6. Public Services                                 Circulation
Appendix
1. Glossary
2. Statutory Requirements
3. Survey
4. Survey Results
5. Children’s Essays
6. Technical Background Report
7.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                          P a g e |8

                        THE GENERAL PLAN UPDATE
                        GENERAL PLAN STEERING COMMITTEE
                        Sierra Madre’s General Plan was last updated in 1996. In July 2009,
                        the City Council initiated an update to reflect current community
                        values and to provide a roadmap for future decision-making. The
                        City Council appointed a 9-member General Plan Steering
                        Committee as an advisory committee to the Planning Commission
                        and City Council.
                        The General Plan Steering Committee (GPSC) held monthly public
                        meetings from November 2009 to May 2013 to conduct a thorough
                        review of the entire 1996 General Plan, conduct community outreach
                        meetings and write the update to the General Plan, culminating in a
                        recommendation of a draft General Plan update document for
                        review by the Planning Commission and City Council.
                        The GPSC updated the document in-house and limited the services
                        of a consultant to the preparation of the Technical Background
                        Report and environmental documents as required by the California
                        Environmental Quality Act.         The role of the consultant also
                        included incorporation of State legislative requirements, including
                        climate change and greenhouse gas reduction policies, review of
                        the goals, policies, and objectives for internal consistency, technical
                        assistance to staff and the GPSC, volunteer coordination and best
                        practices recommendations.
                        This document supersedes the 1996 General Plan, and its
                        implementation will include actions to update other planning
                        documents to ensure consistency with the vision outlined herein.
                        PLANNING COMMISSION AND CITY COUNCIL
                        Beginning in the Fall of 2013, a number of public hearings were
                        conducted by the Planning Commission and City Council to review
                        the Draft General Plan Update document, at which time the Sierra
                        Madre community had the opportunity to provide feedback on all
                        Elements of the document.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                          P a g e |9

                                            COMMUNITY PARTICIPATION
                                            In addition to their monthly meetings, the GPSC
                                            recognized the importance of community outreach to
                                            engage the community and seek their input in the
                                            General Plan update. Over a three-year period, the
                                            GPSC involved the community and its decision-
                                            makers by hosting two town hall forums and an East
                                            Montecito Neighborhood meeting, conducted a
                                            General Plan survey and held an essay contest for
                                            Sierra Madre youth. Residents, employees, business
                                            owners, and other stakeholders were involved in
                                            sharing their ideas and desires for Sierra Madre which
                                            were incorporated by the GPSC in their preparation of
                                            the draft General Plan update document
                                            The GPSC also reached out to stakeholders through a
                                            series of informal meetings in the community to
                                            educate them regarding the role and importance of the
                                            General Plan, and to obtain input into the General Plan
                                            update regarding the vision and the unique challenges
                                            for Sierra Madre in the next 20 years.
                                            In addition, an extensive list of volunteers were
                                            involved in all aspects of the update process, including
                                            communications/public relations, a design contest to
                                            create a General Plan Update logo, advertising,
                                            conducting town hall meetings, surveying the
                                            community, photographing, data gathering, revising
                                            various General Plan sections, and assisting the
                                            consultant with various needs related to the
                                            preparation of the Technical Background Report. A
                                            variety of media, including press releases, e-blasts,
                                            fliers, Channel 3 broadcasts, a dedicated General Plan
                                            Update email, and the City’s website and Facebook
                                            were used to disseminate information, recruit
                                            volunteers, and involve the community at every stage
                                            of the update process.
General Plan Update logo
Source: Friends of the Arts
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                              P a g e | 10

                                               VISION AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES
                                               The Vision & Guiding Principles sets the tone for the
                                               General Plan Update. The purpose of identifying the
                                               Vision & Guiding Principles was to help develop a
                                               summary of general goals to be achieved by the
                                               updated General Plan. The vision provides the
                                               foundation for more specific guiding principles, goals,
                                               policies and programs to be developed during the
                                               update process. The visioning process is valuable in
                                               identifying issues important to the community and in
                                               providing early direction for alternatives development
                                               and analysis.
                                               Community input from the General Plan outreach
                                               efforts were used as the basis for drafting the Vision
                                               and Guiding Principles. GPSC members compiled an
                                               extensive list of “vision statements” and guiding
                                               principles, and then focused this list into five vision
                                               and guiding principles, as follows:
                                               1. Preserve and sustain Sierra Madre’s distinctive
                                               character as a historic small town nestled in the
                                               foothills, but within a major metropolitan area.
                                               2. Ensure that Sierra Madre is a safe, vibrant place to
                                               live, work and visit by providing city services that
                                               match the needs of the community and promote
                                               community engagement.
                                               3. Protect and be responsible stewards of the
                                               neighboring San Gabriel Mountain Foothills’ wildlife,
                                               forest, open space, watershed and all other natural
                                               resources.
                                               4. Promote and develop a strong, diversified local
                                               economy and a thriving town center, consistent with
                                               the needs of the community.
                                               5. Ensure development is done in harmony
                                               with        its neighborhood, while maintaining the
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                P a g e | 11

                                               character of the town and without unduly burdening
                                               existing city services and infrastructure or impacting
                                               the environment.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                               P a g e | 12
                            Chapter One – Land Use
                            INTRODUCTION
                            The Land Use Chapter of the Sierra Madre General Plan contains
                            five components: land use designations (State‐ mandated land
                            use element), historic preservation, housing (State mandated
                            housing element), economic development, and circulation and
                            traffic.
                            Sustainable policies and goals are called out by a green leaf
                            icon.
                            Section One:
                            Land Use Designations
                            OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
                            The City of Sierra Madre is comprised of approximately 1,882
                            acres (2.94 square miles.) There are three distinct geographical
                            patterns in the City –the foothill slope, the canyon and the
                            hillside.
                            Two thirds of the area within the City limits is on the foothill
                            slope. This is the “developable” area of the City and it is largely
                            developed.       Sierra Madre is an established, built‐out
                            community with just a handful of vacant parcels remaining.
                            The predominant land use in the City is residential. Ninety‐
                            three percent of the land is zoned for residential purposes. Of
                            that, 85 percent is residential low density, 1 percent is medium
                            density, and 7 percent is medium/high density. The higher
                            density housing is located around the downtown area near
                            Baldwin Avenue, Sierra Madre Boulevard and adjacent streets.
                            Institutions utilize the second greatest area of land.         This
                            includes four elementary schools, one middle school, one high
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                        P a g e | 13

school, seven churches, the Mater Dolorosa Passionist Retreat
Center, and City‐owned facilities.            Institutional uses are
generally intermixed with residential and commercial areas.
Most institutional uses are old and well established in the
community.
Four percent of the land in the City is devoted to commercial
uses. All of the commercial land is in the historic downtown
area of Sierra Madre along Sierra Madre Boulevard, Baldwin
Avenue, and on adjacent smaller streets.                This area is
characterized by small “one‐of‐a‐kind” retail businesses,
branch offices of major lending institutions, medical offices,
and other personal service businesses.              There are also
magazine and newspaper publishers in town.
There is an old established manufacturing area in the City along
East Montecito Avenue. This area comprises less than one
percent of the City’s land area, and includes a mixture of
structures along the street—single family homes, warehouses,
office spaces, artists’ studios and one complex of studio
apartments. There are naturally occurring vacancies in office
spaces, but the houses have low turnover and the neighborhood
is stable.
There is one canyon in the City which has been developed.
This is known as “Sierra Madre Canyon” or “The Canyon” by
locals. It has its own unique development pattern and a more
rural lifestyle that is valued by its residents. An ordinance that
specifically addresses the unique development standards of
“The Canyon” was adopted in 2011 in an effort to preserve its
rustic and historic character.
The hillside area has experienced some development activity,
mostly involving individual properties rather than multi‐home
subdivisions. In 2007, the City updated a hillside ordinance to
closely regulate development of hillside land and the canyons
within the hillside that have not been developed.                The
ordinance includes major design criteria for development
within the Hillside Management Zone to preserve and minimize
impacts on significant natural features of hillside areas,
including swales, canyons, knolls, ridgelines, and rock
outcrops, and to regulate grading which impacts the natural
terrain, flora and fauna.          The Sierra Madre Mountain
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                  P a g e | 14

                            Conservancy, an organization established for the protection of
                            hillside land, has acquired several acres of property through
                            purchase and donations, further limiting development
                            opportunities in the hillside area.
                            LAND USE AND WATER CONSERVATION
                            The impact of land use and development growth on Sierra
                            Madre’s water supply is a serious concern. In January 2014, the
                            Governor of the State of California proclaimed a state of
                            emergency in the State of California due to current drought
                            conditions in the State. Sierra Madre is a public water supply
                            distributor to the resident customers within its jurisdiction and
                            produces and delivers potable water from four wells located
                            within the Eastern Unit of the Raymond Basin. Due to the lack
                            of rainfall, in 2013 and 2014, Sierra Madre has been able to
                            capture and spread only a fraction of the necessary water at the
                            spreading grounds. As such, water levels of the aquifer have
                            been very low and incapable of pumping water for delivery from
                            any of its four production wells since October 2013. For the
                            first time in the history of the water department, in October
                            2013, Sierra Madre became completely dependent on imported
                            water from the San Gabriel Valley Municipal Water District via
                            the Metropolitan Water District to serve its existing customers.
                            Due to the present serious drought conditions and in recognition
                            of any potential future droughts and the inability to access its
                            adjudicated ground water in the Eastern Unit of the Raymond
                            Basin, Sierra Madre declared a water shortage emergency in July
                            2014 and imposed a water service connection moratorium until
                            the Raymond Basin aquifer recovers sufficiently to allow Sierra
                            Madre to pump its ground water for delivery to its existing
                            customers. Land use regulations and policies which do not
                            increase the demand for ground water must be developed and
                            implemented in order to sustain Sierra Madre’s ability to be self‐
                            sufficient in supplying water from its traditional sources to its
                            customers, especially as the City faces future land use and
                            development growth.
                            URBAN FORM
                            Sierra Madre was originally developed in a traditional grid
                            pattern in the foothill slope area and a more organic street
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                        P a g e | 15

pattern in the hillside and canyon areas reflecting the
topography of these areas. Recent subdivisions of estate‐size
properties have resulted in the existence of some cul‐de‐sac
streets. The development pattern of Sierra Madre is distinctly
different than that of the surrounding jurisdictions. Few of
Sierra Madre’s local streets are through streets to other
jurisdictions. Even Baldwin Avenue, the primary access to the
center of the city from the south, continues through a small
area of the City of Arcadia and then jogs to the east at the 210
freeway.        The self‐contained physical form of the City
contributes to the sense of place experienced by its residents.
Further, the architecture of Sierra Madre is eclectic. Large
houses are commonly found next to small houses of varying
styles throughout the City.
In the language of urban design there are some distinct elements
– paths, nodes, centers, districts, and landmarks – which make
the City function for its residents.
Paths
A path is a street that provides a means of vehicular and
pedestrian movement and interconnects various land uses to
others.
Sierra Madre Boulevard and Baldwin Avenue transect the
City’surban area and establish the commercial and
governmental center of town. Michillinda Avenue, Orange
Grove Avenue, Grandview Avenue and Santa Anita Avenue
are primary paths as they provide access from adjacent
jurisdictions into the City.
Mt. Wilson Trail, Bailey Canyon and Santa Anita Canyon Road
are important paths linking the urbanized area with the
wildland area.
Nodes
A node is a strategically located focal point that contributes to
the functions and activities in the City. Entry nodes are
located at the transition points between jurisdictions or districts.
Internal nodes are places where activity occurs.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                  P a g e | 16

                            The important entry nodes in the City are at the entries into
                            the City from the south at Baldwin Avenue and Orange Grove
                            Avenue, from the west at Michillinda Avenue and Sierra
                            Madre Boulevard, and at the eastern entry on Sierra Madre
                            Boulevard at Sierra Vista Park. These are points at which
                            people traveling into the City from the outside realize that
                            they have arrived in a new place – Sierra Madre. Currently
                            there are signs at these locations which denote the entry node.
                            There are several internal nodes in the City. Perhaps the most
                            important is at Kersting Court. This is a public gathering place
                            at the center of town, and the four‐way stop at Sierra Madre
                            Boulevard and Baldwin Avenue accentuate the importance of
                            this node. Kersting Court is the location or start or terminus
                            for numerous civic events. The intersection of Lima Street and
                            Sierra Madre Boulevard is another important node as it
                            designates the western entry into the commercial district. The
                            Sierra Madre Public Library is also an important node in that it
                            constitutes a public gathering place toward the west end of
                            Sierra Madre Boulevard, Sturtevant Drive and Woodland
                            Drive is a significant node in the Sierra Madre Canyon.
                            Centers
                            Centers are specific sites or clusters of sites with specific
                            functions. There are two primary centers in Sierra Madre:
                            The Civic Center—comprising City Hall, the Police and Fire
                            Stations—and Memorial Park, an important center in Sierra
                            Madre.        The City is a major employer and numerous
                            constituents come to City Hall in both the day and evening
                            hours for assistance and to attend public meetings. Memorial
                            Park is a recreational center with a bandstand, a play area for
                            children, tennis courts and picnic tables. It is also the location
                            for the Sierra Madre Senior Citizens Center housed in a multi‐
                            purpose structure on the park site. Concerts, festivals, and
                            holiday activities for children in the community are among
                            the numerous activities that take place in Memorial Park.
                            The other primary center in the City is Sierra Vista Park. The
                            City’s recreation center is at Sierra Vista Park, which includes
                            a public pool, and a multi‐purpose recreation building which
                            houses the Youth Activity Center and the City’s year‐round
                            programs for children, teens, and adults. In addition, Sierra
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                         P a g e | 17

Vista Park is the location for the City’s baseball diamonds,
tennis, volleyball and basketball courts, the Rose Float building,
a dog park, and it is equipped with picnic tables and barbeques.
The City Yards, settling basins and the Sierra Madre
Community Nursery School are located to the north and east
of Sierra Vista Park, respectively.
Privately owned and operated, the Mater Dolorosa Passionist
Retreat Center is recognized as a location for special functions,
and therefore it is considered a center as well. It is used
regularly on weekends for large retreat gatherings. It is also
made available to the community for special functions, and a
dinner and auction is held once a year in October.
Districts
A district is a geographical area within a city that has
common distinguishing characteristics. It is distinct from
other areas and it is apparent to someone in the district that
they are in a distinctive place.
◊ Downtown District
The Downtown District is located in the center of the City
along Sierra Madre Boulevard and Baldwin Avenue. Along
Sierra Madre Boulevard, this district begins at Lima Street to
the west and Baldwin Avenue to the east. Along Baldwin
Avenue, it extends from Suffolk Avenue to the south and up to
Highland Avenue to the north. The Downtown district can be
described as a “village center” as it is characterized by one
and two‐story commercial buildings with small storefronts
housing quaint retail stores, unique restaurants, commercial and
professional offices, service businesses, institutional and non‐
profit facilities, and medical facilities. The Kensington Assisted
Living Facility is also located in this district.
Among the unique structures in downtown are the Sierra Madre
Playhouse – an active live‐stage theater, Old City Hall which
was vacated by the City in 1977 and restored as offices, the
former Hotel Shirley restored as offices and residences, and the
Sierra Madre Hotel, which is now maintained as
residences, retail business, and offices in a courtyard setting.
Many of the structures were built in the early 1900s, although a
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                P a g e | 18

                            few newer structures have been added in the place of fire
                            damaged and deteriorating buildings.              The pattern of
                            development in the downtown encourages pedestrian activity
                            that brings a liveliness to the street.      In 2007, the Voter’s
                            Empowerment Ordinance, known as “Measure V”, was
                            adopted to ensure the preservation of the small town character
                            of the downtown district by limiting development height and
                            density to two stories, 30 feet in height, and 13 residential units
                            per acre.
                            ◊ East Montecito District
                            East Montecito Avenue is the City’s manufacturing and light
                            industrial district. This street is locally historic in that a
                            number of older industrial structures still exist, as well as
                            historic housing, such as the original ticket booth for the Red
                            Line, and the original cabins built for the tuberculosis patients
                            who came to the area before Sierra Madre was formed. There
                            is very low housing turnover in this area. This district includes
                            several businesses such as plumbers’ and mechanics’ shops,
                            storage facilities, welders, vehicle storage, research and
                            development firms, and crafts‐related businesses, such as
                            furniture making, glass lamp making, pottery, seamstress, film
                            making, photography and artists’ studios. This area is subject
                            to the Voters Empowerment Ordinance (Measure V)
                            requirements.
                            Residential Areas
                            ◊ Residential Medium‐High Density Areas
                            The Medium‐High Density Residential Areas are located along
                            the Sierra Madre Boulevard corridor to the east and west ends
                            of the commercial district on Sierra Madre Boulevard, and the
                            neighborhoods which are clustered around the downtown
                            district, providing a buffer between commercial and low‐
                            density residential uses.      The streets most identified with
                            Medium‐High density development are Esperanza Avenue,
                            Mariposa Avenue from Hermosa Avenue to Baldwin Avenue,
                            Laurel Avenue from Baldwin Avenue to Mountain Trail. The
                            housing stock in these areas is a mixture of older apartment
                            buildings from the 1950s through 1970s, and newer apartment
                            and condominium buildings from the 1980s and 1990s.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 19

Although multi‐unit construction slowed down in the late
1980s and early 1990s, there was a steady pattern of
development of these structures during that period. During the
2000s, there have been a few multi‐unit condominium
developments within this area, including a 46‐unit senior
housing facility.
◊ Residential Medium Density Areas
The Medium Density Residential Areas are located adjacent to
Medium‐High density areas.            These are characterized by
properties with two or three units on a lot. Some of the
notable Medium Density areas are located along San Gabriel
and Santa Anita Courts in the southeast area of the City, as
well as Laurel Avenue and Victoria Lane. In most cases, the
units look like single‐family houses, but upon closer inspection
it can be seen that a second unit exists to the side, rear or on
the second floor of the property. The low‐density residential
appearance of these properties is important to maintain the
character of the neighborhoods.
◊ Residential Canyon Area
The Sierra Madre Canyon Residential Area is located in a
natural canyon in the northeast quadrant of the City. The
boundaries of the Canyon extend from Mountain Trail on the
west, Sturtevant Drive and Canon Avenue on the south, and
Sturtevant Drive on the east.         The Canyon was originally
developed in the 1920s for seasonal housing. The lots are
small and the original structures were cottages used by out‐of‐
town visitors who came to Sierra Madre for rest, recuperation
and recreational purposes. Over time, the cottages have come
to be used for permanent year‐round housing. At one time,
the center of the area known as the Lower Canyon was
developed with commercial businesses.             There was also a
community plunge in this location until the 1950s. Today,
there is one commercial structure remaining in this area, while
others have been converted to year‐round residential uses or
have been demolished and replaced with residential
structures.    There is one property that provides overnight
accommodations and meeting space for an international nature
organization.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                P a g e | 20

                            ◊ Residential Low Density Area
                            The Low Density Residential Areas comprise most of Sierra
                            Madre. Due to the City’s original rural development pattern,
                            the urbanization of the City took place over a period of 100
                            years. The low‐density residential pattern varies throughout
                            the City. Lot sizes vary dramatically as do the structures built
                            on them, which enhances Sierra Madre’s charm. The periods
                            of tract home development occurred in the post‐war era of the
                            1940s and 50s throughout the City, in the 1960s and 70s in the
                            northeastern portion of the City at Liliano Drive and in the
                            development of two subdivisions along Orange Grove, and
                            more recently in the 1980s and 90s with the subdivision of the
                            Jameson Estate in the west central area of town. A notable
                            hillside subdivision development in the 2000s occurred above
                            Carter Avenue, at the intersection of Baldwin Avenue, which is
                            the original land of the Nathanial Carter estate, historically
                            known as “Carterhia.” Responsible stewardship of the Low
                            Density Residential Areas demands strict enforcement and
                            monitoring of all zoning requirements, including the Hillside
                            Management Zone where applicable.
                            Landmarks
                            Landmarks are reference points that help identify an area.
                            They provide functional and visual points of reference and are
                            easily identifiable. The following are notable landmarks in Sierra
                            Madre: Kersting Court with its bell tower, pepper trees and the
                            Hotel Shirley façade, the cannon and band shell in Memorial
                            Park, St. Rita’s Catholic Church, Sierra Madre Congregational
                            Church and the Old North Church, Alverno High School, the
                            Wistaria Vine on Carter Avenue, the Pinney House on Lima
                            Street, the E. Waldo Ward property, the Richardson House,
                            Lizzy’s Inn, the Sierra Madre Elementary School (Lower
                            Campus), the Sierra Madre Middle School (Upper Campus),
                            Sierra Vista Park, the Mater Dolorosa Passionist Retreat Center,
                            the Sierra Madre Canyon Dam, the Mount Wilson Trailhead and
                            the Bailey Canyon Trailhead.
                            HISTORIC PRESERVATION
                            The City’s Historic Preservation Ordinance provides incentives
                            and guidelines for the protection of individual properties
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                      P a g e | 21

listed in the City’s List of Designated Historic Landmarks,
which includes 49 properties as of 2013.             The Ordinance
provides a process and criteria for historical designation, as well
as standards for the review of exterior modifications of historic
structures as seen from the public view.
LAND USE CHARACTERISTICS
There are several land use characteristics relating to the
existing urban form which are identified below to help “set the
stage” for the goals of the Land Use Chapter:
1. The urbanized area of the City is built‐out. Very few
     vacant parcels exist and the number of large very‐low
     density properties has diminished as they have been
     subdivided into smaller parcels.
2.    As evidenced by the water shortage emergency and the
     enactment of a moratorium in 2014 on new water service
     connections, land use policies which encourage water
     conservation and avoid creating additional burdens on
     the aquifer are a priority.
3.    An emphasis on conservation of natural resources,
     including water conservation will play an important role
     in the Cityʹs land use development regulations in order to
     preserve the health, safety, welfare, and quality of life of
     the existing population. The City shall enact and enforce
     development standards which do not significantly
     increase the demand for water use and encourage
     reduction.
4. The development pattern of the City is established.
5. Sierra Madre remains a desirable place to live as evidenced
     by the long term stability of property values.
6. Due to the distance from highways and major arterials,
     there is little demand for new commercial and industrial
     development.
      GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                P a g e | 22

                            7.   Most parcel sizes in the downtown area are small and
                                shallow, not permitting development of large new
                                structures and their required parking.
                            8.   Residential neighborhoods are varied throughout the City
                                regarding lot sizes, housing sizes, age and style of structures.
                            9.   Additional parkland, sports playing fields, and
                                recreational facilities are desired by the community. In
                                order to create additional space, it is likely that the City
                                would have to purchase land at market rate for these
                                purposes.
                            10. There are a number of historic structures in the City in all
                                land use categories – single‐ and multiple‐family residential,
                                commercial, institutional, and governmental.
                            11. Other than City Hall, the Recreation Center at Sierra Vista
                                 Park, the Senior Center and the Sierra Madre Elementary
                                 School auditorium, there are no other indoor public
                                 meeting places in the City.
                            12. The commercial downtown area has a regular pattern of
                                 occupancy consistent with economic cycles.
                            13.   The East Montecito area is currently zoned as a light‐
                                 industrial and commercial/residential mixed‐use area,
                                 and is interspersed with residential non‐conforming uses.
                            OVERVIEW OF LAND USE POLICY
                            The fundamental principle behind the land use policies of the
                            General Plan is to maintain the existing low‐density village
                            character of Sierra Madre in the same urban development
                            pattern that exists today. This provides a central business
                            district that serves local residents and attracts visitors to the
                            boutique and retail establishments. This area also contains
                            religious and educational institutions and public buildings. East
                            of the central business district is a light‐manufacturing area
                            which should also be preserved or adapted to complimentary
                            residential and commercial uses. Surrounding
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                          P a g e | 23

the central business district is a Medium‐High Density
residential zone which is characterized by multi‐family units,
including apartments and condominiums. The majority of
land in the City is devoted to single‐family residential
development of varying densities. These neighborhoods occur
around the City center.
Parkland and open space should be preserved and expanded
when possible. Hillside areas should be preserved either in
their natural state or with very low density residential
development designed to be sensitive to the environmental
nature of the foothills. This should include water conservation
measures to reduce and minimize the impact to the City’s water
supply and the ability to serve its water customers.
The City should continually recognize the connection from the
urban area to the mountain wildland by way of hillside land.
This connection aligns Sierra Madre with a unique cluster of
foothill cities, and preserving this area is vital to protect the
fragile watershed, and the urban wildland interface.
Two general categories of open space are recognized: natural
and constructed. Constructed open space includes developed
recreational parklands, and natural open space means
undeveloped natural areas conserved for their wild land
characteristics. Natural open space is the most precious
because it cannot be replaced once lost. Both constructed open
space and natural open space should be preserved and
expanded when possible.
DISTRIBUTION AND            INTENSITY     OF    LAND  USE
DEVELOPMENT
The City’s Land Use Map and Land Use Chart are
shown below as Figures 1‐1 and 1‐2, respectively.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA               P a g e | 24

Figure 1-1 Land Use Designation Map
 GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA P a g e | 25
   Figure 1-2 Land Use Chart
                                                     HEIGHT (FEET)/
               LAND USE CATEGORY                    NO. OF STORIES          MAXIMUM DENSITY/FLOOR
                                                                                    AREA RATIO
RL       (Residential Low Density)                     25 / 2 stories          1 dwelling units/lot
RC       (Residential – Canyon)                        25 / 2 stories          1 dwelling units/lot
H        (Hillside)                                    25 / 2 stories          1 dwelling units/lot
RM       (Residential Medium Density)                  30 / 2 stories          2 dwelling units/lot
RH       (Residential Medium/High Density)             30 / 2 stories          13 dwelling units/acre
RH1      (Residential Medium/High Density)             30 / 2 stories          20 dwelling units/acre
RE       (Residential Entrepreneur Overlay)            30 / 2 stories          13 dwelling units/acre
C (Commercial)                                         30 / 2 stories          13 dwelling units/acre
                                                                               1.0 FAR
AMU      (Artisan Mixed Use)                           30 / 2 stories          13 dwelling units/acre
                                                                               1.0 Floor Area Ratio
I        (Institutional)                           Established by Master Established by Master Plan
                                                            Plan
Measure V boundary area                                30 / 2 stories          13 dwelling units/acre
M        (Municipal Government)                              n/a               n/a
COS (Constructed Open Space)                                 n/a               n/a
NOS (Natural Open Space)                                     n/a               n/a
SUMMARY OF LAND USE GOALS
1.        Preserve the existing street and block patterns currently
          established throughout the City and provide additional
          non‐vehicular connectivity where it is currently lacking in
          the downtown commercial area.
2.        Preserve and enhance the diversity in the character of
          residential neighborhoods ensuring that new development
          is compatible in its design and scale with older established
          development in the surrounding neighborhood without
          attempting to replicate or mass produce a style of
          development.
3.        Ensure that development is done in harmony with its
          neighborhood, and preserves and protects privacy and
          mountain views of neighboring properties.
4.        Ensure that development is done to maximize water
          conservation practices to reduce and minimize the impact
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                    P a g e | 26

                                on the City’s local water supply and the ability to serve its
                                water customers.
                         5.     Institute conservation measures so that the demand for
                                water matches the City’s local supply.
                         6.     Achieve a balanced physical environment which provides
                                for housing, business, service, light‐industrial and
                                manufacturing, recreational,        social,  cultural      and
                                educational needs of the residents, thereby maintaining and
                                enhancing their quality of life while recognizing that Sierra
                                Madre is not a self‐sufficient city and many needs must be
                                met outside the City borders.
                         7.     Preserve and enhance the pattern of development in the
                                downtown area to facilitate commerce.
                         8.     Preserve existing and provide additional constructed and
                                natural open space.
                         9.     Preserve the hillside areas in order to protect the
                                environment and mountain views, obtain a balance
                                between developed areas and the hillside wilderness, and
                                establish the role of the hillside as an entry point into
                                wildland areas.
                         10.    Preserve the Canyon as a predominantly single‐family
                                residential community characterized by its rustic environs.
                         11.    Preserve East Montecito Avenue as a vital district
                                containing     light‐manufacturing,      commercial        and
                                residential uses by encouraging its preservation through
                                the adaptive reuse of existing structures.
                         OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
                         The City has established the following goals and policies for land
                         use in the City of Sierra Madre. The implementation measures
                         are contained in the Implementation Section at the end of the
                         General Plan.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 27

General Types and Mix of Land Uses
 Objective L1: Continuing the existing patterns of residential
 housing development.
Policies:
L1. 1    Maintain areas of the City for single‐family residences on
        varying lot sizes through the review and update of
        appropriate development standards.
L1. 2   Maintain areas of the City for the development of two
        units per lot through the review and update of
        appropriate development standards.
L1. 3   Maintain areas of the City for the development of
        multiple‐unit apartment, condominium, and townhouse
        development through the review and update of
        appropriate development standards.
L1. 4    Develop regulations for housing which meets the special
        needs of senior citizens and the disabled.
L1.5    Encourage preservation, refurbishment, and adaptive
        reuse of existing housing stock.
L1.6    Require that new residential development, substantial
        remodeling and additions comply with all adopted water
        conservation measures that reduce and minimize the
        impact on the City’s water supply and its ability to serve
        its water customers.
L1.7      Develop regulations that discourage lot splits, including
          but not limited to, increasing minimum lot sizes.
           Objective L2: Appropriately regulating group living
           facilities such as assisted living facilities, homes for the
           aged, dormitories, boarding houses, sororities,
           fraternities, live‐in drug or alcohol rehabilitation
           facilities, rest homes and convalescent hospitals in
           designations which allow residential uses.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                     P a g e | 28

                         Policies:
                         L2.1      Require discretionary review and approval, such as a
                                   conditional use permit, for the construction of a building
                                   for, or establishment of, a group living facility, except
                                   where prohibited by state law.
                         L2.2      Establish measures of, and limits to, resident/patient
                                   occupancy in group living facilities as part of the zoning
                                   code implementing these provisions. Except in the
                                   central core area covered by Measure V, such occupancy
                                   limit shall supersede the dwelling unit density limit.
                         L2. 3      Establish zoning provisions for group living facilities
                                   including floor area limits, height limits, setbacks,
                                   location of residential uses in commercial areas, and
                                   design guidelines.
                         L2.4      Adopt a zoning code to implement the foregoing
                                   together with other appropriate regulations of group
                                   living facilities, and review and update such code and
                                   other implementing ordinances every two years to
                                   ensure compliance with Goals and Policies of the General
                                   Plan.
                          Objective L3: Continuing the existing, and developing new
                          commercial structures and uses.
                         Policies:
                         L3. 1   Maintain an area in the City for commercial development
                                 through the review and update of appropriate standards
                                 and regulations for new construction.
                         L3. 2    Encourage the development of specialty retail, including
                                 stores selling products of local artisans and craftsmen, art
                                 galleries, and design furnishings.
                         L3. 3   Encourage the development of restaurants, bed and
                                 breakfasts, and other visitor‐serving uses.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                        P a g e | 29

L3. 4   Encourage the development of service and retail uses
        which meet the needs of local residents and local business
        people and residents.
L3. 5   Encourage businesses that attract more people to the
        downtown area in the evening.
L3. 6    Encourage office and technology uses without displacing
        retail.
L3. 7   Encourage commercial uses that do not add a burden on
        the City’s natural resources, including water resources.
 Objective L4: Mitigating the impacts of new development on
 the City’s open space, trees, infrastructure, water, transit
 services, the character of existing development, and other
 public needs.
Policies:
L4. 1   Ensure that the expansion of existing uses is reflective of
        and complements the overall pattern of development,
        without changing the character of existing development.
L4. 2   Except for those single family residences that would not
        otherwise require a conditional use permit (CUP),
        development projects that cumulatively comprise over
        one acre of land on one or more parcels require a CUP
        unless a specific plan or master plan is approved for the
        proposed project.
L4. 3   Ensure that new development and the expansion of
        existing uses incorporate water conservation measures
        that reduce and minimize the impact on the City’s water
        supply and its ability to serve its customers.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                 P a g e | 30

                          Objective L5: Preserving the existing grid street pattern
                          which promotes community life.
                         Policies:
                         L5. 1    Prohibit the use of cul‐de‐sacs and require through streets
                                 in new subdivisions except when no other access is
                                 physically feasible due to property ownership, parcel
                                 location or other physical factors.
                         Residential Low Density – Neighborhood Conservation (Map
                         designation RL)
                          Objective L6: Development that is done in harmony with its
                          neighborhood and preserves and protects the privacy,
                          mountain and basin views of neighboring properties.
                         Policies:
                         L6.1    Require that all adjoining neighbors of new or expanded
                                 existing structures in residential areas be notified and be
                                 made aware of the appeal process for any new
                                 construction that will exceed one story in height or
                                 significantly increase the volume and/or footprint of the
                                 overall structure.
                         L6.2    Ensure that any new or expanded structures in residential
                                 neighborhoods do not unreasonably obstruct significant
                                 mountain or basin views.
                         L6.3    Ensure      new and remodeled structures in residential
                                 neighborhoods to minimize placement of windows and
                                 decks with direct lines of sight inside neighboring homes
                                 and back yards.
                         L6.4     Establish an angle plane height envelope along the side
                                 property line for properties located in the Residential Low
                                 Density and Residential Canyon designations.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                        P a g e | 31

 Objective L7: Development that is compatible in its design and
 scale with the neighborhood.
Policies:
L7. 1   Maintain maximum lot coverage and floor area ratios
        which allow for adequate buffering from neighboring
        properties, usable private yard area, air circulation and
        light.
L7. 2    Maintain a maximum floor area for ministerial approvals
        and require that properties which are proposed to exceed
        that floor area be reviewed as a discretionary project.
L7.3 Limit the height of new buildings to reflect the prevailing
       height patterns on the street and within the Sierra Madre
       community.
 L7.4 Encourage new residential development to be compatible
        with and complement existing structures including the
        following:
        a.      Maintenance of front, side, and rear yard setbacks.
        b.      Use of landscaping to complement the design of
                the structure and reflect the Sierra Madre
                vegetation patterns, with an emphasis on
                sustainable, low‐water use landscaping and use of
                permeable surfaces for hardscaping, and the use of
                irrigation equipment that automatically senses the
                need for water.
        c.      Minimize paving in the front yard as necessary to
                accommodate         driveways       and   pedestrian
                walkways.
        d.      Require that covered parking be provided.
        e.      Prohibit required parking from being located in
                the front yard setback except in the Residential
                Canyon Zone.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                  P a g e | 32

                         L7.5   Review and update the R1 Zoning Ordinance and other
                                implementing ordinances every two years as necessary to
                                ensure compliance with the Goals and Policies of the
                                General Plan.
                         L7.6    Consider implementing a design review process.
                          Objective    L8:    Incorporating   measures     to  promote
                          sustainability in RL neighborhoods.
                        Policies:
                         L8.1    Encourage the use of sustainable materials in the design
                                and construction of structures and landscapes.
                         L8.2    Incorporate water conservation measures in the zoning
                                development standards for new construction and
                                substantial remodeling or building expansion, including
                                but not limited to        green building construction, the
                                percentage of permeable ground surfaces, building floor
                                area limitations, lot coverage, landscaping and irrigation,
                                greywater plumbing requirements, rainwater capture, and
                                design review.
                         L8.3   Consider a water impact fee to apply to new residential
                                dwelling units and additions to existing development that
                                increase water consumption, to fund water fixture
                                retrofits of existing homes and other water conservation
                                measures.
                         L8.4   Conduct a historic resources survey to encourage retention
                               of existing older homes and encourage the retention of
                               these homes where there are conservation methods.
                         L8.5     Provide incentives for property owners to retrofit
                                historically designated homes with water saving fixtures.
                         L8.6    Consider the establishment of a home inspection program
                                upon sale of property to confirm the retrofit of the
                                property to existing City water saving standards.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                     P a g e | 33
Residential – Canyon (Map designation RC)
 Objective L9: Maintaining the          existing density of the
 Canyon.
Policies:
L9. 1   Require that new sites be limited to single‐family
        detached units, no more than one unit per lot, except as in
        compliance with State law regarding second units.
L9. 2   Require a minimum lot area of 15,000 square feet for
        newly created lots.
L9. 3   Maintain a maximum dwelling size beyond which the
        Planning Commission shall review plans to ensure that
        the structure is consistent with the character of the
        Canyon area.
L9. 4   Provide incentives to rebuild damaged or demolished
        structures to pre‐existing dimensions but in conformance
        with the City’s building code. Incentives may include fee
        reductions, permit streamlining and other similar
        measures.
 Objective L10: Preserving the existing rustic atmosphere of
 the Canyon.
Policies:
L10. 1 Maintain a minimum dwelling size, lot coverage and floor
        area ratio which are consistent with the smaller homes in
        the Canyon area.
L10. 2 Require new construction to provide adequate on‐site
        parking either covered or uncovered, tandem or prime with
        flexibility in design and development standards such that
        both parking needs and aesthetic considerations are
        accommodated.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                 P a g e | 34

                         L10. 3 Maintain the appropriate setbacks consistent with
                                 structures in the immediate area, and to allow safe access
                                 between structures.
                         L10. 4 Maintain development standards and minimum lot sizes
                                 which result in development with dimensions, quality,
                                 and aesthetics consistent with existing developments.
                         L10. 5 Encourage open porches and discourage the enclosure of
                                 porches and other non‐habitable areas.
                         L10. 6 Undertake to develop guidelines which encourage the use
                                 of materials which are characteristic of existing
                                 development in the Canyon area.
                         L10. 7 Require the conservation of natural elements such as large
                                 rocks, plants and trees.
                         L10. 8 Require that new development be designed in a way
                                 which preserves the flood control channel as an open
                                 space focal point.
                          Objective L11: Retaining uses that promote a sense of
                          community.
                         Policies:
                         L11. 1 Allow for the continued use of multiple residential units
                                 and retail uses in the area near the City parking lot located
                                 at the junction of Woodland Drive and Brookside Lane.
                         L11. 2 Allow for the continued use of facilities which allow
                                 overnight guest accommodations, group meeting space,
                                 and limited commercial activity.
                         L11. 3 Allow for the development of park and open space areas
                                 on a discretionary basis.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 35

  Objective L12:     Discouraging the deterioration of existing
  housing stock.
Policies:
L12. 1 Provide economic assistance to the extent possible for the
        improvement of physically deteriorated and blighted
        structures.
L12. 2 Provide a program for educating property owners
        regarding methods of maintenance and upkeep of their
        property.
L12. 3 Conduct a historic resources survey to encourage
        retention of existing older homes and encourage the
        retention of these homes where there are conservation
        methods.
L12. 4 Provide incentives for property owners to retrofit
        historically designated homes with water saving fixtures.
 Objective L13: Providing adequate parking for Canyon
 residents.
Policies:
L13. 1 Require new construction projects to provide on‐site
        parking.
L13. 2 Continue to evaluate policies for public parking areas to
        benefit Canyon residents.
L13. 3 Review and update the RC Zoning Ordinance and other
        implementing ordinances every two years as necessary to
        ensure compliance with the Goals and Policies of the
        General Plan.
 Objective     L14:   Incorporating      measures  to   promote
 sustainability in RC neighborhoods .
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                P a g e | 36

                         Policies:
                         L14.1 Incorporate water conservation measures in the zoning
                                 development standards for new construction and
                                 substantial remodeling or building expansion, as it relates
                                 to green building construction, the percentage of
                                 permeable ground surfaces, building floor area
                                 limitations, lot coverage, landscaping and irrigation,
                                 greywater plumbing requirements, rainwater capture, and
                                 design review.
                         L14.2 Consider a water impact fee to apply to new residential
                                 dwelling units and additions to existing development, to
                                 fund water fixture retrofits of existing homes and other
                                 water conservation measures.
                         L14.3 Conduct a historic resources survey to encourage retention
                                 of existing older homes.
                         L14.4 Provide incentives for property owners to retrofit
                                 historically designated homes with water saving fixtures.
                         Residential Low Density – Hillside (Map designation H)
                          Objective L15: Preserving the hillside through the
                          application of standards and guidelines that direct and
                          encourage development that is sensitive to the unique
                          characteristics of the hillsides, which include, but are not
                          limited to, slopes, land forms, vegetation, wildlife habitat
                          and scenic quality; accordingly, innovation in the design of
                          buildings and structures is encouraged in order to preserve
                          hillside areas.
                         Policies:
                         L15.1 In subdividing larger parcels, determine development
                                 density based on a calculation that uses slope as one of
                                 the primary factors, which means that the steeper the
                                 slope, the larger the minimum lot size.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                      P a g e | 37

L15.2 Ensure that development in the hillside areas be located
        in those areas resulting in the least environmental
        impact.
L15.3 Require that all access into hillside areas be designed for
       minimum disturbance to the natural features.
L15.4 Limit the use of irrigation systems in landscaping to
       comply with water conservation measures and provide
       for natural habitat and erosion control.
L15.5 Consider the impact of development on wildlife.
 Objective L16: Minimizing hazards in the hillside.
Policies:
L16.1 Minimize the amount of grading and removal of
        natural vegetation.
L16.2 Require that home sites be planned, developed and
        designed to:
               a.      Eliminate fire hazards;
               b.      Prevent land instability.
               c.      Prevent exposure to geological and
                       geotechnical hazards;
               d.      Provide adequate drainage controls to
                       prevent flooding and landslides;
               e.      Prevent any other hazard or threat to the
                       public health, safety, and welfare.
               f.      Use the minimum amount of water possible
                       for landscaping and interior uses.
L16.3 Establish performance standards for public safety to
       address the upkeep and maintenance of sites under
       construction.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                P a g e | 38
                          Objective L17: Protecting views to and from hillside areas in
                          order to maintain the image and identity of the City as a
                          village of the foothills.
                         Policies:
                         L17.1   Require the use of natural materials where allowed and
                                 earth tone colors for all structures to blend in with the
                                 natural landscape and natural chaparral vegetative growth.
                         L17.2 Require that all development be designed to reflect the
                                 contours of the existing land form using techniques
                                 such as split pads, detached secondary structures (such as
                                       garages), and avoiding the use of excessive
                                 cantilevers.
                         L17.3   Require that all development preserves, to the maximum
                                   extent possible, significant features of the natural
                                   topography, including swales, canyons, knolls, ridge lines,
                                   and rock outcrops.
                         L17.4      Require that fencing be designed of fire retardant
                                    materials and that permanent fencing be minimized,
                                    and in no event placed in any area with slopes in excess
                                    of 25 percent.
                         L17.5    Require that exterior lighting be directed away from
                                   adjacent properties and the night sky.
                         L17.6    Review and update the H Zoning Ordinance and other
                                   implementing ordinances as necessary every two years
                                   to ensure compliance with the Goals, Objectives and
                                   Policies of the General Plan.
                          Objective L18:        Incorporating   measures   to  promote
                          sustainability in Hillside neighborhoods.
                         Policies:
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 39
L18.1     Incorporate water conservation measures in the zoning
          development standards for new construction and
          substantial remodeling or building expansion, as it
          relates to green building construction, percentage of
          permeable ground surfaces, building floor area
          limitations, lot coverage, landscaping and irrigation,
          greywater plumbing requirements, rainwater capture,
          and design review.
L18.2   Consider a water impact fee to apply to new residential
          dwelling units and additions to existing development, to
          fund water fixture retrofits of existing homes and other
          water conservation measures.
L18.3       Conduct a historic resources survey to encourage
          retention of existing older homes.
L18.4      Provide incentives for property owners to retrofit
          historically designated homes with water saving fixtures.
Residential Medium Density (Map designations RM)
 Objective L19: Providing for a medium density area as a
 transition from low density to higher intensity uses in
 neighborhoods developed with two units, attached or
 detached, one‐ and two‐story structures, and in
 transitional areas which are characterized by high traffic
 patterns and/or a mix of low, medium and medium‐high
 density structures.
Policies:
L19.1 Allow for one or two units per lot.
L19.2 Require a minimum lot area of 7,500 square feet.
L19.3      Review and update the R‐2 Zoning Ordinance and
          other implementing ordinances as necessary every
          two years to ensure compliance with the Goals,
          Objectives and Policies of the General Plan.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                  P a g e | 40

                          Objective L20: Maintaining the massing and scale of the
                           existing block and existing structures on sites.
                         Policies:
                         L.20.1 Require that new residential development be compatible
                                 with and complement existing structures on the block:
                                         a.      Maintain existing front yard setbacks on
                                                 the block;
                                         b.      Use compatible building materials, colors,
                                                 and forms;
                                         c.      Minimize front yard paving and prohibit
                                                 front yard parking.
                         L20.2 Limit the floor area ratio and maximum lot coverage for
                                 single‐family dwellings on RM lots the same as for RL
                                 lots.
                         L20.3 Limit floor area of all above‐ground buildings and
                                 structures (including garages and other non‐habitable
                                 areas) to 40% of lot area on lots with two dwelling units,
                                 provided, however, that an additional five percent of lot
                                 area (for a total 45% of lot area) may be occupied by such
                                 structures for development that preserves all or
                                 substantially all of an existing residential unit.
                         L20.4 Require that second residential structures added to
                                 properties with an existing residential structure be
                                 compatible in design.
                         L20.5 Require that the front elevation of a property developed
                                 with two units maintains the appearance of a single‐ family
                                 structure.
                         L20.6   Require that two‐unit structures have design elements
                                 which avoid flat, planar like structures and provide visual
                                 interest, such as balconies, recessed or projecting
                                 windows, sloping roofs, landscaped courtyards, etc.
                         L20.7 Require that a minimum of 50 percent of the street‐facing
                                 façade of the building at the graded elevation be designed
                                 as occupiable space and entries.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                      P a g e | 41

L20.8 Require that entries occur at the lowest habitable level.
L20.9 Prohibit subterranean parking and require that all parking
        under habitable spaces be within fully enclosed
        structures.
 Objective L21: Promoting the safety of individuals in RM
 neighborhoods.
Policies:
 L21.1 Require that the primary entrance of a front unit be
        accessed from and oriented toward the street.
 L21.2 Require that perimeter fencing and landscaping be
        kept low for visual clearance to the street.
  Objective    L22:    Incorporating     measures    to promote
  sustainability in RM neighborhoods.
Policies:
L22.1    Incorporate water conservation measures in the
        Zoning development standards for new construction and
        substantial remodeling or building expansion, as it relates
        to green building construction, percentage of permeable
        ground surfaces, building floor area limitations, lot
        coverage, landscaping and irrigation, greywater
        plumbing requirements, rainwater capture, and design
        review.
L22.2 Consider a water impact fee to apply to new residential
        dwelling units and additions to existing development, to
        fund water fixture retrofits of existing homes and other
        water conservation measures.
L22.3 Conduct a historic resources survey to encourage retention
        of existing older homes.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                  P a g e | 42
                         L22.4 Provide incentives for property owners to retrofit
                                 historically designated homes with water saving fixtures.
                         L22.5 Consider requiring individual meters for each dwelling
                                 unit for new construction, for the purpose of tracking
                                 water usage per unit.
                         Residential Medium/High Density (Map designations
                         RH)
                          Objective L23: Allowing the continued development of
                          multiple family units in areas which are characterized by
                          multiple family structures.
                         Policies:
                         L23.1 Allow for densities of approximately 13 units per acre.
                         L23.2 Ensure that on small or narrow lots (lot area less than
                                10,000 square feet or street frontage of less than 50 feet),
                                the floor area of all above‐ground buildings and
                                structures (including garages and other non‐habitable
                                areas, but excluding basements and other fully
                                subterranean spaces) is limited to 55% of lot area. On
                                other lots, limit floor area of all above‐ground buildings
                                and structures (including garages and other non‐
                                habitable areas, but excluding basements and other
                                fully subterranean spaces) to 5,500 square feet plus 70%
                                of lot area in excess of 10,000 square feet.
                         L23.3 Review and update the R‐3 Zoning Ordinance and other
                                implementing ordinances as necessary every two years to
                                ensure compliance with the Goals, Objectives and
                                Policies of the General Plan.
                          Objective L24: Promoting new development that is compatible
                          in scale and character with existing development.
                         Policies:
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                         P a g e | 43

L24.1 Require that new residential development be compatible
with and complement existing structures on the block:
                       a.       Maintain      existing  front   yard
                                setbacks on the block;
                       b.       Use compatible building materials,
                                colors, and forms;
                       c.       Minimize front yard paving and
                                prohibit front yard parking.
L24.2   Require that building siting maximize the privacy of
      residents by placement of windows, balconies,
      landscaping, and design of outdoor spaces.
L24.3   Require that buildings be oriented to face the street,
      avoiding views from the street of parking garages and
      alleys.
L24.4   Require that buildings include useable common open
       space in addition to private patios and balconies.
L24.5    Encourage the retention of existing mature, specimen
       trees.
L24.6 Require that a minimum of 50 percent of the street‐facing
       façade of the building at the graded elevation be designed
       as occupiable space and entries.
L24.7 Require that development incorporates             architectural
       design details and elements which provide visual
       character and interest, avoiding flat planar walls and “box‐
       like” appearances. This may include the use of courtyards,
       balconies, offset plans, deeply recessed or projecting
       windows, sloping roofs, and extensively landscaped yards.
L24.8 Establish special zoning provisions for development on
       small or narrow lots in addition to the limitations on
       density and floor area ratios contained herein.
 Objective L25: Promoting the safety of individuals in RH
 neighborhoods.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                    P a g e | 44

                         Policies:
                         L25.1Require that the primary entrance of a front unit be
                                 accessed from and oriented toward the street.
                         L25.2 Require that perimeter fencing and landscaping be kept
                                 low for visual clearance to the street.
                         L25.3 Require that parking below habitable spaces be fully
                                 underground or within fully enclosed structures.
                          Objective     L26:    Incorporating    measures   to promote
                          sustainability in RH neighborhoods.
                         Policies:
                         L26.1 Incorporate water conservation measures in the zoning
                                 development standards for new construction and
                                 substantial remodeling or building expansion, as it relates
                                 to green building construction, percentage of permeable
                                 ground surfaces, building floor area limitations, lot
                                 coverage, landscaping and irrigation, greywater
                                 plumbing requirements, rainwater capture, and design
                                 review.
                         L26.2 Consider a water impact fee to apply to new residential
                                 dwelling units and additions to existing development, to
                                 fund water fixture retrofits of existing homes and other
                                 water conservation measures.
                         L26.3 Conduct a historic resources survey to encourage retention
                                 of existing older structures.
                         L26.4 Provide incentives for property owners to retrofit
                                 historically designated properties with water saving
                                 fixtures.
                         L26.5 Consider requiring individual meters for each dwelling
                                 unit for new construction, for the purpose of tracking
                                 water usage per unit.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                    P a g e | 45
Combined Uses Overlay Designation
Residential Entrepreneur (Map designation RE)
 Objective L27: Providing         opportunities     for    small
 entrepreneurial businesses, service and professional offices in
 addition to residential uses near the downtown area where
 transit opportunities exist and where a mix of uses already
 exists.
Policies:
 L27.1 Create an overlay zoning ordinance that allows for certain
        commercial uses in addition to residential uses.
        Residential densities, floor area ratios, and other
        development standards shall be the same as for the
        underlying residential zone.
 L27.2 Maintain zoning districts which contain classifications of
        permitted and conditionally permitted uses allowed on a
        block by block basis.
 L27.3 Adopt an overlay zoning ordinance to implement the RE
        designation, and review and update such ordinance and
        other implementing ordinances every two years to ensure
        compliance with the Goals, Objectives and Policies of the
        General Plan.
 Objective L28: Requiring that new development be designed
 to be compatible with the existing residential appearance in
 order to maintain the City’s village setting.
Policies:
L28.1 Encourage adaptive reuse of the existing structures and
        prohibit the demolition and replacement of residential
        structures with development which contains commercial
        uses only.
L28.2 Require Planning Commission review (appealable to the
        City Council) when a             change of use occurs from
        residential to business and office uses.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                 P a g e | 46

                          Objective L29: Preserving the residential feel of East and West
                          Sierra Madre Boulevard and South Baldwin Avenue.
                         Policies:
                         L29.1 Allow for existing structures to be converted to limited
                                 office and business use, but require that any new
                                 development (construction) include residential uses or
                                 both residential and limited business uses.
                         L29.2 Require that the construction of any new primary
                                 structures on a property designated RE be reviewed by the
                                 Planning Commission.
                         L29.3 Review and update the RP Zoning Ordinance and other
                                 implementing ordinances as necessary every two years to
                                 ensure compliance with the Goals, Objectives and
                                 Policies of the General Plan.
                           Objective L30: The incorporation of measures to promote
                           sustainability in RE neighborhoods.
                         Policies:
                         L30.1 Incorporate water conservation measures in the zoning
                                development standards for new construction and
                                substantial remodeling or building expansion, as it relates to
                                green building construction, percentage of permeable
                                ground surfaces, building floor area limitations, lot
                                coverage, landscaping and irrigation, greywater plumbing
                                requirements, rainwater capture, and design review.
                         L30.2 Consider a water impact fee to apply to new residential
                                 dwelling units and additions to existing development, to
                                 fund water fixture retrofits of existing homes and other
                                 water conservation measures.
                         L30.3 Conduct a historic resources survey to encourage retention
                                of existing older structures.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 47
L30.4 Provide incentives for property owners to retrofit
        historically designated properties with water saving
        fixtures.
L30.5 Consider requiring individual meters for each dwelling
        unit for new construction, for the purpose of tracking
        water usage per unit.
Commercial (Map designation C)
 Objective L31: Providing for infill development in the
 downtown area to create a uniform and consistent pattern of
 development.
Policies:
L31.1 Limit the floor area of all above ground buildings and
        structures (including garages and other non‐habitable
        areas, but excluding basements and other fully‐
        subterranean spaces) to 1.0 FAR and height of 30 feet.
L31.2 Establish a front yard setback for new construction which
        allows for outdoor dining and sales uses, landscaping,
        and/or decorative paving.
L31.3 Discourage on‐site parking along the street frontage to
        maintain the streetscape.
 Objective L32: Providing for the upgrading and adaptive
 reuse of existing structures.
Policy:
L32.1 Allow the reconstruction of existing non‐conforming
        structures which must be replaced due to deterioration or
        hazard (fire and earthquake).
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                P a g e | 48

                          Objective L33: Maintaining a commercial area designed to
                          enhance pedestrian activity, preserve historic patterns of
                          development and foster community values.
                         Policies:
                         L33.1 Require that the ground floor elevation of a commercial
                                space (storefront or professional) facing the sidewalk be
                                visibly and physically penetrable by placing windows and
                                doorways at the street elevation.
                         L33.2 Encourage professional and personal service businesses and
                                other non‐retail uses to locate on the second floor or to the
                                rear of commercial properties, thereby allowing retail uses
                                to be located along the street frontage.
                         L33.3 Encourage the use of awnings, overhangs, porticoes,
                                 trellises, and other design elements which provide
                                 protection to pedestrians.
                         L33.4 Encourage the use of architectural design elements such as
                                showcase windows, cornices, and columns to provide
                                interest along the sidewalk.
                         L33.5 Require that front elevations be designed to mimic small
                                individual storefronts even if one tenant intends to use the
                                space. This may be accomplished using vertical design
                                elements to break up the façade.
                         L33.6 Encourage the use of traditional building materials such as
                                tile, textured concrete, color‐tinted concrete, decorative
                                masonry (brick, river rock), wood siding, and stucco.
                         L33.7 Encourage the development of outdoor spaces for dining,
                                and public gathering spaces.
                         L33.8 Require that landscaping be designed with form and
                                function in mind – that the plant materials be low
                                maintenance as well as attractive, and drought tolerant
                                plants that use the minimum amount of water.
                         L33.9 Require signage to be designed as part of the overall
                                architectural design theme through the use of similar
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 49

       materials and colors, as well as proportionate size and
       location.
 Objective L34: Promoting greater linkage between off‐street
 parking areas and commercial uses.
Policies:
L34.1 Encourage the enhancement of rear entrances to existing
       businesses.
L34.2 Require that new construction adjacent to a parking area be
       designed to have access from the parking area as well as the
       street.
L34.3 Identify opportunities to improve pedestrian access from
       public parking areas to commercial uses, particularly the
       access from the parking lot on Mariposa Avenue to the
       commercial uses on the south side of Sierra Madre
       Boulevard.
L34.4 Improve directional signage and develop educational
       materials to encourage the use of available public parking.
 Objective L35: Achieving a mix of uses which accomplishes a
 healthy balance of local services and visitor attraction while
 maximizing the City’s revenues from property and other
 taxes.
Policies:
L35.1 Prohibit any new, and the expansion of existing institutional
       facilities.
L35.2 Accommodate a diversity of commercial uses intended to
       meet the needs of local residents.
L35.3 Accommodate commercial uses intended to attract visitors
       such as gift shops, lodging, specialty shops, antiques, retail
       sales and rental of outdoor and recreational equipment, art
       galleries, and sales of local art and crafts.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                    P a g e | 50

                         L35.4 Allow for residential uses at the rear and above the first
                                floor on commercial properties.
                         L35.5 Establish a required minimum depth for commercial uses
                                which have residential uses located at the rear.
                         L35.6 Review and update the C Zoning Ordinance and other
                                implementing ordinances every two years as necessary to
                                ensure compliance with the Goals and Policies of the General
                                Plan.
                          Objective L36: Conserving the City’s water resources.
                         Policies:
                         L36.1 Incorporate water conservation measures in the zoning
                                development standards for new construction and
                                substantial remodeling or building expansion, including
                                but not limited to green building construction, percentage
                                of permeable ground surfaces, landscaping and irrigation,
                                and design review.
                         L36.2 Consider a water impact fee to apply to new commercial
                                development and additions to existing development, to
                                fund water fixture retrofits of existing development or other
                                water conservation measures.
                         L36.3 Consider the establishment of a home inspection program
                                upon sale of property to confirm the retrofit of property to
                                existing City water saving standards.
                         Artisan Mixed Use (Map designation AMU)
                          Objective L37: Allowing for complementary commercial,
                          residential, and manufacturing uses on East Montecito Avenue
                          which appeal to local residents as well as visitors to the City,
                          where artisans can work and live, and where craft‐related
                          manufacturing can take place.
                         Policies:
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                      P a g e | 51

L37.1   Create standards for adaptive reuse of existing
        manufacturing properties to accommodate mixed land
        uses.
L37.2   Accommodate light manufacturing uses which support
        design related industries.
L37.3   Accommodate a full diversity of craft related businesses
        including, but not limited to, furniture making, pottery,
        and art and design studios.
L37.4 Accommodate a full diversity of entertainment and
       specialty stores including, but not limited to, bookstores,
       galleries, boutiques, performance art venues, hotels, and
       cafes.
L37.5 Accommodate professional offices.
L37.6 Accommodate live/work space for artists to have studios in
       concert with residential units.
L37.7 Accommodate housing units (i) on the second level, or to
       the rear of buildings provided that the impacts of noise,
       odor, and other adverse characteristics of commercial
       activity can be adequately mitigated, and a healthy, safe,
       and well‐designed environment is achieved for the
       residential units, and (ii) in the easterly third of the Artisan
       Mixed‐Use area.
L37.8 Ensure that all development and new uses are compatible
       with adjacent uses, and yield no significant negative impacts
       to noise, air quality, water quality and traffic.
L37.9 Encourage the addition of street trees to make the area less
       industrial and more attractive.
L37.10 Allow buildings to utilize outdoor display space closer to
        the street to show wares.
L37.11 Ensure that all new development and uses provide sufficient
        off‐street parking.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                      P a g e | 52

                         L37.12 Examine other parking opportunities and other options to
                                   address the shortfall of on‐site parking space
                                   requirements in order to accommodate re‐use of existing
                                   commercial spaces and new uses.
                          Objective L38: Providing for infill development that allows
                          diversity yet is complementary.
                         Policies:
                         L38.1 Permit a maximum above‐ground building area (including
                                 garages and other non‐habitable areas, but excluding
                                 basements and other fully subterranean spaces), expressed
                                 as the ratio of building area to lot size (floor area ratio), of
                                 a maximum of 1.0 and height of 30 feet for structures
                                 designed for the intended use of light manufacturing,
                                 general commercial, and residential.
                         L38.2 Adopt an Artisan Mixed Use Zoning Ordinance to regulate
                                 commercial, light‐manufacturing and residential uses.
                         L38.3 Require the issuance of a conditional use permit for new
                                 uses to adequately protect adjacent uses.
                         L38.4 Review and update the Artisan Mixed Use Zoning
                                 Ordinance and other implementing ordinances every two
                                 years to ensure compliance with the Goals and Policies of
                                 the General Plan.
                          Objective L39: Conserving the City’s water resources.
                         Policies:
                         L39.1   Incorporate water conservation measures in the zoning
                                 development standards for new construction and
                                 substantial remodeling or building expansion, including
                                 but not limited to green building construction, percentage
                                 of permeable ground surfaces, building floor area
                                 limitations, lot coverage, landscaping and irrigation,
                                 greywater plumbing requirements, rainwater capture, and
                                 design review.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                         P a g e | 53

L39.2 Consider a water impact fee to apply to new residential
         units, new commercial or industrial development, and
         additions to existing development, to fund water fixture
         retrofits of existing homes and other water conservation
         measures.
L39.3 Conduct a historic resources survey to encourage retention
        of existing older structures.
L39.4 Provide incentives for property owners to retrofit
        historically designated structures with water saving fixtures .
Central Core Area
 Objective L40: Maintaining residential density and building
 height restrictions in the Central Core Area.
Policies:
L40.1 Limit density of new residential use in central core area to
         a maximum 13 dwelling units per acre.
L40.2 Limit height of new construction in the central core area to
         a maximum of two stories and 30 feet.
Implementation:
Enforce Measure V, Voter’s Empowerment Ordinance, Municipal
Code Chapter 17.35, which by its terms is set forth in full here:
17.35.010 ‐ Title.
This chapter shall be known as the Sierra Madre votersʹ empowerment
ordinance.
(Init. Ord. 2‐30‐13 (part), 2007)
17.35.020 ‐ Findings.
The people of Sierra Madre find and determine as follows:
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                     P a g e | 54

                         A. Preserving the small town character of downtown Sierra Madre is a
                         matter of utmost importance, and residents of our city must not be
                         excluded from major decisions affecting our downtown.
                         B. No city council or city staff can possess the necessary community‐
                         wide sensitivity to make decisions to ensure that the small town
                         character of downtown Sierra Madre will be preserved.
                         C. Only by carefully considering long‐standing land use goals as to height
                         and density will the small town character of downtown Sierra Madre
                         be maintained for all members of our community.
                         D. Downtown development decisions that could deviate from our long‐
                         standing goals should be made by the entire city after a public debate
                         and an election, and not by a few city hall insiders.
                         (Init. Ord. 2‐30‐13 (part), 2007)
                         17.35.030 ‐ Core area height limit.
                         On and after the effective date of the initiative ordinance codified in this
                         chapter, no new construction shall be permitted or occur within the
                         central core area (as those terms are defined in this chapter) which exceeds
                         the height limit as specifically defined below in this chapter, and more
                         generally described as no more than thirty feet and two stories in height.
                         (Init. Ord. 2‐30‐13 (part), 2007)
                         17.35.040 ‐ Core area density limit.
                         A. On and after the effective date of the initiative ordinance codified in
                         this chapter, no new construction shall be permitted or occur with the
                         central core area (as those terms are defined in this chapter), which exceeds
                         the density limit as specifically defined below in this chapter, and more
                         generally described as no more than thirteen dwelling units per acre of
                         land. A density bonus, to the extent required by state law to provide
                         additional units for affordable housing, may be allowed in addition to this
                         density limit, but no greater than as specifically required by state law.
                         B. Notwithstanding the density limit set forth in Sub‐section A, an
                         assisted living facility which is consistent with the “Kensington
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                               P a g e | 55

(Assisted Living Facility) Specific Plan,” which was conditionally
approved on July 24, 2012 and on file with the City Clerk of the City of
Sierra Madre may be constructed on the parcels located at 33 North
Hermosa Avenue (APN 5768‐019‐043) and 245 West Sierra Madre
Boulevard (APN 5768‐019‐041), which parcels together comprise
approximately 1.84 acres.”
(Init. Ord. 2‐30‐13 (part), 2007; Ord. 1331, 2012)
17.35.050 ‐ Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to the provisions of this chapter:
ʺCentral core areaʺ means the downtown geographic area within the
city of Sierra Madre generally shown on the map attached to the
initiative ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A, and used for
illustration purposes only, and more particularly described as all property
in public and private ownership assigned the following 2006‐
2007 Los Angeles County assessor parcel numbers (ʺAPNʺ), and also
all of the following described portions of streets, rights‐of‐way, and
easements immediately abutting such assessor parcels (street addresses
are provided for information purposes only and may be in error). In the
event of any uncertainty the 2006‐2007 assessor parcel number shall
govern:
A. North Side of Montecito Avenue Between Baldwin and an Unnamed
Alley.
 1. APN 5767‐013‐900            city property, Montecito
 2. APN 5767‐013‐024            41 E. Montecito Ave.
 3. APN 5767‐014‐022            71 E. Montecito Ave.
 4. APN 5767‐014‐023            61 E. Montecito Ave.
 5. APN 5767‐014‐028            61 E. Montecito Ave.
 6. APN 5767‐014‐021            77 E. Montecito Ave.
 7. APN 5767‐014‐027            85 E. Montecito Ave.
 8. APN 5767‐014‐026            85 E. Montecito Ave.
 9. APN 5767‐014‐020            89 E. Montecito Ave.
 10. APN 5767‐014‐019           97 E. Montecito Ave.
 11. APN 5767‐014‐035           123 E. Montecito Ave.
 12. APN 5767‐014‐032           139 E. Montecito Ave.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                         P a g e | 56

                          13. APN 5767‐014‐033        145 E. Montecito Ave.
                          14. APN 5767‐014‐034        145 E. Montecito Ave.
                          15. APN 5767‐014‐013        155 E. Montecito Ave.
                          16. APN 5767‐014‐012        161 E. Montecito Ave.
                          17. APN 5767‐014‐011        167 E. Montecito Ave.
                          18. APN 5767‐014‐009        171 E. Montecito Ave.
                          19. APN 5767‐014‐010        175 E. Montecito Ave.
                          20. APN 5767‐014‐008        179 E. Montecito Ave.
                          21. APN 5767‐014‐007        181 E. Montecito Ave.
                          22. APN 5767‐014‐005        187 E. Montecito Ave.
                          23. APN 5767‐014‐006        189 E. Montecito Ave.
                        B. South Side of Montecito Avenue Between Baldwin and an Unnamed
                        Alley.
                          24. APN 5767‐015‐040        38 E. Montecito Ave.
                          25. APN 5767‐015‐041        40 E. Montecito Ave.
                          26. APN 5767‐015‐042        52 E. Montecito Ave.
                          27. APN 5767‐015‐043        70 E. Montecito Ave.
                          28. APN 5767‐015‐044        72 E. Montecito Ave.
                          29. APN 5767‐015‐045        80 E. Montecito Ave.
                          30. APN 5767‐015‐045        80 E. Montecito Ave.
                          31. APN 5767‐015‐046        90 E. Montecito Ave.
                          32. APN 5767‐015‐047        100 E. Montecito Ave.
                          33. APN 5767‐015‐048        lot E. Montecito Ave.
                          34. APN 5767‐015‐014        162 E. Montecito Ave.
                          35. APN 5767‐015‐015        174 E. Montecito Ave.
                          36. APN 5767‐015‐028        134 E. Montecito Ave.
                          37. APN 5767‐015‐029        150 E. Montecito Ave.
                          38. APN 5767‐015‐058        194 E. Montecito Ave.
                          39. APN 5767‐015‐105        lot E. Montecito Ave.
                          40. Part of APN 5767‐015‐ northerly 211 feet of a city‐owned alley
                        900
                        C. North Side of Sierra Madre Boulevard East of Baldwin.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                         P a g e | 57

 41. APN 5767‐015‐039          25 E. Sierra Madre Bl.
 42. APN 5767‐015‐055          33 E. Sierra Madre Bl.
D. South Side of Sierra Madre Boulevard East of Baldwin.
 43. APN 5767‐025‐038          14 E. Sierra Madre Bl.
 44. APN 5767‐025‐041          14 E. Sierra Madre Bl.
 45. APN 5767‐025‐042          14 E. Sierra Madre Bl.
E. East Side of Baldwin Avenue Between Sierra Madre and Highland.
 46. APN 5767‐015‐038          4 North Baldwin Ave.
 47. APN 5767‐015‐036          12 North Baldwin Ave.
 48. APN 5767‐015‐037          12 North Baldwin Ave.
 49. APN 5767‐015‐104          20 North Baldwin Ave.
 50. APN 5767‐015‐034          26 North Baldwin Ave.
 51. APN 5767‐015‐033          34 North Baldwin Ave.
 52. APN 5767‐015‐032          38 North Baldwin Ave.
 53. APN 5767‐015‐031          52 North Baldwin Ave.
 54. APN 5767‐015‐030          54 North Baldwin Ave.
 55. APN 5767‐013‐018          90 North Baldwin Ave.
 56. APN 5767‐013‐003          94 North Baldwin Ave.
 57. APN 5767‐013‐002          108 North Baldwin Ave.
 58. APN 5767‐013‐001          122 North Baldwin Ave.
 59. APN 5767‐013‐800          telephone co. property
 60. APN 5767‐013‐801          telephone co. property
F. East Side of Baldwin Avenue Between Sierra Madre and Suffolk.
 61. APN 5767‐025‐906          city property S. Baldwin
 62. APN 5767‐025‐907          city property S. Baldwin
 63. APN 5767‐025‐066          50 S. Baldwin Ave.
 64. APN 5767‐025‐069          17 Suffolk Ave.
G. West Side of Baldwin Avenue Between Sierra Madre and Montecito
Avenue.
 65. APN 5767‐018‐019          29 North Baldwin Ave.
 66. APN 5767‐018‐020          29 North Baldwin Ave.
 67. APN 5767‐018‐021          31 North Baldwin Ave.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                P a g e | 58

                          68. APN 5767‐018‐022       31 North Baldwin Ave.
                          69. APN 5767‐018‐023       35 North Baldwin Ave.
                          70. APN 5767‐018‐024       35 North Baldwin Ave.
                          71. APN 5767‐019‐024       41 North Baldwin Ave.
                          72. APN 5767‐019‐025       41 North Baldwin Ave.
                          73. APN 5767‐019‐021       55 North Baldwin Ave.
                          74. APN 5767‐019‐018       65 North Baldwin Ave.
                          75. APN 5767‐019‐017       73 North Baldwin Ave.
                        H. Kersting Court, Near Northwest Corner of Baldwin and Sierra
                        Madre.
                          76. APN 5767‐018‐900       city park Baldwin/Kersting
                          77. APN 5767‐018‐025       1 Kersting Court
                          78. APN 5767‐018‐016       11 Kersting Court
                          79. APN 5767‐018‐015       11 Kersting Court (rear)
                          80. APN 5767‐018‐013       13 Kersting Court
                          81. APN 5767‐018‐012       15 Kersting Court
                          80. APN 5767‐018‐010       15 Kersting Court (rear)
                          82. APN 5767‐018‐011       17 Kersting Court
                          83. APN 5767‐018‐009       17 Kersting Court (rear)
                        I. West Side of Baldwin Avenue Between Sierra Madre and South of
                        Mariposa.
                          84. APN 5767‐023‐007       27 S. Baldwin Ave.
                          85. APN 5767‐023‐008       31 S. Baldwin Ave.
                          86. APN 5767‐023‐009       35 S. Baldwin Av. (Parkg)
                          87. APN 5767‐023‐036       41 S. Baldwin Ave.
                          88. APN 5767‐023‐037       41 S. Baldwin Ave.
                          89. APN 5767‐024‐033       65 S. Baldwin Av. (PO)
                          90. APN 5767‐024‐039       65 S. Baldwin Av. (PO)
                          91. APN 5767‐024‐030       85 S. Baldwin Av. (Lot)
                        J. West Montecito Avenue, Montecito Court, and Windsor Lane.
                          92. APN 5767‐019‐016       20 W. Montecito Ave.
                          93. APN 5767‐018‐014       9 Montecito Court
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 59

 94. APN 5767‐019‐009          15 Montecito Court
 95. APN 5767‐019‐020          50 Montecito Court
 96. APN 5767‐019‐019          72 Montecito Court
 97. APN 5767‐020‐900          city parking lot
 98. APN 5767‐019‐027          24 Windsor Lane
 99. APN 5767‐020‐017          39 Windsor Lane
K. North Side of West Sierra Madre Boulevard Between Baldwin and
Auburn Avenue.
 100. APN 5767‐018‐007         25 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 101. APN 5767‐018‐008         25 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 102. APN 5767‐018‐005         31 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 103. APN 5767‐018‐006         31 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 104. APN 5767‐018‐003         37 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 105. APN 5767‐018‐004         37 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 106. APN 5767‐018‐001         47 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 107. APN 5767‐018‐002         47 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 108. APN 5767‐020‐023         55 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 109. APN 5767‐020‐024         55 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 110. APN 5767‐020‐025         55 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 111. APN 5767‐020‐008         71 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 112. APN 5767‐020‐007         73 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 113. APN 5767‐020‐005         81 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 114. APN 5767‐020‐006         81 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 115. APN 5767‐020‐003         87 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 116. APN 5767‐020‐004         87 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 117. APN 5767‐020‐001         91 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 118. APN 5767‐020‐002         91 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
L. North Side of West Sierra Madre Boulevard Between Auburn and
Hermosa.
 119. APN 5767‐022‐054         115 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 120. APN 5767‐022‐055         125 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 121. APN 5767‐022‐010         127 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA               P a g e | 60

                          122. APN 5767‐022‐038       147 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          123. APN 5767‐022‐039       147 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          124. APN 5767‐022‐045       161 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          125. APN 5767‐022‐046       161 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          126. APN 5767‐022‐012       181 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          127. APN 5767‐022‐015       183 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          128. APN 5767‐022‐011       191 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          129. APN 5767‐022‐036       201 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          130. APN 5767‐022‐052       201 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                        M. West Side of Auburn Avenue North of Sierra Madre Boulevard.
                          131. APN 5767‐022‐006       15 Auburn Ave.
                          132. APN 5767‐022‐004       27 Auburn Ave.
                          133. APN 5767‐022‐003       37 Auburn Ave.
                          134. APN 5767‐022‐002       47 Auburn Ave.
                          135. APN 5767‐022‐001       55 Auburn Ave.
                        N. North Side of Sierra Madre Between Hermosa Avenue and West of
                        Lima Street.
                          136. APN 5768‐019‐043       33 N. Hermosa Avenue
                          137. APN 5768‐019‐041       245 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          138. APN 5768‐019‐067       283 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          139. APN 5768‐019‐025       297 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          140. APN 5768‐019‐026       297 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          141. APN 5768‐019‐003       303 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          142. APN 5768‐019‐001       321 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          143. APN 5768‐019‐066       331 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          144. APN 5768‐018‐023       341 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          145. APN 5768‐018‐022       347 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                        O. South Side of Sierra Madre Between Baldwin and Hermosa Avenue.
                          146. APN 5767‐023‐001       2 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          147. APN 5767‐023‐002       12 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          148. APN 5767‐023‐003       14 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          149. APN 5767‐023‐004       16 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                      P a g e | 61

 150. APN 5767‐023‐005         18 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 151. APN 5767‐023‐006         24 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 152. APN 5767‐023‐031         38 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 153. APN 5767‐023‐034         38 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 154. APN 5767‐023‐039         48 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 155. APN 5767‐023‐040         48 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 156. APN 5767‐023‐026         60 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 157. APN 5767‐023‐025         62 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 158. APN 5767‐023‐022         70 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 159. APN 5767‐023‐021         74 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 160. APN 5767‐023‐020         78 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 161. APN 5767‐023‐019         80 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 162. APN 5767‐023‐041         80 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 163. APN 5767‐023‐015         82 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 164. APN 5767‐023‐018         82 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 165. APN 5767‐023‐038         90 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 166. APN 5767‐023‐013         100 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 167. APN 5767‐023‐014         100 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 168. APN 5767‐024‐015         110 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 169. APN 5767‐024‐016         110 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 170. APN 5767‐024‐017         110 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 171. APN 5767‐024‐018         110 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 172. APN 5767‐024‐013         120 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 173. APN 5767‐024‐014         120 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 174. APN 5767‐024‐011         138 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 175. APN 5767‐024‐012         140 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 176. APN 5767‐024‐009         154 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 177. APN 5767‐024‐010         154 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 178. APN 5767‐024‐007         170 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
 179. APN 5767‐024‐008         170 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
P. South Side of Sierra Madre Between Hermosa Avenue and West of
Lima Sheet.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA               P a g e | 62

                          180. APN 5768‐020‐902          city park
                          181. APN 5768‐020‐907          city park
                          182. APN 5768‐020‐908          city park
                          183. APN 5768‐020‐905          City Hall and facilities
                          184. APN 5768‐020‐906          City Hall and facilities
                          185. APN 5768‐020‐909          City Hall and facilities
                          186. APN 5768‐020‐910          City Hall and facilities
                          187. APN 5768‐020‐030          280 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          188. APN 5768‐020‐031          280 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          189. APN 5768‐020‐028          300 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          190. APN 5768‐020‐029          300 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          191. APN 5768‐020‐039          304 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          192. APN 5768‐020‐024          304 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          193. APN 5768‐020‐025          304 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          194. APN 5768‐020‐022          314 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          195. APN 5768‐020‐023          314 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          196. APN 5768‐020‐020          322 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          197. APN 5768‐020‐021          322 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          198. APN 5768‐020‐001          330 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          199. APN 5768‐021‐008          350 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          200. APN 5768‐021‐031          370 W. Sierra Madre Bl.
                          201. APN 5768‐020‐002          22 S. Lima Street
                          202. APN 5768‐021‐030          23 S. Lima Street
                        Q. North Side of Mariposa Street Between Baldwin and Hermosa.
                          203. APN 5767‐023‐900          city parking, Mariposa St.
                          204. APN 5767‐023‐901          city parking, Mariposa St.
                          205. APN 5767‐024‐006          40 S. Hermosa Ave.
                         R. Public Rights‐of‐Way, Streets, Alleys, and Easements. The following
                         described portions of public rights‐of‐way, streets, alleys, and easements
                         are also included with the central core area:
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                               P a g e | 63

1. Auburn Avenue. The portion of the Auburn Avenue public right‐of‐
way located between West Sierra Madre Boulevard and the northerly edge
of West Montecito Avenue located to the south of 2006‐2007 Los Angeles
County Assessor Parcel Number 5767‐020‐014 (but not including the
parcel itself).
2. Baldwin Avenue. The portion of the Baldwin Avenue public right‐of‐
way located between a line extending westward along the northerly edge
of Highland Avenue and a line located one hundred fifty feet south of
and parallel to the southerly edge of Mariposa Street.
3. Hermosa Avenue (North). The portion of the North Hermosa Avenue
public right‐of‐way located between West Sierra Madre Boulevard and a
point two hundred twelve feet north of the northerly edge of Sierra
Madre Boulevard.
4. Hermosa Avenue (South). The portion of the South Hermosa Avenue
public right‐of‐way located between West Sierra Madre Boulevard and a
line located 460.7 feet south of and parallel to the southerly edge of
Sierra Madre Boulevard.
5. Lima Street (North). The portion of the North Lima Street public right‐
of‐way located between West Sierra Madre Boulevard and a line one
hundred fifty feet north of and parallel to the northerly edge of Sierra
Madre Boulevard.
6. Lima Street (South). The portion of the South Lima Street public right‐
of‐way located between Sierra Madre Boulevard and a line one hundred
sixty‐three feet south of and parallel to the southerly edge of Sierra
Madre Boulevard.
7. Mariposa Street. The portion of the Mariposa Street public right‐of‐
way located between Baldwin Avenue and a line four hundred fifty‐nine
feet west of and parallel to the westerly edge of South Hermosa Avenue.
8. Montecito Avenue (East). The portion of the East Montecito Avenue
public right‐of‐way located between Baldwin Avenue and the easterly
edge of the unnamed alley located one hundred feet west of and parallel
to Mountain Trail.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                        P a g e | 64

                         9. Montecito Avenue (West). The portion of the West Montecito Avenue
                         public right‐of‐way located between Baldwin Avenue and a line extending
                         northward from the westerly edge of Montecito Court, and a separate
                         portion of the West Montecito Avenue public right‐of‐way located
                         between the easterly edge of Auburn Avenue and a line one hundred fifty
                         feet west of and parallel to the westerly edge of Auburn Avenue.
                         10. Montecito Court. All of the Montecito Court public right‐of‐way
                         located between West Montecito Avenue and extending southward and
                         then westward to the easterly edge of Auburn Avenue.
                         11. Sierra Madre Boulevard. The portion of the Sierra Madre Boulevard
                         public right‐of‐way located between a line two hundred eighty‐five east
                         of and parallel to the easterly edge of Baldwin Avenue and another line
                         two hundred fifty‐nine feet west of and parallel to the westerly edge
                         Lima Street.
                         12. Suffolk Avenue. The portion of the Suffolk Avenue public right‐of‐
                         way located between South Baldwin Avenue and a line one hundred sixty‐
                         four feet east of and parallel to the easterly edge of South Baldwin Avenue.
                         13. Unnamed Alley Extending North from East Montecito Avenue. All
                         of the unnamed alley public right‐of‐way located one hundred feet west
                         of and parallel to Mountain Trail between its northerly terminus and
                         the northerly edge of East Montecito Avenue.
                         14. Unnamed Alley Extending South from East Montecito Avenue. The
                         portion of the unnamed alley public right‐of‐way located one hundred
                         feet west of and parallel to Mountain Trail between the southerly edge of
                         East Montecito Avenue and a line two hundred eleven feet south of and
                         parallel to the southerly edge East Montecito Avenue. This portion of
                         the alley is part of 2006‐2007 Los Angeles County Assessor Parcel
                         Number 5767‐015‐900 owned by the city of Sierra Madre.
                         15. Unnamed Alley West of Mountain Trail. The portion of the
                         unnamed alley public right‐of‐way located one hundred fifty‐two and one‐
                         half feet north of and parallel to East Montecito Avenue between its
                         westerly terminus and a line extending northerly from and along the
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                               P a g e | 65

easterly edge of another unnamed alley perpendicular thereto and
located one hundred feet west of and parallel to Mountain Trail.
16. Unnamed Alley Extending North from Montecito Court. The
portion of the unnamed alley public right‐of‐way located sixty‐five feet
west of and parallel to Windsor Lane that extends north from Montecito
Court to a line one hundred nine feet north of and parallel to Montecito
Court.
17. Unnamed Alley Extending West of North Lima Street. The portion
of the unnamed alley public right‐of‐way located one hundred fifty north
of and parallel to West Sierra Madre Boulevard extending from the
westerly edge of North Lima Street and a line eighty‐five feet west of
and parallel to the westerly edge of North Lima Street.
18. Unnamed Alley Near City Parking Lot. All of the unnamed alley
public right‐of‐way extending northerly from Mariposa Street between
2006‐2007 Los Angeles County Assessor Parcel Numbers 5767‐024‐034
and 5767‐024‐900, and then extending westerly until its terminus at
the easterly edge of Assessor Parcel Number 5767‐024‐041.
19. Windsor Lane. The portion of the Windsor Lane public right‐of‐way
located between West Sierra Madre Boulevard and a line one hundred
nine feet north of and parallel to Montecito Court.
ʺCityʺ means the city of Sierra Madre, including, but not limited to,
actions or policies of the city council.
ʺDensity limitʺ generally means no greater than thirteen dwelling units
per acre of land. This density limit shall be specifically applied as
follows: no new construction shall be permitted or constructed for more
than one dwelling unit for each three thousand three hundred fifty
square feet of area of a lot or parcel where units will be built. The
number of dwelling units allowed under this density limit shall be
rounded down to whole integers. For example, for half an acre (twenty‐
one thousand seven hundred eighty square feet) only six dwelling units
could be built.
ʺDwelling unitʺ is defined as follows in a manner consistent with its
2006 definition in Sierra Madre Municipal Code Section 17.08.020:
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                      P a g e | 66

                         ʺDwelling unitʺ means one or more rooms in a building designed and
                         intended to be used as living quarters by one person or a family.
                         ʺFinished gradeʺ means the final grade of the site which conforms to the
                         approved plan.
                         ʺHeightʺ is defined as follows in a manner consistent with its 2006
                         definition in Sierra Madre Municipal Code Section 17.08.020:
                         The ʺheightʺ of a building is the vertical distance above a reference datum
                         measured to the highest point of:
                         1. The coping of a flat roof; or
                         2. The deck line of a mansard roof; or
                         3. The average height of the highest pitched gable of a pitched or hipped
                             roof.
                         The reference datum shall be selected from one of the following
                         whichever yields a greater height of building:
                         a. The average elevation of adjoining finished grade within a five‐
                          foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building; or
                         b. The average elevation of adjoining pre‐existing grade or natural grade
                         within a five‐foot horizontal distance of the exterior wall of the building,
                         but natural grade shall not be used if the site has been previously graded
                         or developed.
                         The ʺheightʺ of a stepped or terraced building is the greatest height of any
                         segment of the building, and the height limit shall apply to each segment.
                         ʺHeight limitʺ means both no greater than a physical height of thirty
                         feet, and also no greater than two stories of enclosed space. Under no
                         circumstances shall the height limit be exceeded. No change in the height
                         limit shall be allowed as part of any density bonus offered for any
                         reason.
                         ʺMajor general plan changeʺ means any action by the city of Sierra
                         Madre, including, but not limited to, any change to the land use element
                         of the Sierra Madre general plan or the land use map in the Sierra
                         Madre general plan or by adoption or amendment of any specific plan
                         which would either:
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                              P a g e | 67

1. Increase the allowed height on any lot or parcel of land in the central
core area beyond the height limit, or
2. Increase the allowed development density on any lot or parcel of land
in the central core area beyond the density limit, or
3. Sell, lease, transfer, or allow any development of land or rights‐of‐way
or easements owned or controlled by the city of Sierra Madre or any public
entity within the central core area.
ʺMajor zone changeʺ means any action by the city of Sierra Madre,
including, but not limited to, any change to the Sierra Madre zoning
map or the Sierra Madre zoning code or any city ordinance or city council
resolution or motion or approval of a contract which would either:
1. Increase the allowed height on any lot or parcel of land in the central
   core area beyond the height limit, or
2. Increase the allowed development density on any lot or parcel of land
   in the central core area beyond the density limit, or
3. Sell, lease, transfer, or allow any development on any rights‐of‐way or
   easements or other land within the central core area owned or controlled
   by the city or by any public entity.
ʺNatural gradeʺ means the grade prior to the deposit of earth material
placed by artificial means and/or prior to mechanical removal of earth
material.
ʺNew constructionʺ means any physical activity to erect or alter any
building within the central core area, but does not include mere repairs
or maintenance of existing buildings or structures which does not increase
the physical height, number of habitable stories, or number of dwelling
units on a lot or parcel or in an existing building,
ʺPre‐existing gradeʺ means an established grade that exists on a site for
which a legal grading or building permit was in effect for ten years prior
to a request for a building, demolition, or grading permit.
ʺStoryʺ or ʺstoriesʺ are defined as follows in a manner consistent with
its 2006 definition in Sierra Madre Municipal Code Section 17.08.020:
      GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                        P a g e | 68

                         ʺStoryʺ means that portion of a building included between the upper
                         surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except
                         that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between
                         the upper surface of the topmost floor and the highest point of the exterior
                         roof above. If the finished floor level directly above a usuable or unused
                         underfloor is more than six feet above the pre‐existing grade or natural
                         grade for more than fifty percent of the total perimeter or it is more than
                         twelve feet above the finished grade at any point, such usable or unusable
                         underfloor shall be considered as a story.
                         ʺVoter approvalʺ means an ordinance proposed by the city council or
                         voter petition and affirmatively approved by a majority voting ʺYESʺ
                         on it at a regularly‐scheduled city election. The entire text of any such
                         proposed ordinance shall appear in all sample ballot materials.
                         Nothing in this chapter restricts the city from applying existing or
                         commonly used definitions to other words and phrases not specifically
                         defined in this chapter. (Init. Ord. 2‐30‐13 (part), 2007)
                         17.35.060 ‐ Zoning code and general plan amended.
                         On and after the effective date of the initiative ordinance codified in this
                         chapter:
                         A. The entire text of the initiative ordinance codified in this chapter is
                         hereby added to the zoning code of the city of Sierra Madre, and all
                         copies of the zoning code shall contain the entire text of this chapter.
                         B. The entire text of this chapter is hereby added to the land use element
                         of the 1996 Sierra Madre general plan under new a heading entitled
                         ʺ3.5 Central Core Areaʺ commencing at the middle of page 36 in
                         Chapter One, prior to the heading ʺ4. Institutional Land Uses.ʺ All copies
                         of the land use element of the general plan thereafter shall contain the
                         entire text of this chapter. (Init. Ord. 2‐30‐13 (part), 2007)
                         17.35.070 ‐ Zoning map and land use map amended.
                         On and after the effective date of the initiative ordinance codified in this
                         chapter, all copies of the zoning map and general plan land use map of
                         the city printed or distributed to the public by the city shall include or
                         attach a copy of the map of the central core area attached to the initiative
                         ordinance codified in this chapter as Exhibit A as follows:
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                               P a g e | 69

A. All copies of the zoning map of the city of Sierra Madre shall contain a
map of the central core area either printed on the zoning map itself or as
a separate attachment thereto.
B. All copies of land use map of the Sierra Madre general plan shall
contain a copy of a map of the central core area either printed on the
land use map itself or as a separate attachment thereto. (Init. Ord. 2‐30‐
13 (part), 2007)
17.35.080 ‐ Priority of this chapter.
On and after the effective date of the initiative ordinance codified in this
chapter, its provisions shall apply to all new construction in the central
core area without regard to any provisions of the Sierra Madre
Municipal Code or the Sierra Madre general plan that may be in conflict
with the provisions of this chapter. (Init. Ord. 2‐30‐13 (part), 2007)
17.35.090 ‐ Geographic scope of this chapter.
The provisions of this chapter apply to all land, all public or private rights‐
of‐way or easements, and their uses within the central core area only, and
the provisions of this chapter do not apply to property or rights‐of‐way or
easements outside the central core area. (Init. Ord. 2‐
30‐13 (part), 2007)
17.35.100 ‐ Relation to other land use regulations.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the authority of the city
to regulate uses of property or design standards or building construction
within the central core area as to matters outside the subjects of:
A. The maximum of two stories in any new construction,
B. The maximum of thirty feet height in any new construction,
   and
C. The maximum of thirteen net dwelling units per acre.
However, in no event may the city staff or city council approve any policy
or take any action which directly or indirectly undermines or is
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter except through the voter
approval mechanism set forth in Section 17.35.140 below. (Init. Ord. 2‐
30‐13 (part), 2007)
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                             P a g e | 70

                         17.35.110 ‐ Effective date.
                         The provisions of this chapter shall become effective at midnight after the
                         polls close on the same day of its approval by the voters at an election.
                         (Init. Ord. 2‐30‐13 (part), 2007)
                         17.35.120 ‐ Severability.
                         In the event a final judgment of a court determines that a provision of this
                         chapter, or a particular application of a provision, is invalid or
                         unenforceable pursuant to a state or federal law or constitution, that
                         invalid or unenforceable portion or application shall be severed from the
                         remainder of this chapter, and all other portions of this chapter shall
                         remain in effect without the invalid or unenforceable provision or
                         application. (Init. Ord. 2‐30‐13 (part), 2007)
                         17.35.130 ‐ Conflict with other ballot measures.
                         In the event that any ballot measure is proposed for voter approval on
                         the same election ballot as this initiative measure, and such other
                         measure contains provisions which deal with land uses or development
                         or construction in the central core area, it is the intent of the voters that
                         the provisions of this measure shall prevail over any such other measure
                         in its entirety, and to the extent that this measure receives a greater
                         number of votes for approval than any such other measure, it is the votersʹ
                         intent in enacting this measure that no provision of any such other
                         measure shall become effective. (Init. Ord. 2‐30‐13 (part), 2007)
                         17.35.140 ‐ Amendment.
                         No provision of this chapter may be amended or repealed except by a
                         majority of the voters of the city of Sierra Madre voting on a ballot
                         measure for that purpose placed before them at a regularly‐scheduled
                         municipal election. (Init. Ord. 2‐30‐13 (part), 2007)
                         Institutional (Map designation I)
                           Objective L41: Providing for the development of private
                           institutional uses in areas where such uses currently exist and
                           ensure that they are compatible with and complement
                           adjacent land uses.
                         Policies:
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                              P a g e | 71

L41.1  Require that private institutional uses are compatible
        with adjacent land uses, in the following ways:
       a.   Building, siting, massing, and scale shall be
            consistent with adjacent uses;
       b.   Structures should be designed to a high level of
            architectural quality, being a visual asset in the
            area in which they are located;
       c.   Landscaping should be incorporated in the
            building design and reflect the overall visual
            character of the district which surrounds it.
       d.   Building and sites shall be designed to enhance
            the pedestrian character of the City, by opening
            directly onto sidewalks, providing walkways,
            other pedestrian linkages, and other amenities
            and incorporating public open activity spaces.
L41.2   Allow for the expansion of existing institutional sites,
        including height and density beyond that allowed in
        adjacent commercial and residential areas, provided
        that a comprehensive master plan is approved by the
        City which demonstrates that the project:
       a.   Contains activities and functions which will be a
            significant asset for the City.
       b.    Adequately mitigates all impacts attributable to
            the increase in floor area ratio and height.
       c.    Conveys the village theme in its siting of
              structures, massing, scale, use of open space and
              architectural character.
       d.    Preserves historic structures to the maximum
              extent possible.
       e.    Provides additional benefits to the community
              above those which can be exacted to account for
              the direct impacts of the development. Such
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA               P a g e | 72
                                           benefits can include making available parking to
                                           the public when not needed for the use,
                                           dedicating on‐site recreational space or parkland
                                           facilities for public meetings, making day care
                                           available to the public, contributing to park site
                                           acquisition, and offsetting impacts to historic
                                           structures with monetary contribution to a
                                           preservation fund.
                                       f.   Will not displace or encroach into existing
                                          commercial uses.
                                       g. Incorporates water conservation practices such
                                          as but not limited to greywater plumbing,
                                          permeable ground surfaces, drought tolerant
                                          landscaping, green building materials, rainwater
                                          capture devices, and low‐flow fixtures.
                         L41.3      Allow the re‐use of existing institutional properties as
                                     appropriate for the following uses:
                                            a. Relocation of large institution.
                                            b. Retreat center, civic use or other such uses
                                                 operated by religious, non‐profit or health
                                                 organizations.
                                            c. Housing for institutional uses such as
                                                 dormitories.
                                            d. Parkland, open space, and public recreation
                                                 facilities.
                                            e. School.
                         L41.4      Retain all school sites that are needed to meet future
                                    educational needs and determine the appropriate use
                                    of surplus school property in the context of the City’s
                                    open space and recreation needs.
                         L41.5      Review and update the Institutional Zoning Ordinance
                                    and other implementing ordinances every two years as
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                      P a g e | 73

             necessary to ensure compliance with the Goals and
             Policies of the General Plan.
Municipal Government (Map designation M)
 Objective L42: Providing for the development of public
 institutional uses such as civic buildings, educational facilities,
 libraries, etc., in locations where these uses already exist and
 ensure that they are compatible with and complement
 adjacent land uses.
Policies:
L42.1       Allow for the development of a governmental agency or
            services building (administrative, police, fire) which is
            easily accessible to residents and other users.
L42.2       Allow for the development of resident‐serving
            public cultural facilities, such as libraries,
            museums, etc.
Open Space
Constructed Open Space (Map designation OS)
 Objective L43: Preserving constructed open space areas for the
 enjoyment of residents and visitors to Sierra Madre.
Policies:
L43.1    Allow the installation and maintenance of recreational
          equipment such as ball fields, fire rings, bridges, nature
          trails, picnic tables, and other equipment in existing park
          areas.
L43.2 Encourage the use of open space areas for the purposes of
        educating individuals and groups about the local
        environment. This may include informational gatherings,
        information kiosks, and other methods of public outreach.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 74

                         Natural Open Space (Map designation NOS)
                          Objective L44: The preservation of natural open space areas as
                          crucial to the distinctive character of Sierra Madre, and as a
                          key feature of sustainability and public safety.
                       Policies:
                         L44.1 Support the purchase of hillside property by the Sierra
                                 Madre Mountains Conservancy and similar organizations.
                         L44.2 Require stringent environmental analysis following
                                 existing conservation easements prior to the installation of
                                 any improvements for any purpose on existing
                                 unimproved hillside land, in order to preserve existing
                                 biology, natural habitat, resources and watershed health.
                         L44.3 Establish the role of natural open space as an interface to
                                 the wilderness area.
                          Objective 45: Acquiring additional natural and constructed
                          open space areas.
                         Policy:
                         L 45.1 When not preempted by Federal and State law, establish
                                 generally applicable standards that require applicants to
                                 dedicate land or provide payment of fees in lieu thereof in
                                 amounts that exceed the maximum dedication/fee
                                 thresholds set forth on Government Code 66477, or any
                                 successor statue.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                      P a g e | 75
                         Section Two:
                         Historic Preservation
                         OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
                         Prior to the arrival of the first Europeans in the 16th century, the
                         Los Angeles Basin was occupied by two major Native Californian
                         cultures: the Gabrielino and Chumash.
                         Native American artifacts have been found in Sierra Madre, and
                         according to the book titled “Southern California Story: Seeking the
                         Better Life in Sierra Madre”, “evidence has been found of Indians
                         living in the northwest part of the present‐day town adjacent to the
                         mountains around Marlborough Terrace and Vista Circle.ʺ (p.7).
                         The more recent history of Sierra Madre dates to the 1880s when
                         the area was first settled by eastern and midwestern families who
                         moved to the Los Angeles basin and purchased land from
                         Nathanial Carter.
                         Due to the incorporation of Arcadia and Pasadena to the east,
                         south and west, the growth of Sierra Madre has been limited to
                         three square miles. The development pattern was established
                         early with the commercial area being located in the south central
                         portion of the City and the residential neighborhoods around
                         the core. Sierra Madre has remained a “small town” due to its
                         size and development pattern. This is a quality that is cherished
                         by the Sierra Madre community. The preservation of many original
                         structures has led to a strong sense of place.
                         The Sierra Madre Historical Preservation Society and the
                         Archives at the Sierra Madre Public Library have strived to
                         maintain the City’s historical records and work with property
                         owners to preserve historic landmarks within the City. In 1988,
                         the City adopted a preservation ordinance which formalized the
                         process for designating historic properties and reviewing
                         requests for alterations and demolitions of those properties. This
                         ordinance was revised in 1997. (Ch. 17.82 of the Sierra Madre
                         Municipal Code.) An ordinance establishing a Cultural Heritage
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                         P a g e | 76

Commission was adopted at the same time. (Ch. 2.28 of Sierra
Madre Municipal Code.)
Both chapters were amended in 2001 pursuant to Ordinance No.
1134. In 2002, the duties of the Cultural Heritage Commission
were transferred to the Planning Commission pursuant to
Ordinance No. 1192.
Although a formal survey of historic properties according to the
guidelines of the State of California has not yet been conducted,
many properties have been designated as historic landmarks by
the City of Sierra Madre. Several others were de‐designated per
request of the property owners pursuant to Ordinance I‐97‐1,
though some arguably have historic value. Many owners of
historic properties are also members of the Sierra Madre Historical
Preservation Society, and comprise a group of stakeholders
concerned about the City’s support and facilitation of historic
preservation.
The City owns two historic buildings that are Interpretive
Museums: the Richardson House and Lizzie’s Trail Inn. Both are
maintained and operated by the Sierra Madre Historical
Preservation Society, and are important in the settlement and
early development of the City. Two other important early
buildings are within the development at One Carter/Stonegate:
the Macomber Cabin and the Carter Barn. The conditions of
approval for the development include measures to afford
protection to these buildings. The 1939 Willis Residence, also
located on the site, was designated a historical landmark in 2008.
The City of Sierra Madre participates in the Mills Act program, a
State program that provides tax incentives to the property owners
of designated historic properties for maintenance and
improvements.
CLASSIFICATIONS OF HISTORIC RESOURCES
The following criteria may be used to identify historic resources:
Cultural. It was the site of, or is associated with local, State, or
national cultural, social, economic, political, or natural history,
events and/or persons significant to the history of Sierra Madre,
or, it reflects significant geographical patterns, including those
associated with different eras of settlement and growth,
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 77

                         particular transportation modes, or distinctive examples of park
                         or community planning.
                         District. It contributes to the significance of a historic area, being a
                         geographically definable area or thematically related grouping of
                         historic, architectural or scenic resources which contribute to each
                         other, and are unified aesthetically by plan or physical
                         development.
                         Architectural. It is representative of the work or is one of a few
                         remaining examples of a notable builder, designer, or architect,
                         or, it embodies distinctive characteristics of a style, type, period,
                         or method of construction, or is a valuable example of architectural
                         achievement or innovation, such as the use of indigenous materials
                         or craftsmanship.
                         Scenic. It has a unique location or singular physical
                         characteristics, or is a view or vista representing an established
                         and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood, community, or the
                         City of Sierra Madre. Alternately, it meets the criteria for a Cultural
                         Landscape as defined under The Secretary of the Interior’s
                         Standards.
                         PRESERVATION BENEFITS
                         There are several benefits that help to identify the importance of
                         historic preservation in Sierra Madre:
                         1. The preservation of historic resources act to revitalize and
                         stabilize residential neighborhoods thus leading to improved
                         maintenance and increased property values.
                         2. The Sierra Madre community will realize greater civic and
                         neighborhood pride and a sense of identity as it gains a greater
                         understanding and appreciation of the City’s historic past.
                         3. The presence of historic resources attracts visitors to the City
                         thereby stimulating commerce.
                         4. Historic resources can be linked to cultural and recreational
                         activities of the community, such as the use of the Richardson
                         House and Lizzie’s Trail Inn at the head of Mt. Wilson Trail, and
                         the viewing of the historic Wistaria Vine each March.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                          P a g e | 78

5. The reuse of existing structures helps to conserve building
materials and energy resources, and helps to reduce construction
waste which occurs when structures are demolished
6. The retention of existing historic homes and structures to limit
redevelopment and reconstruction that would otherwise
maximize building floor area, creating a greater demand on the
City’s water resources and its ability to serve its customers.
SUMMARY OF HISTORIC PRESERVATION GOALS
    1. The preservation of historic structures in the City.
OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
The following objectives and policies promote the historic
preservation goals of Sierra Madre.               The implementation
measures are contained in the Implementation Section at the end
of the General Plan.
  Objective L46: Identifying and encouraging the preservation
  of significant historic resources.
Policies:
L46.1           Complete and utilize a comprehensive survey of
                 Sierra Madre’s significant historic resources
                 according to the guidelines from the State Office of
                 Historic Preservation.
L46.2            Compile and maintain an inventory (historic
                 register) of those historical resources within the City
                 which are identified as significant.
L46.3            Create a list of potential historic resources (those
                 identified by the comprehensive survey under
                 Policy L46.1) for special consideration under
                 CEQA, to the extent that they would otherwise be
                 exempt.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                      P a g e | 79

                         L46.4          Establish special zones or districts characterized by
                                        the presence of historical structures.
                         L46.5          Share historic preservation information with the
                                        public.
                         L46.6          Develop an information base of preservation
                                        techniques and economic incentives for the benefit
                                        of historic property owners.
                          Objective L47: Preserving in the long‐term significant
                          architectural and historical landmarks and districts.
                         Policies:
                         L47.1          Consider obtaining Certified Local Government
                                        status from the State Office of Historic
                                        Preservation.
                         L47.2          Encourage property owners to submit applications
                                        to qualify appropriate properties and buildings on
                                        the National Register of Historic Places, the State
                                        Register or the City’s Register of Historic
                                        Landmarks.
                         L47.3          Remove constraints on the use of historic
                                        structures by allowing for adaptive reuse of
                                        historic    properties,     waiving     development
                                        standards, and through other appropriate means.
                         L47.4          Develop guidelines for rehabilitation and new
                                        construction, demolition control, and regulation of
                                        uses in designated structures. Demolition control
                                        to include payment of significant fines and
                                        recompense for destroying historic resources
                                        without having followed applicable procedures.
                         L47.5          Ensure that, if and when landmarks are renovated
                                        by the property owner, it is done according to the
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 80

               Secretary of the Interior’s Standards, which
               accomplish the following:
                       a. Preservation of the distinguishing
                            features or character of the property
                            and its environment;
                       b. Allow for compatible uses which
                            provide the maximum appreciation of
                            the resource;
                       c. Allow         for    renovations    which
                            complement the neighborhood or
                            historic context within which the
                            resource exists.
L47.6          Consider the relaxation of current building and
               zoning codes, as necessary, to preserve significant
               structures, while ensuring that basic health and
               safety goals are met.
L47.7          Support tax incentives, protective covenants,
               preservation easements, code modifications, and
               other methods deemed mutually agreeable by the
               City and the property owner which will help to
               preserve historic resources.
L47.8          Allow for adaptive re‐use of significant
               architectural and historical structures provided
               that the use is compatible with the neighborhood
               in which it is located and with the approval of the
               Planning Commission.
L47.9          At such time any loans or grants are made
               available through public or private agencies for the
               purpose of renovating landmarks, assist in
               obtaining the grant or loan on behalf of the property
               owner.
L47.10          Provide staff with professional historic expertise to
               support for the preservation program.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                    P a g e | 81

                         L47.11          Maintain a historic preservation ordinance which
                                        has, as its purpose, the voluntary participation of
                                        property owners in the preservation of historic
                                        resources.
                         L47.12          Maintain and enact policies, regulations and
                                        programs to facilitate historic preservation.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                        P a g e | 82
                         Section Three:
                         Housing
                        The most recent Sierra Madre Housing Element (2014-2021) was
                        adopted by the Sierra Madre City Council on January 28, 2014.
                        Because the Housing Element was recently updated and is subject to
                        specific laws and timeframes dictated by the State of California, it is
                        not included in this General Plan and is provided under separate
                        cover.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                      P a g e | 83
                         Section Four:
                         Economic Development
                         OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
                         Commercial enterprises are located in two different areas of the
                         City. The most visible location for commercial enterprise is in the
                         central business district or “downtown”. The center of the
                         district is located at the intersection of Baldwin Avenue and
                         Sierra Madre Boulevard, roughly three‐quarters of a mile north of
                         the Interstate 210 Foothill Freeway. The business district was
                         established when the City was settled in the late 1800s. Less
                         obvious are the businesses which are located throughout the City
                         as home or internet‐based businesses.
                         The Sierra Madre business community includes retail,
                         professional office, light industrial and neighborhood services
                         centered along Sierra Madre Boulevard, Baldwin Avenue, and East
                         Montecito Avenue. This area is covered by Measure V and is
                         referred to herein as the central core area.
                         The community has never been a dominant shopping focus for
                         residents of the San Gabriel Valley. Most residents of Sierra Madre
                         seek major item shopping opportunities outside of the City in
                         conveniently located regional and community shopping centers
                         which feature a wide variety of durable goods.
                         In terms of employment, the most recent data states that
                         approximately 1,973 persons were employed in the City of Sierra
                         Madre in 2013, compared to 3,520 in 2007. Services employment
                         was the largest employment sector in the City, comprising 77
                         percent of all employment in Sierra Madre. Retail/wholesale 7
                         percent), manufacturing (3 percent), and government jobs (4
                         percent) comprised a total of 14 percent of City employment.
                         Construction and other jobs contributed the remaining 9 percent of
                         City employment.             (Southern California Association of
                         Governments, 2015 Local Profile of the City of Sierra Madre
                         Report May 2015).
                         A Retail Site Assessment was prepared in 2012 by Buxton. It
                         concluded that the Sierra Madre Trade Area captures only
                         approximately half of the retail sales generated by residents. It
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 84

should be noted that the trade area is larger than the City
boundaries and includes a number of nearby shopping centers, so
retail businesses within the City likely captures an even lower
percentage of potential sales to residents.
The State Board of Equalization reported that taxable sales in the
City increased from $22.9 million in 2002 to $31.1 million in 2008.
However, due to the recent economic downturn, taxable sales
within the City declined to $25.4 million in 2012.
Programs identified by the study to improve the existing
downtown included business attraction, retention and
promotion, including a branding campaign to define and
highlight Sierra Madre as a lively and viable business
opportunity with a small village character.
CONSTRAINTS AND OPPORTUNITIES
Opportunities
1.   Sierra Madre has a special “foothill village” character
     because of its history and people, its natural beauty,
     mountain recreational access and ambiance, and its semi‐
     isolation within the Los Angeles basin. Visitors to the village
     find it welcoming and charming.
2.   Sierra Madre has a reputation for interests and activities
     related to arts and crafts, film, video, literary and theatrical
     interests. The annual Wistaria Festival and Art Fair are two
     examples of events which bring visitors to the City.          In
     addition, a number of civic organizations and businesses
     provide art and related classes, programs and exhibitions for
     adults and children. There are several studios and galleries
     in the City, as well as artisans and craftsmen in furniture,
     clothing and similar fields. The Sierra Madre Playhouse runs
     live plays throughout the year, and local coffeehouses as well
     as the City Library sponsor poetry readings. Sierra Madre is
     also a popular location for Hollywood film companies to shoot
     on location.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 85

                         3.  As an entryway into the San Gabriel Mountains, Sierra
                             Madre draws locals and visitors to outdoor activities such as
                             walking, hiking, and cycling.
                         4.  Although downtown is small, there are some properties
                             which, with attrition of existing businesses, could be
                             developed into additional retail and commercial space.
                         5.  The historic building stock in Sierra Madre provides
                             potential for adaptive reuse of residential, commercial, light
                             industrial/warehouse and institutional properties as bed and
                             breakfasts, galleries, studios, retail shops, and other income
                             generating ventures.
                         Constraints
                         1.  The downtown area of Sierra Madre is small and made up
                             primarily of small shallow lots, thus reducing the ability to
                             consolidate lots for larger projects.
                         2.  Existing commercial structures are primarily divided into
                             small business spaces, limiting the type of businesses that
                             may locate in Sierra Madre.
                         3.  There is limited commercial space in the City, and a sizeable
                             portion of that is being used for non‐retail purposes.
                         4.  There is no visibility from highways or major arterials.
                         5.  Limited funds from the City make it difficult to undertake a
                             comprehensive marketing strategy.
                         6.  Total taxable sales in the City comprise only a very small
                             portion of the total taxable sales and total retail sales in the San
                             Gabriel Valley, thus significantly limiting City revenues.
                         7.  Portions of the central core area lack sufficient parking (such
                             as East Montecito Avenue).
                         8.  Existing parking is poorly identified and lacks satisfactory
                             pedestrian access to businesses.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                           P a g e | 86

OVERVIEW OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
There are two primary purposes for an economic development
strategy in the City of Sierra Madre. The first is to generate
necessary revenues to offset public services. The second is to
preserve a quality of life for Sierra Madre residents which allows
them to have commercial retail and services, along with the
ambiance of a village atmosphere, in their own community.
Another purpose of the economic development policy is to provide
business and employment opportunities to local residents.
Economic development includes land use strategies, financing
strategies and organizational strategies. The land use strategy
includes identifying locations for new business opportunities,
achieving the highest and best use of the properties located in the
downtown, and providing capital improvements with public
funds. The financing strategies include ways in which public and
private dollars can be channeled into the business community.
The organizational strategies address the strength of the Chamber
of Commerce and the City’s Planning and Community
Preservation Department in partnering to market the City to
potential new businesses and to consumers.
SUMMARY OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT GOALS
1.      A diverse mix of uses to meet the needs of local residents
        as well as visitors to the City.
2.      An enhanced relationship between the City and the
        Chamber of Commerce to maximize the effectiveness of
        both organizations to assist businesses in the City.
3.      Sierra Madre as a destination point accenting the area’s
        natural beauty, artist community, and historic character.
OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
The City has established the following objectives and policies for
economic development in Sierra Madre. The implementation
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                 P a g e | 87

                         measures are contained in the Implementation Chapter at the end
                         of the General Plan.
                          Objective L42: Providing a business friendly environment in
                          Sierra Madre.
                         Policies:
                         L48.1          Streamline the       permitting     process for     new
                                        businesses.
                         L48.2          Support efforts of the Chamber of Commerce to
                                        support business activities, such as festivals and
                                        programs which bring residents and visitors to the
                                        downtown.
                         L48.3          Continue to allow home based businesses which
                                        do not negatively impact the residential
                                        neighborhoods in which they are located.
                         L48.4          Consider reducing business license fees and other
                                        taxes and fees to the extent feasible.
                         L48.5          Consider implementing a Business Improvement
                                         District in the central core area.
                          Objective L49: Improving the aesthetics, safety, and usability
                          of the public realm within the downtown area.
                         Policies:
                         L49.1           Encourage restoration of original building
                                         facades, and adaptive reuse of existing buildings
                                         through educational programs and economic
                                         incentives such as reduced permit fees and parking
                                         requirements.
                         L49.2          Provide enhanced paving for all pedestrian
                                        crosswalks on Sierra Madre Boulevard and
                                        Baldwin Avenue within the downtown district,
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                        P a g e | 88
               and consider installation of the same on East
               Montecito Avenue.
L49.3          Maintain pedestrian‐level street lighting in the
               downtown district to enhance the nighttime dining
               and shopping experience, and consider installation
               of the same on East Montecito Avenue in
               accordance with dark sky guidelines.
L49.4          Permit closure of Kersting Court during the
               evenings, weekends, and special events for
               musical events, outdoor dining, farmers market or
               similar activities.
L49.5          Adopt a long‐term design plan for Kersting Court
               which enhances the park as a focal point of the
               downtown and increases its usability.
L49.6          Develop a coordinated parking plan for the
               downtown business             area, including East
               Montecito, and ensure that any in‐lieu or other
               parking fees generated downtown are used to
               improve downtown parking.
L49.7          Improve pedestrian connections between the street
               and the public parking lots through signage,
               coordination with property owners, purchase of
               properties and other mechanisms.
L49.8          Improve the aesthetic qualities of the public
               parking lots by adding color plantings and
               encouraging improvements to rear facades of
               buildings.
L49.9          Encourage outdoor dining, sidewalk sales, street
               fairs, and other uses of the sidewalk which
               encourage pedestrian activity.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                P a g e | 89

                          Objective L50: Maximizing retail opportunities.
                         Policies:
                         L50.1          Provide incentives for the location of restaurants
                                        and retail uses on the ground floor of buildings
                                        fronting Sierra Madre Boulevard and Baldwin
                                        Avenue (and possibly portions of East Montecito
                                        Avenue).         Such incentives may include
                                        reduced/waived utility taxes, permit fees or
                                        business license fees and streamlined permit
                                        processing.
                         L50.2          In order to increase daytime demand for City
                                        retail, provide incentives for the location of service
                                        retail, office and other commercial uses            above
                                        and/or behind street‐facing, ground‐floor retail.
                                        Such incentives may include reduced/waived
                                        utility taxes, permit fees or business license fees
                                        and streamlined permit processing.
                         L50.3          Prohibit any new and the expansion of existing
                                        institutional facilities in the central core area.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                           P a g e | 90

                         Section Five:
                         Circulation
                         OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
                         There are no regional transportation facilities located within the
                         City boundaries of Sierra Madre. The City is served by Interstate
                         210 Foothill Freeway located approximately one‐half mile south of
                         the City. This is controlled by the State of California Department
                         of Transportation.          The Los Angeles County Metropolitan
                         Transportation Authority (Metro) maintains two bus lines in town
                         as well as nearby light rail service (the Sierra Madre Villa Gold Line
                         Station is approximately two miles from the center of town and the
                         Arcadia Gold Line Station, once it is completed in 2015, will be
                         approximately 2.6 miles from downtown Sierra Madre.)). Major
                         streets which are operated by the City include Michillinda Avenue,
                         Santa Anita Avenue, Grandview Avenue, Sierra Madre Boulevard,
                         and Orange Grove Avenue.
                         The circulation system in the City of Sierra Madre includes a
                         network of surface streets which serve two distinct and equally
                         important functions: access to adjacent properties, and movement
                         of persons and goods into and out of the City. The design and
                         operation of each street depends upon the importance placed on
                         each of these functions. A classification system is used to identify
                         the function of each street in the City. This system is important
                         because it provides a logical framework for the design and
                         operation of the street system. The functional classification system
                         allows the residents and elected officials to identify preferred
                         characteristics of each street.
                         STREET CLASSIFICATIONS
                         Sierra Madre has developed its own roadway classification system
                         using four functional classification types: major street, collector
                         street, local collector street, and local streets. Traffic volumes were
                         measured in 2011.
                         Major Streets
                         Major streets are generally commercial arteries. They carry the
                         majority of traffic entering or traveling through the City. A major
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                           P a g e | 91

                         artery would contain either four or six lanes of through traffic plus
                         left turn lanes. Minor arterials serve the same function as major
                         arterials, but have four lanes of through traffic and may or may not
                         have separate left‐turn lanes. Recommended design volumes on
                         arterials range from 30,000 to 60,000 vehicles per day depending on
                         the number of lanes and left‐turn movements. Arterials serve two
                         primary functions: to move vehicles into and through the City and
                         to adjacent commercial land uses. Driveways and other curb cuts
                         along arterials are generally limited to minimize disruption to traffic
                         flow.
                         The only street in Sierra Madre that can be considered a major
                         street is Michillinda Avenue. It runs along the western boundary
                         of Sierra Madre and is shared by Pasadena and Sierra Madre. As
                         Michillinda Avenue leaves Sierra Madre south of Orange Grove
                         Avenue, it is shared by Pasadena and Arcadia.            Michillinda
                         Avenue is classified as a four lane major street in Sierra Madre
                         (84’/64’) and as a four lane secondary arterial in Arcadia (80’/60’).
                         Currently, Michillinda Avenue has two lanes along the Sierra
                         Madre/Pasadena segment and four lanes along the
                         Arcadia/Pasadena segment.
                         Following is information regarding traffic volumes and
                         volume/capacity ratios:
                            Road Segment:        Daily        Existing     Volume/Capacity
                              Michillinda       Traffic      Capacity           Ratio
                          Grandview‐Sierra        6,600        15,000            0.44
                          Madre
                          Sierra Madre‐          12,900        15,000            0.86
                          Orange Grove
                                                         Table V-1
                         Collector Streets
                         Collector streets are intended to carry traffic between residential
                         neighborhoods and the arterial street network. They are generally
                         two‐lane roadways with a mixture of residential and commercial
                         land uses. Based upon planning criteria developed by the U.S.
                         Department of Transportation and other agencies, average daily
                         traffic volumes on collector streets should be held below 15,000
                         vehicles per day in order to maintain acceptable levels of service at
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                        P a g e | 92

                         intersections and to preserve the ambiance of adjacent land uses.
                         Higher density residential land uses or side yards of single family
                         homes would be appropriately located adjacent to collector streets.
                         Local commercial development is also appropriate for collector
                         streets.
                         In Sierra Madre, only Baldwin Avenue and Sierra Madre Boulevard
                         can be classified as collector streets. Baldwin Avenue is classified as
                         a four‐lane collector street in Sierra Madre (80’/64’) and as a four‐
                         lane secondary arterial in Arcadia (80’/60’). These classifications
                         are consistent although the curb‐to‐curb width would change by
                         four feet at the city boundary. Currently, Baldwin Avenue has two
                         lanes in Sierra Madre and four lanes in Arcadia.
                         Sierra Madre Boulevard is classified as a four‐lane collector street
                         in Sierra Madre (80’/64’) and as a one ‐lane secondary arterial in
                         Arcadia (80’/60’) with a bike lane.           These classifications are
                         consistent although the curb‐to‐curb width would change by four
                         feet at the city boundaries. Currently, Sierra Madre Boulevard has
                         two lanes in Arcadia and Sierra Madre.
                         West of Michillinda Avenue, Sierra Madre Boulevard enters the
                         City of Pasadena and widens to become a four‐lane divided
                         roadway.       It is classified as a principal mobility corridor in
                         Pasadena, but as of early 2013, it is not planned to be further
                         widened.       Although the four‐lanes on each side of the City
                         boundary would be consistent, there is a median divider in
                         Pasadena while none currently exists in Sierra Madre.
                            Road Segment:         Daily        Existing     Volume/Capacity
                           Baldwin Avenue         Traffic      Capacity           Ratio
                          Grandview‐               3,800         15,000            0.25
                          Sierra Madre
                          Sierra Madre‐           10,500         15,000            0.70
                          Orange Grove
                                                          Table V‐2
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                           P a g e | 93

                            Road Segment:         Daily      Existing      Volume/Capacity
                             Sierra Madre        Traffic     Capacity             Ratio
                              Boulevard
                          Michillinda –           8,600        15,000              0.57
                          Baldwin
                          East of Baldwin         3,600        15,000              0.24
                                                         Table V‐3
                         Local Collector Streets
                         Local collector streets or “feeder” streets are similar to collectors in
                         that they carry traffic between residential neighborhoods and the
                         arterial network; however, they are almost solely residential in
                         character. Feeder streets generally have single‐family or multi‐
                         family residences fronting the street, and are therefore intended to
                         carry lower volumes of traffic than collector streets, usually below
                         7,500 vehicles per day.
                         There are four local collectors in Sierra Madre: Lima Street,
                         Mountain Trail Avenue, Grandview Avenue, and Orange Grove
                         Avenue.
                         Grandview Avenue is two lanes (60’/40’) in Sierra Madre and
                         Arcadia. The City of Arcadia, however, has classified Grandview
                         Avenue as a four‐lane secondary arterial (80’/60’). There are no
                         known plans to improve Grandview Avenue to a four‐lane arterial
                         at this time.
                         Orange Grove Avenue runs along the southern boundary of Sierra
                         Madre and is shared with the City of Arcadia. It is classified as a
                         two‐lane local collector street in Sierra Madre (60’/40’) and as a
                         two‐lane collector street in Arcadia (60’/40’).        Orange Grove
                         Avenue currently has two travel lanes.
                         Orange Grove Avenue becomes Greenhill Road west of
                         Michillinda Avenue in the City of Pasadena, where it continues as
                         a two‐lane local street.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                          P a g e | 94

                            Road Segment:        Daily       Existing      Volume/Capacity
                              Grandview         Traffic      Capacity            Ratio
                                Avenue
                          Michillinda –          3,000         7,500              0.40
                          Baldwin
                          East of Baldwin        2,700         7,500              0.36
                                                         Table V‐4
                           Road Segment:        Daily        Existing      Volume/Capacity
                            Orange Grove       Traffic       Capacity            Ratio
                          Michillinda –          6,100         7,500              0.81
                          Baldwin
                          East of Baldwin        4,600         7,500              0.61
                                                         Table V‐5
                         No traffic counts were available for Lima Street and Mountain
                         Trail Avenue.
                         Local Streets
                         Local streets are designed to serve adjacent residential land uses
                         only. They allow access to residential driveways and often provide
                         parking for the neighborhood. They are not intended to serve thru‐
                         traffic traveling from one location in the City to another, but
                         primarily to serve traffic with an origin or destination in that street.
                         Traffic volumes on a local street should not exceed 2,500 per day or
                         200‐300 vehicles per hour.        The maximum residential traffic
                         volume which is acceptable to persons living along a street may
                         vary from one street to another depending upon roadway width,
                         type of dwelling units, presence of schools, and other factors. These
                         factors may dictate the need for lower traffic volumes than
                         2,500 per day. All other public streets in Sierra Madre are local
                         streets.
                         It should be noted that functional classifications vary between
                         agencies, as seen in the different classifications seen between
                         Arcadia and Sierra Madre for Orange Grove.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                         P a g e | 95

                          The Functional Classification system as adopted by the California
                         Department of Transportation and referenced below provides a
                         metric under which federal highway funding may be used for
                         repairs to Sierra Madre’s city streets. The Caltrans system
                         supersedes the local classification system in the administration of
                         and determination of eligibility of streets for federal roadway
                         dollars.
                         Sierra Madre streets are categorized into five categories under the
                         Caltrans classification system: Principal Arterials, Minor Arterials,
                         Major Collectors, Minor Collectors, and local streets. Under the
                         Caltrans system, streets classified as Principal Arterials, Minor
                         Arterials, or Major Collectors qualify for the use of federal highway
                         funding in street maintenance. Federal funds may not be utilized
                         on local streets. The Sierra Madre street classifications as mapped
                         in Caltrans Functional Classification Maps 13U55 and 13V15 are as
                         follows:
                                                     Limits                       Functional
             Street Name
                                     From                To                      Classification
        West Sierra Madre                                                          Principle
                                     Michillinda         Baldwin
        Blvd.                                                                      Arterial
        East Sierra Madre                                                          Principle
                                     Baldwin             City Limits
        Blvd.                                                                      Arterial
                                     Sierra Madre
      North Michillinda                                 City Limits          Minor Arterial
                                    Blvd.
                                                         Sierra Madre
        South Michillinda            City Limits                                Minor Arterial
                                                         Blvd.
        West Grandview Ave.          Michillinda         Baldwin Avenue         Minor Arterial
        East Grandview Ave.          Baldwin Ave.        Santa Anita Ave.       Minor Arterial
        Elkins Ave.                  Santa Anita Ave.    City Limits            Minor Arterial
                                                         City bridge
        Santa Anita Ave.             Grandview Ave.                             Minor Arterial
                                                         (Chantry)
                                     Sierra Madre                                   Major
        North Sunnyside Ave.                             Mater Dolorosa
                                     Blvd.                                      Collector
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                          P a g e | 96

                               Orange Grove     Sierra Madre      Major
   South Sunnyside Ave.
                               Ave.             Blvd.            Collector
                               Sierra Madre                       Major
   North Lima St.                               West Carter Ave.
                               Blvd.                             Collector
                               Orange Grove     Sierra Madre      Major
   South Lima St.
                               Ave.             Blvd.            Collector
                               Sierra Madre                       Major
   North Baldwin Ave.                           Carter Avenue
                               Blvd.                             Collector
                                                Sierra Madre      Major
   South Baldwin Ave.          City Limits
                                                Blvd.            Collector
                               Sierra Madre     East Mira Monte   Major
   North Mountain Trail
                               Blvd.            Ave.             Collector
                               Orange Grove     Sierra Madre      Major
   South Mountain Trail
                               Ave.             Blvd.            Collector
                               Sierra Madre                       Major
   Auburn Ave.                                  West Carter Ave.
                               Blvd.                             Collector
                                                North Baldwin     Major
   West Carter Ave.            North Lima St.
                                                Ave.             Collector
                               North Mountain                     Major
   Churchill Drive                              Canyon Crest
                               Trail                             Collector
                                                                  Major
   Canyon Crest                Churchill Drive  Skyland Dr.
                                                                 Collector
                               North Baldwin    North Mountain    Major
   East Mira Monte Ave.
                               Ave.             Trail            Collector
                               North Mountain                     Major
   Sturtevant Drive                             Woodland Dr.
                               Trail                             Collector
                                                                  Major
   Woodland Drive              Sturtevant Dr.   Yucca Trail
                                                                 Collector
   Orange‐Idle Hour‐                                              Major
                               Canyon Crest     Churchill
   Skyland‐Fern                                                  Collector
   West Orange Grove           South            South Baldwin     Major
   Ave.                        Michillinda Ave. Ave.             Collector
   East Orange Grove           South Baldwin                      Major
                                                City Limits
   Ave.                        Ave.                              Collector
                               North            North Baldwin     Major
   West Highland Ave.
                               Michillinda Ave. Ave.             Collector
                               North Baldwin                      Major
   East Highland Ave.                           Coburn Ave.
                               Ave.                              Collector
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                         P a g e | 97

                         Accident Locations
                         The majority of traffic accidents occur along Sierra Madre
                         Boulevard and Baldwin Avenue, the two most heavily traveled
                         streets in the City. West Sierra Madre Boulevard alone accounted
                         for 27% of the total accidents in Sierra Madre between 2007 and
                         2011. Over the same period the most significant cause of accidents
                         were unsafe backing out of a parking lot or parking space (13%),
                         unsafe turn/failure to signal (12%), driving while intoxicated (10%),
                         failure to yield (9%), and unsafe entering from a private drive
                         (5%). Pedestrians were involved in 11% of accidents.
                         Traffic Signals
                         There are no signalized intersections in the City of Sierra Madre,
                         except at the western entry points along the border with the City
                         of Pasadena at West Orange Grove Boulevard/South Michillinda
                         Avenue and West Sierra Madre Boulevard/North Michillinda
                         Avenue.
                         Bike Routes
                         There are currently no defined bicycle facilities within the City of
                         Sierra Madre. The City’s outdated bikeway plan has identified the
                         need for a bike lane along Sierra Madre Boulevard through the
                         length of the City, but this lane has not been built.
                         Truck Routes
                         The following road segments are truck traffic routes for the
                         movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of 3
                         (three) tons:
                                 a.      Michillinda Avenue from the southerly City limits
                                         northerly to Sierra Madre Boulevard;
                                 b.      Sierra Madre Boulevard from Michillinda Avenue
                                         easterly to Mountain Trail Avenue;
                                 c.      Mountain Trail from Sierra Madre Boulevard
                                         northerly to Montecito Avenue;
                                 d.      Montecito Avenue from Mountain Trail Avenue
                                         westerly to Baldwin Avenue;
                                 e.      Baldwin Avenue from Montecito Avenue southerly
                                         to the City limits.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                        P a g e | 98

                         Transit Network
                         There are currently two forms of transit in operation within the
                         City: fixed‐route transit and paratransit.
                         Fixed‐Route Transit
                         Within the City, there are two entities operating transit routes: Los
                         Angeles County Metropolitan Transit Authority (Metro) and the
                         City of Sierra Madre.
                         Metro Line 487: This is an express line connecting Downtown Los
                         Angeles to the cities of San Gabriel, Sierra Madre, and El Monte.
                         Within Sierra Madre, the line runs down Sierra Madre Boulevard
                         with stops every few blocks. Headways are approximately 20
                         minutes during the weekday peak periods. This line also stops at
                         the Metro Gold Line train station in Pasadena, providing another
                         method of connectivity to Los Angeles. Because the route runs
                         along Sierra Madre Boulevard, the majority of the City’s residents
                         live within a half‐mile of the line, making it a usable commuting
                         choice for many.
                         Metro Line 268: This line runs through the western portion of the
                         San Gabriel Valley, connecting the cities of Altadena, Pasadena,
                         Sierra Madre, Arcadia, and El Monte. Within Sierra Madre, the
                         line runs along Sierra Madre Boulevard from Michillinda Avenue
                         to Baldwin Avenue, and along Baldwin Avenue from Sierra Madre
                         Boulevard south to Orange Grove Avenue where it crosses into
                         Arcadia. This line operates on 30‐minute headways during the
                         weekday peak periods, and it stops near the Metro Gold Line at
                         East Foothill Boulevard/North Hasltead Street.
                         City of Sierra Madre Gateway Coach: The City operates a fixed‐
                         route shuttle bus to serve residents during the week, Monday
                         through Friday. The line only operates mid‐day from 11:00 am‐
                         1:20 pm, providing access to Downtown Sierra Madre, and the
                         shopping center located at the intersection of Michillinda Avenue
                         and Sierra Madre Boulevard. Headways are 40 minutes. Several
                         key City locations are linked by the shuttle, including the public
                         schools, library, City Hall, and post office. While there are defined
                         stops with scheduled times, the shuttle will also pick up hailing
                         residents along the route.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                        P a g e | 99

                         Paratransit
                         The City provides full demand‐responsive transportation service
                         through the Dial‐A‐Ride program. Dial‐A‐Ride provide same day,
                         curb‐to‐curb transit to anyone who is a city resident, and is either
                         62 years of age or older, or disabled in a manner that makes use of
                         regular transit unduly difficult. Any qualifying users must submit
                         an application to the City before using the service. The service will
                         typically not travel to destinations more than two miles outside of
                         City limits. The relatively small size of the City makes this type of
                         paratransit possible. The Dial‐A‐Ride service operates Monday
                         through Friday during the day.
                         Transit Connectivity
                         Metro Line 487 stops at the Sierra Madre Villa Gold Line
                         station. This station provides access to the regional light rail
                         system as well as serving as a bus transit hub for the northwest San
                         Gabriel Valley, with several bus lines from multiple jurisdictions
                         intersecting at this location. Metro Line 487 also connects to
                         Downtown Los Angeles, providing access to commuter rail and
                         interstate rail service through Metrolink and Amtrak, respectively.
                         FUTURE TRAFFIC DEMANDS
                         Since the City is significantly built‐out, it is not anticipated that
                         traffic will significantly increase on City streets.
                         Transportation Issues
                         The following have been identified as primary issues:
                         1.       Pedestrian and vehicular safety at certain locations in the
                                  City.
                         2.      Public parking opportunities in the downtown (including
                                  East Montecito Avenue), near schools and in the Sierra
                                  Madre Canyon.
                         3.      Street width and configurations vis‐a‐vis public safety and
                                  emergency evacuation situations.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 100

                         SUMMARY OF CIRCULATION GOALS
                         1.      A balanced transportation system which accommodates all
                                 modes of travel including automobiles, pedestrians,
                                 bicycles, and transit users.
                         2.      Safe and well‐maintained streets.
                         3.      Preservation of quiet neighborhoods with limited thru
                                 traffic.
                         OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
                         The City has established the following objectives and policies for
                         circulation in Sierra Madre. The implementation measures are
                         contained in the Implementation Chapter at the end of the General
                         Plan.
                           Objective L51: Developing a balanced and multi‐modal
                           transportation system to serve the needs of all roadway
                           users, including motorists, public transit patrons, pedestrians
                           and cyclists.
                         Policies:
                         L51.1            Maintain the existing street classification system.
                         L51.2            Limit the development of new roadways or the
                                          expansion of existing roadways.
                         L51.3            Maintain existing facilities         for   bicyclists,
                                          pedestrians, and transit users.
                         L51.4            Explore the development of new facilities for
                                          bicyclists, pedestrians and transit users.
                         L51.5            Encourage and support the use of non‐automotive
                                          travel throughout the City.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                         P a g e | 101

                         L51.6           Encourage City staff, employees, residents and
                                         visitors to walk and bicycle as often as possible.
                         L51.7           Utilize non‐automotive transportation solutions as
                                         a tool to further goals related to environmental
                                         sustainability and economic development.
                         L51.8           Prioritize improvements for non‐vehicular modes
                                         like bicycles, pedestrians, and transit to eliminate
                                         the need for new or expanded roadways and
                                         intersection improvements like traffic signals.
                          Objective L52: Improving streets to maintain levels of service,
                          vehicular, cyclist and pedestrian safety.
                         Policies:
                         L52.1          Ensure that all pedestrians, particularly seniors and
                                        the disabled, are able to travel safely and easily
                                        throughout the City.
                         L52.2          Prioritize opportunities to implement            traffic
                                        calming techniques and limit new driveway curb
                                        cuts along roadways such as Sierra Madre
                                        Boulevard and East Montecito.
                         L52.3          Provide safe travel routes for bicyclists including
                                        designated bicycle lanes on streets where these
                                        facilities can be accommodated.
                         L52.4          Evaluate the impact of any capital improvement
                                        project on the travel needs of bicycles, pedestrians,
                                        and vehicle users.
                         L52.5          Install and maintain mirrors on blind streets in the
                                        canyon.
                         L52.6          Improve pedestrian crossing opportunities work to
                                        increase pedestrian safety, and eliminate painted
                                        crosswalks where they provide a false sense of
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 102

                                        security, and make a more concerted effort to
                                        enforce laws related to pedestrian safety.
                         L52.7          Create and implement the City’s bikeway plan.
                         L52.8          Require the incorporation of bicycle facilities into
                                        the design of land use plans and capital
                                        improvements, including bicycle parking within
                                        new multi‐family and non‐residential sites or
                                        publicly accessible bicycle parking.
                         L52.9          Explore the possibility of sidewalk continuity
                                        where feasible.
                          Objective L53: Protecting residential neighborhoods from the
                          intrusion of through traffic.
                         Policies:
                         L53.1          Develop a comprehensive Citywide approach to
                                        residential street traffic calming.
                         L53.2          Coordinate with law enforcement agencies to
                                        ensure adequate enforcement of speed limits along
                                        streets, including local collector and local streets.
                         L53.3          Maintain and enforce speed limits which address
                                        the residential nature of local collector and local
                                        streets.
                         L53.4          Install and maintain traffic calming measures
                                        where appropriate.
                          Objective L54: Providing off‐street parking requirements, on‐
                          street parking and public parking facilities to maximize parking
                          opportunities and address future parking needs.
                         Policies:
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                         P a g e | 103

                         L54.1          Maintain on‐street parking in the downtown
                                         business area which is safe for motorists,
                                         pedestrians, and sidewalk diners.
                         L54.2          Implement parking management approaches for
                                         portions of the City such as the downtown business
                                         area.
                         L54.3          Consider opportunities for shared parking, off‐site
                                         parking, and         other    parking management
                                         approaches to reduce excessive off‐street parking
                                         for new development.
                          Objective L55: Enhancing the aesthetic character and safety of
                          residential streets by addressing nighttime parking.
                         Policy:
                         L55.1          Limit overnight parking within residential areas.
                          Objective L56: Maximizing accessibility for the disabled.
                         Policies:
                         L56.1          Make streets handicap‐accessible with more ramps
                                         and curb cuts.
                         L56.2          Identify locations for handicap parking stalls on the
                                         street, and also install and maintain those spaces.
                         L56.3          Promote usage of the Dial‐A‐Ride paratransit
                                         service.
                         L56.4          Ensure that all streets are accessible to all persons
                                         including those with mobility challenges.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                        P a g e | 104

                         Chapter Two –
                         Resource Management
                         INTRODUCTION
                         The Resource Management Chapter of the Sierra Madre General
                         Plan contains seven components:           hillside preservation, co‐
                         existence with wildlife, Dark Sky, tree preservation, water
                         resources, waste management/recycling, and air quality. With
                         the exception of co‐existence with wildlife and Dark Sky, all are
                         required as part of the State‐mandated conservation element.
                         Sustainable policies and goals are called out by a green leaf icon.
                         Section One:
                         Hillside Preservation
                         OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
                         The City of Sierra Madre is known for its scenic foothills, which
                         contain land forms, slopes, animal life and vegetation that are
                         increasingly rare. The City has established and updated a Hillside
                         Management Zone Ordinance to limit development to that which
                         is sensitive to the unique characteristics found in the hillside
                         areas. The Hillside Management Zone sets forth a mandate to
                         preserve the identity, image and environmental quality of the
                         City, and to maintain an environmental equilibrium consistent
                         with the native vegetation, animal life, geology, slopes and
                         drainage patterns.
                         Sierra Madre, because of its location, is a steward of water quality
                         for the neighboring communities to the south. The San Gabriel
                         Watershed and Mountains Special Resource Study determined and
                         documented that water quality is dependent on the level of
                         development and land use. Sierra Madre is committed to
                         preserving the hillside areas and ensuring that development in
                         the hillside is located in those areas resulting in the least
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                      P a g e | 105

environmental impact. The Hillside Management Zone contains
development standards and procedures which require extensive
planning and environmental information prior to the City
making a determination on project requests. The development
standards ensure sensitivity to the terrain and prevent over‐
development which would destroy the natural environs. The City
requires that all development in the hillside areas be designed to
fit the existing land forms and preserve significant features of the
natural topography. Development must also be undertaken by
using minimal amounts of grading and removal of natural
vegetation, and with the prevention of land instability and fire
hazards in mind.
Standards for development in the hillside areas outline specific
requirements, including but not limited to, drainage, grading,
fencing, landscaping, architectural controls for site design, and
building design, in order to be sensitive to the natural terrain.
SUMMARY OF HILLSIDE PRESERVATION GOALS
1. Preservation of the identity, image, and environmental quality
    of hillside areas.
2. Acquisition, to the extent feasible, of as much hillside land as
    possible by non‐profit open space conservation organizations
    to prevent development and promote the protection of hillside
    land as natural open space.
3. Public access to the San Gabriel Mountains via parks, trails and
    roads.
4. Protection of hillside open space for public health and safety,
    and sustainability.
OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
The City has established the following objectives and policies for
hillside preservation in Sierra Madre.             The implementation
measures are contained in the Implementation Chapter at the end
of the General Plan.
      GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                  P a g e | 106

                         Objective R1: Protecting hillside areas to preserve their
                         unique character.
                         Policies:
                         R1.1           Maintain and enforce the Hillside Management
                                        Zone Ordinance and other ordinances that seek to
                                        protect hillside areas.
                         R1.2           Work with other hillside communities in the San
                                        Gabriel Valley to establish a protected hillside
                                        corridor along the entire length of the San Gabriel
                                        Mountains.
                          Objective R2: Purchasing hillside properties by non‐profit
                          organizations dedicated to the preservation of natural open
                          space and access to the San Gabriel Mountains.
                         Policies:
                         R2.1           Assist the Sierra Madre Mountains Conservancy
                                        and other non‐profit organizations in the
                                        application of funds to purchase hillside property,
                                        and when feasible, to provide public access to the
                                        mountains via parks and trails.
                         R2.2           Designate      properties    purchased     by      the
                                        Conservancy and other non‐profit organizations as
                                        natural open space utilizing conservation
                                        easements.
                         R2.3           Explore the use of bond issues, assessment
                                        districts, environmental partnerships and other
                                        methods for purchasing and managing hillside
                                        areas.
                         R2.4           Coordinate with other public agencies’ plans and
                                        pursue partnerships with local and regional
                                        environmental and conservation organizations to
                                        locate and protect hillside open space areas.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                      P a g e | 107

 Objective R3: Preserving open space as a public safety
 enhancement, and a component of sustainability.
Policies:
R3.1           Where possible, assist the Council for Watershed
               Health and promote community awareness of the
               Council’s work.
R3.2           Ensure that wildland open space, including the
               areas of the City designated as High Fire Hazard
               Severity Zone, is left in its natural state with the
               exception of brush abatement for public safety in
               order to aid the City in fighting fires.
R3.3           Ensure that natural open space within the High
               Fire Hazard Severity Zones remains undeveloped so
               as to mitigate the flood cycles that follow wild land
               fires in the natural open space.
R3.4           Ensure the protection of natural open space so as
               to maintain it as a preventative measure against
               flooding, and as a means of capturing stormwater
               runoff for groundwater recharge.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 108

                         Section Two:
                         Co‐Existence with Wildlife
                         OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
                         The entire City of Sierra Madre is a Wildlife Sanctuary, and there
                         has been wildlife activity throughout the City. Mountain lion, bear,
                         deer, fox, bobcat, coyote, raccoon, opossum, owl, hawk and other
                         species have a well‐documented presence in Sierra Madre. Their
                         existence here is of ancient lineage. As people push more and
                         more into surrounding wildlife habitats, displaced wildlife are
                         fighting for survival. These animals have been forced into living
                         with humans due to the loss of their own habitat, making Sierra
                         Madre an urban/wildlife interface.
                         The City adopted Resolution 72‐62 in 1972, designating Sierra
                         Madre as a Wildlife Sanctuary. “The city, its officers and employees
                         and the residents of the city of Sierra Madre are hereby
                         encouraged to protect the birds, wildlife, natural habitats, food
                         sources and other wildlife resources located within the city limits.”
                         In 2000, the City adopted Ordinances 1177 and 1197 into the
                         Municipal Code Development Standards, Section 17.48.130.H
                         (“Prohibited Fencing. Spiked fencing shall be prohibited in all
                         zones.”) In 2004, the City received an Education Award from the
                         American Planning Association, Los Angeles section, for the
                         pamphlet series “A Guide for Living with Wildlife in the Urban
                         Landscape.”
                         GOALS OF CO-EXISTENCE WITH WILDLIFE
                         1. Safe co‐existence for wildlife and residents.
                         2. Appreciation of the wildlife sanctuary within which we live.
                         3. Wildlife protection in the City and its environs in support of
                          the City Council’s declaration of Sierra Madre as a Wildlife
                          Sanctuary in 1972.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 109

OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
The City has established the following objectives and policies for
the co‐existence with wildlife in Sierra Madre.                   The
implementation measures are contained in the Implementation
Chapter at the end of the General Plan.
  Objective R4: Promoting a peaceful co‐existence with wildlife
  through community education.
Policies:
R4.1            Raise awareness of Sierra Madre as an
                urban/wildlife interface where, as such, it is
                necessary for the residents to respect the wildlife,
                share space with wildlife, and to acknowledge the
                right of wildlife to pass within City limits
                undisturbed.
R4.2            Encourage grassroots community efforts dedicated
                to the peaceful co‐existence with wildlife.
R4.3            Publicize and post signs that announce Resolution
                72‐62 which designates Sierra Madre as a Wildlife
                Sanctuary.
R4.4            Encourage wide availability and dissemination of
                materials teaching how to coexist with wildlife.
R4.5            Encourage the education of the public on how to
                “wild proof,” and on compliance with State laws
                prohibiting trapping, killing, or relocating wildlife.
   Objective: R5 Enforcing and expanding wildlife protections.
Policies:
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                    P a g e | 110

                         R5.1           Actively enforce regulations prohibiting spiked
                                        iron fencing.
                         R5.2           Encourage residents to modify any existing
                                        structures to better accommodate safe passage of
                                        wildlife.
                         R5.3           Continue to include wildlife‐resistant garbage
                                        containers for the High Activity Wildlife Zone in
                                        the waste disposal contract. (See R 15.6)
                         R5.4           Create a High Activity Wildlife Zone that mirrors
                                        the Fire Hazard Severity Zone.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                    P a g e | 111

Section Three:
Dark Sky
OVERVIEW
Sierra Madre has a diversity of natural areas and landforms
which contribute to its quality of life, economic well‐being, and
environmental beauty. Night time views of both the landscape
and sky can be significantly degraded by excessive and
unnecessary levels of light. Excessive lighting increases
“skyglow” around urban areas, makes the man‐made environment
overly prominent, and results in visual clutter at night.
Dark Sky is defined as the starlit sky without interference of
illumination from man‐made sources. Sierra Madre recognizes
the preservation of the night sky to perpetuate the view of the
stars as a valuable community resource. Additionally, Sierra Madre
acknowledges that Dark Sky is going to be an increasingly limited
resource in the future. Therefore, it requires action in the present.
SUMMARY OF DARK SKY GOALS
1. Protection of the starlit sky to avoid deterioration of the
    viewing of dark sky as it is a valuable resource.
2. Preservation and maintenance of the view of night time skies
    and the visual character of natural areas, while allowing for
    night‐time lighting levels appropriate to use, location and
    community safety.
3. Consideration of neighboring properties and the community as
    a whole with regard to exterior lighting through the reduction
    of negative light impacts in the design of new exterior lighting
    schemes.
4. Energy conservation.
OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
      GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                  P a g e | 112

                         The City has established the following objectives and policies for
                         Dark Sky in Sierra Madre. The implementation measures are
                         contained in the Implementation Chapter at the end of the
                         General Plan.
                           Objective R6: Reducing light pollution, trespass, and
                           unnecessary glare through the use of light shielding methods,
                           and elimination of lighting that is misdirected, excessive, or
                           unnecessary.
                         Policies:
                         R6.1            Require that all new development projects utilize
                                         light fixtures that shield the light source so that light
                                         is cast downward to avoid light spillage offsite
                                         or upward into the sky.
                         R6.2            Discourage continuous all‐night exterior lighting
                                         and encourage motion‐sensored lighting.
                         R6.3            Encourage the use of fixtures like the ʺshoe boxʺ
                                         design that are capable of providing accurate light
                                         patterns, and can often be used for lighting
                                         without spilling onto the neighboring property
                                         and upward into the sky.
                           Objective R7: Minimizing lighting use and intensity, utilizing
                           the most efficient lighting technology.
                         Policies:
                         R7.1            The City shall use the lowest wattage of lamp that
                                         is feasible and encourage the public to do the
                                         same.
                         R7.2            The City shall, whenever possible, turn off the
                                         lights or use motion sensor controlled lighting and
                                         encourage the public to do the same.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                          P a g e | 113

R7.3           Investigate the possibility of having businesses
               turn off lights when they are closed.
 Objective R8: The reasonable use of outdoor lighting for
 nighttime safety, utility, security, and enjoyment while
 preserving the ambiance of the night.
Policies:
R8.1           Encourage outdoor lighting to be designed and
               installed in a manner that confines the direct
               lighting rays to the property upon which the
               lighting is installed so as to protect adjacent and
               nearby residential districts and public rights‐of‐
               way, and reduce “skyglow.”
R8.2           Lighting in and near residential areas shall be
               minimal and shielded to prevent nuisance glare.
R8.3           Lighting attached to single‐family home structures
               should not exceed the height of the eave, and
               residential lighting pole height restrictions can be
               considered to control light trespass on adjacent
               properties and upward into the sky.
R8.4           Provide adequate illumination of all streets, alleys,
               and public areas.
 Objective R9: Promoting and educating the community
 regarding awareness of Dark Sky as a limited resource
Policy:
R9.1           Provide pamphlets from organizations dedicated
               to the preservation of the night sky.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 114

                         Section Four:
                         Tree Preservation
                         OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
                         The City of Sierra Madre has demonstrated a strong commitment
                         to tree preservation. Indigenous oak and other native ornamental
                         trees are dominant features of the City’s landscape. Not only do the
                         City’s many trees significantly enhance the aesthetics of the
                         community, they improve air quality, act as buffers against the
                         elements, and reduce noise. The Tree Preservation and Protection
                         Ordinance, updated in February of 2014, establishes basic
                         standards for preserving and protecting the City’s public trees
                         and the last vestiges of the City’s landmark Oak, Sycamore, and
                         Walnut trees located on undeveloped private property. The
                         ordinance specifies the requirements for several identified species
                         on private property and trees on public property in or adjacent to
                         newly planned or renovated commercial and residential
                         developments. The City has also established Energy,
                         Environment and Natural Resources Commission (EENRC),
                         which is a combination of members from a long‐standing Tree
                         Advisory Commission and a more recently created Green
                         Committee. The EENRC is charged with assisting Public Works
                         staff with fulfilling the new requirements in the updated Trees
                         Preservation and Protection Ordinance, including reviews of
                         certain development projects, public outreach, and carrying out
                         the objectives and recommendations of the Sierra Madre
                         Community Forest Management Plan completed in 2014, which
                         provides guidance regarding City trees for the next 50 years.
                         SUMMARY OF TREE PRESERVATION GOALS
                         1. Continued preservation and protection of existing trees.
                         2. Increase of the City’s community forest.
                         OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
                         The City has established the following objectives and policies for
                         tree preservation in Sierra Madre. The implementation measures
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                      P a g e | 115

are contained in the Implementation Chapter at the end of the
General Plan.
 Objective R10:        Maintaining and enhancing the City’s
 significant tree resources.
Policies:
R10.1           Continue to develop          public awareness   and
                support for the City’s tree ordinance.
R10.2           Continue to      develop     tree preservation  and
                protection measures.
R10.3           Carry out the objectives and recommendations of
                the Community Forest Management Plan.
R10.4           Continue to develop and update a recommended
                tree palette for parks and parkways.
R10.5           Continue to update and maintain an inventory of
                trees located on City property including parkways,
                parks and other City‐owned locations.
R10.6           Continue to publish and update basic tree
                maintenance and care brochures for residents.
R10.7           Continue to provide a tree expert as needed to
                assist the City regarding tree removal, tree
                trimming, root pruning, identifying tree diseases,
                and grading that might affect trees.
R10.8           Continue to monitor construction projects with
                regard to grading and construction effects on trees,
                tree removal and replacement.
R10.9           Continue to monitor latest trends and research in
                the field of arboriculture to better manage the
                City’s urban forest.
R10.10          Promote the voluntary Legacy Tree Program.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 116

                          Objective R11: Developing       funding     sources  for     the
                          maintenance and enhancement of the tree preservation and
                          planting program.
                         Policies:
                         R11.1          Locate financial assistance for trimming and care
                                        of trees.
                         R11.2          Solicit community participation in programs
                                        which are geared towards planting and
                                        maintaining City trees.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                    P a g e | 117
Section Five:
Water Resources
OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
For many years, Sierra Madre was the only city in the San Gabriel
Valley that relied entirely on groundwater for its water supply.
On October 9, 2013 the city switched to a new source of water,
imported from outside the Southern California region. The
change in the water source was necessitated by drought‐related
low levels of water in the City’s aquifer.
The drought of 2012‐2014 has driven home the point that
Southern California is an arid region which does not have an
adequate local water supply to meet current water demands, and
that supplies of imported water cannot be counted upon in dry
periods or in the event of a disaster. Current and future residents
of Southern California and particularly Sierra Madre need to
make major changes in their use of water in order to ensure that
in the future there will be adequate supplies available.
Due to the present serious drought conditions and in recognition
of any potential droughts, and the inability to access its adjudicated
ground water in the Eastern Unit of the Raymond Basin, Sierra
Madre declared a water shortage emergency in July
2014 and imposed a water service connection moratorium until
the Raymond Basin aquifer recovers sufficiently to allow Sierra
Madre to pump its ground water for delivery to its existing
customers.      Land use regulations and policies which do not
increase the demand for ground water must be developed and
implemented in order to sustain Sierra Madre’s ability to be self‐
sufficient in supplying water from its traditional sources to its
customers, especially as the City faces future land use and
development growth.
Until 2013, the primary source of water for the City was the Santa
Anita Subarea (aka the Eastern Unit) of the Raymond Groundwater
Basin. Sierra Madre shares this source of water with the City of
Arcadia. Under the 1955 adjudication of the Raymond Basin, Sierra
Madre has a decreed right to extract 1764 acre/feet (574,808,220
gallons) of water annually from the Eastern Unit. That decreed
right was reduced to 940 acre/feet in 2014 at
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                    P a g e | 118

                         the direction of the Raymond Basin Management Board in
                         response to historically low water levels in the Eastern Unit and is
                         in effect until the level in the Arcadia Orange Grove #1 well is at
                         the 500‐foot above average mean sea level . In addition to the
                         decreed right, the City is allowed credit for “replacement” or
                         recharge water that is percolated into the Eastern Unit at the
                         City’s spreading basins located on East Grandview Avenue. The
                         sources of the water used for groundwater recharge are Sierra
                         Madre Creek, Santa Anita Canyon, and storm runoff collected off
                         of East Grandview at Sycamore Place. The amount of water
                         captured for recharge purposes varies depending on annual
                         rainfall. The 50‐year average rainfall is 23.03 inches, with the high
                         being 59.01 inches in 2004‐05, and the low being 7.23 inches in
                         1960‐61(Station 169Z data from Los Angeles County Department
                         of Public Works.)
                         Secondary local sources of water are two horizontal wells or
                         “tunnels” located at the upper end of Woodland Drive at the base
                         of Little Santa Anita Dam. Water flows by gravity from the two
                         tunnels, with the amount of water varying greatly depending on
                         rainfall amounts and season of the year. Water from the west
                         tunnel meets drinking water quality standards and is taken directly
                         into the City’s distribution system. East tunnel discharge does not
                         meet drinking water quality standards, so it is discharged
                         to Little Santa Anita Creek where it is collected downstream and
                         routed to the City’s spreading basins. Annual Sierra Madre water
                         production from the Eastern Unit averages approximately 2800
                         acre/feet, exceeding the City’s decreed right. The difference
                         between annual production and decreed right is covered by a
                         combination of recharge water credits and flow from the West
                         Tunnel. The Eastern Unit has experienced a decline in water levels
                         over the past decade or more. While water levels fluctuate
                         seasonally, the trend has been steadily downward. This indicates
                         that more water is being taken from the Basin than is being
                         replaced, regardless of the safeguards established under the Basin
                         adjudication. The Eastern Unit is a finite source of water and one
                         that must be restored and protected. That fact was underscored by
                         the failure of one of the city’s wells in the fall of
                         2013 due to low aquifer water levels and the determination that
                         for preservation of the aquifer, the remaining three operational
                         wells be taken off line.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 119

The City of Sierra Madre has been granted a Fluoride Variance
from the State Department of Health Services DHS). Sierra Madre
first requested the variance in the beginning of 1994. Sierra Madre
pioneered the California Law Assembly Bill 2681 which
authorizes the DHS of the State of California to grant water utilities
a variance from the stateʹs fluoride drinking water standard of 1.6
milligrams per liter mg/1. The variance allows water utilities to
serve water which exceeds the stateʹs drinking water standards
but shall not exceed 3.0 mg/1, which is 75 percent of the primary
maximum contaminant level M.C.L. of 4.0 mg/1 established by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency USEPA. However,
the USEPA has set a secondary standard M.C.L. of 2.0 mg/1. With
this variance, the Sierra Madre Water Department SMWD is able to
operate its water system in a more economical manner and within
the guidelines established by DHS.
On June 6, 1995, the DHS conducted a public hearing in the City
of Sierra Madre to determine if there was substantial public
opposition to the City receiving a variance from the California
drinking water standard for fluoride. The hearing is required by
the California Health and Safety Code. Of the approximately 30
people in attendance, sixteen presented comments and only one
was not in favor of the variance. More than 100 written responses
supported the variance. Therefore, the DHS found that there was
not substantial opposition to the City receiving the variance. It
should be noted that due to the fluoride concentration of Sierra
Madreʹs drinking water, additional fluoride products are not
necessary for children. All water is chlorinated according to State
water quality requirements prior to discharge into the water
distribution system.
The local groundwater sources for Sierra Madre provided very
high quality potable water for the city; the community has been
recognized for its good water. The City is desirous of returning to
those local sources as soon as aquifer conditions permit.
A third source of water for the City and the source of water that
began to be utilized by the City in 2013 is the San Gabriel Valley
Municipal Water District SGVMWD. The District is a State water
contractor much like Metropolitan Water District. The other three
member agencies of SGVMWD are Azusa, Alhambra and
Monterey Park. The District imports untreated water from the
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                    P a g e | 120

                         Bay delta via the State Water Project and its own pipeline which
                         runs from Devil’s Canyon in San Bernardino County to an outlet
                         in Azusa Canyon. SGVMWD water is used for groundwater in
                         the Main San Gabriel Groundwater Basin. Sierra Madre may at
                         any time request to purchase a limited supply of water from
                         SGVMWD, which is then credited to Sierra Madre for extraction
                         from the Main Basin.
                         The City of Sierra Madre Public Works Department operates the
                         City’s own water production and distribution system. Water is
                         produced from 4 wells located in the vicinity of Sierra Vista Park.
                         Water from the wells flows directly into the Granulated Activated
                         Charcoal treatment system which was constructed in 2006. The
                         water then flows into a small reservoir/pumping forebay at the
                         City maintenance yard and is pumped from there directly and
                         indirectly to the City’s eight reservoirs; the combined storage
                         capacity of the reservoirs is 7.46 million gallons. From the
                         reservoirs, the water is distributed to all residential, commercial
                         and institutional customers via over 46 miles of pipeline. Water is
                         moved through the distribution pipeline system by gravity to
                         over 3700 individual metered water services.
                         The City’s water system incorporates three interconnections with
                         the water systems of other agencies. On the west, there are two 4
                         inch unidirectional flow interconnections with the City of
                         Pasadena water system. The northerly interconnection on
                         Michillinda Avenue flows east to west, for Sierra Madre to supply
                         water to Pasadena. The southerly interconnection flows west to
                         east; from this location Sierra Madre can request to draw water
                         from Pasadena. These connections are suitable for use only in
                         extreme emergency, as their small diameter and location within
                         system pressure zones will not provide a significant flow of
                         water, and because of differences in the treatment processes of
                         the two cities’ water, if the two waters are mixed in either system, a
                         harmless discoloration results. The third system connection is a
                         twelve‐inch pipeline along East Sierra Madre Boulevard linking
                         Sierra Madre with the water system of the City of Arcadia. It is
                         via this pipeline that Sierra Madre can indirectly access its
                         SGVMWD source of water. Water obtained from this source is
                         purchased from SGVMWD and incurs additional costs in the
                         form of Watermaster fees and City of Arcadia production and
                         pumping costs. As a result of the relatively high cost of this
                         water, it is used only in emergencies, and if it is available from
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                        P a g e | 121

Arcadia. Additionally, this source of water is limited in quantity
and cannot fulfill the entire needs (demand) of the City.
The fourth system interconnection was constructed in 2012/13 by
San Gabriel Valley Municipal Water District. This is a direct
connection between the city’s water system and the Metropolitan
Water District Foothill Feeder which crosses Sierra Madre along
Grandview Avenue. This interconnection allows the City to take
potable water directly into its distribution system in an amount
equivalent to the entire water demand of the community. This
interconnection began to be used in October 2013.
Wastewater treatment at the tertiary level provides water that is
considered safe for human consumption. However, the state of
California has not approved the use of reclaimed water for
human consumption. Reclaimed water is only allowed for
specific approved uses, such as irrigation or limited groundwater
recharge. The nearest water reclamation facilities are located in
Whittier Narrows and in the City of Glendale. Reclaimed water
transmission mains from those facilities end miles from Sierra
Madre’s corporate boundary. Due to the high cost of extending
the transmission pipelines, the cost of construction of a second,
separate distribution system throughout Sierra Madre, and the
limited uses of reclaimed water there has not been a significant
effort to incorporate reclaimed water into the City’s water system.
Water conservation and reduction of water use is a primary
means of preserving the City’s limited groundwater supply. In
order to encourage water conservation, the City has undertaken a
number of efforts to educate the community, working closely
with SGVMWD distributing free low‐flush replacement toilets, and
passing out water conservation‐awareness materials at community
events. Chapter 13.24 of the Sierra Madre Municipal Code is
entitled “Mandatory Water Conservation Plan.” This portion of the
Code was adopted by the City Council in 1991 as Ordinance 1073.
The ordinance outlines a six‐phase water conservation plan, each
phase to be enacted by City Council resolution. Phase 1 of that
conservation plan has been in place since the adoption of
Resolution 04‐086 in October 2004. Six specific Phase 1 water
restrictions are listed in SMMC 13.24.060. California Senate Bill 7
Steinberg, 2009 requires every water agency to reduce per capita
water use by 1 percent on or before December 31, 2015 and by a
total of 20 percent by December 31,
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                 P a g e | 122

                         2020. According to the City’s 2010 Urban Water Management
                         Plan, the 10 year baseline daily per capita water use for Sierra
                         Madre is 262 gallons per capita per day GPCD). The 2015 goal is
                         236 GPCD and the 2020 goal is 210 GPCD.
                         National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
                         The Federal Water Pollution Control Act was passed in 1948 and
                         was significantly expanded in 1972. In 1977, it became known as
                         the Federal Clean Water Act, and it established the National
                         Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit
                         program to control water pollution by regulating point sources
                         that discharge pollutants into waters of the United States. The
                         Federal Clean Water Act requires that municipalities obtain an
                         NPDES permit to regulate any discharges (i.e. stormwater) going
                         directly into surface waters.
                         In 1969, the State of California enacted the Porter‐Cologne Water
                         Quality Control Act establishing the State Water Resources Control
                         Board and regional Boards, including the Los Angeles Regional
                         Water Quality Control Board that continues to have regulatory
                         authority over the City of Sierra Madre. The City has managed to
                         meet the strict requirements of the 2001 NPDES permit. However,
                         the most recent NPDES permit was adopted on November 8,
                         2012 (Permit Order No. r4‐2012‐0175) and the City is facing many
                         challenges in meeting the new requirements.
                         The City of Sierra Madre discharges stormwater into the Los
                         Angeles River Watershed. There are three main outflows from the
                         borders of the City. The eastern Santa Anita wash discharges into
                         Peck Park Lake and then to the Rio Hondo tributary of Reach 2 of
                         the Los Angeles River; the center and western channels discharge
                         to the Rio Hondo below the Peck Park Lake via the Arcadia
                         Wash.
                         When a particular body of water is determined to exceed
                         acceptable limits of a particular pollutant, it is prescribed a Total
                         Daily Maximum Loads (TMDL) regulation. Sierra Madre is
                         collectively and independently responsible for many additional
                         TDMLs with the adoption of the new permit, including Los
                         Angeles River Metals, Los Angeles River Trash, Los Angeles
                         River Bacteria, and Peck Road Lake Toxics.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 123

In order to meet the requirements of the new NPDES permit, the
City of Sierra Madre joined with the Cities of Arcadia, Monrovia,
Azusa, Bradbury, Duarte, and Los Angeles County Public
Works/Flood Control District to form the Upper Rio Hondo, San
Gabriel River Watershed Management Group.                The Group
collectively began to develop an Enhanced Watershed
Management Plan along with a Coordinated Integrated Monitoring
Program. The Plan will be finalized in June of 2015 and provide
for a regional framework to address watershed quality challenges
and requirements of the new NPDES permit.
Each of the members of the Group have also taken proactive
“early actions” to meet water quality objectives by drafting Low
Impact Development Ordinances and “Green Streets” policies.
SUMMARY OF WATER PRESERVATION GOALS
1. Conservation of the Cityʹs water resources.
2. High quality drinking water.
3. Growth that is linked to the availability of water.
4. Use of local sources of groundwater rather than imported
water.
5. Meet or exceed water quality objectives.
OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
  Objective R12: Optimizing the use of water resources.
Policies:
R12.l           Protect settling basins for water collection for the
                purposes of groundwater recharge.
R12.2           Actively follow state legislative and policy actions
                to ensure that Sierra Madre is able to use all of its
                water through the conservation of lands for
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 124

                                        groundwater       recharge   and    storm     water
                                        management.
                         R12.3          Develop new ways to capture and percolate storm
                                         water.
                         R12.4          Identify ways in which reclaimed water can be
                                        utilized in Sierra Madre.
                         R12.5          Work collaboratively with Los Angeles County
                                        Department of Public Work/Flood Control to
                                        utilize existing debris basins for groundwater
                                         recharge.
                          Objective R13: Maintaining the City’s water treatment and
                          delivery system.
                         Policies:
                         R13.1          Charge water usage fees which anticipate capital
                                        improvement needs.
                         R13.2          Maintain a capital plan for the maintenance of the
                                        City’s water facilities.
                          Objective R14: Ensuring adequate water availability for future
                          growth in the City.
                         Policies:
                         R14.1          Maintain an urban water management plan.
                         R14.2          Evaluate water availability in conjunction with
                                        public and private development projects.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                    P a g e | 125

 Objective R15: Conserving water during times of drought.
Policies:
R15.1          Prohibit washing of concrete surfaces such as
               sidewalks and driveways with a hose.
R15.2          Regulate water used for decorative fountains.
R15.3          Require restaurants to limit use of drinking water.
R15.4          Restrict hours of water usage for landscape and
               irrigation.
R15.5          Explore other methods or innovations to conserve
               water during times of drought and implement as
               necessary.
R15.6          Consider a rate structure that encourages the
               efficient use of water and that does not
               discriminate unfairly against those with larger lots.
 Objective R16: Eliminating the use of imported water.
Policies:
R16.1          Work with Raymond Basin Management Board
               (Watermaster) to improve management of the
               Eastern Unit of the Raymond Basin.
R16.2          Collaborate with other Raymond Basin water
               producers, especially the City of Arcadia, to
               eliminate the overdraft of the Raymond Basin.
 Objective R17:        Developing a comprehensive National
 Pollutant Discharge Elimination System program that meets or
 exceeds State standards as they are revised from time to time.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 126
                         Policies:
                         R17.1          Diligently carry out minimum control measures
                                        and source reduction programs as required and/or
                                        is beneficial to water quality.
                         R17.2          Continue to identify programs or projects with
                                        multiple benefits with water quality, water
                                        retention, recreation, flood safety, and aesthetics as
                                        priorities.
                         R17.3          Continue to work with regional partners to
                                        increase efficiency, effectiveness, and cost savings
                                        as priorities.
                         R17.4          Participate in the discussion regarding emerging
                                        regulatory       National    Pollutant    Discharge
                                        Elimination System topics, and provide comments
                                         as necessary.
                         R17.5          Develop public education and outreach programs
                                        with regard to specific City and regional topics.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                      P a g e | 127
Section Six:
Waste Management/Recycling
OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
The City requires all residential and business properties to have
trash collection services. The City has an exclusive franchise
agreement with a contractor, Athens Services, to provide
collection and recycling services under a 25‐year contract that
renews yearly. No other haulers are authorized with the
exception of construction projects that elect to file a Waste
Management Plan and provide a performance bond. The contractor
provides residential customers with three separate containers for
waste separation: one for trash, one for commingled recyclables,
and one for green waste and organic yard materials. Residents
pay rates based only on the size and number of black trash cans,
therefore incentivizing the use of recycling and green waste
containers. Multi‐family and commercial land uses are typically
provided with bin service. The size and number of bins are
coordinated though the contractor and the material collected in
these bins are separated into trash and recycling material at a
Material Recovery Facility. Also included in the contract are
opportunities for residents to dispose of bulky items at no charge
up to four times per year. The contractor also supplies extra
services for community events such as the annual Wistaria
Festival and Friends of the Library Art Fair. The contractor does
its own billing and customer service relations, with City staff
serving as a liaison and occasional arbitrator between the
contractor and the residents of Sierra Madre.
The City contracts for landscape services to collect refuse placed
in public trash receptacles. These are located primarily in the
downtown districts, parks, and at bus stops. The trash is collected
daily and taken to the City Yards to be picked up by waste disposal
contractor.
Sierra Madre is included in the Scholl Canyon Wasteshed so the
City’s refuse goes to Scholl Canyon Landfill. This is a major
advantage to the City as capacity of this landfill is many years
away from being reached.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                 P a g e | 128

                         The California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (AB
                         939) requires every city and county in the state to prepare a
                         Sources Reduction and Recycling Element (SRRE) in its Solid Waste
                         Management Plan that identifies how each jurisdiction will meet
                         the mandatory state waste diversion requirement of 50 percent by
                         and after the year 2000. The City of Sierra Madre has included this
                         requirement in the contract with its contractor. It has also joined
                         the Los Angeles Regional Agency with 17
                         Southern California cities, including the City of Los Angeles, to
                         work cooperatively to increase diversion rates to the maximum
                         extent possible. Public recycling containers are provided at
                         Memorial Park, Sierra Vista Park, and a large roll‐off bin is
                         available to residents for recycling at the west side of Sierra Vista
                         Park below the Sierra Madre Rose Float building. City staff
                         provides recycling information outreach through various
                         communication tools throughout the year, including a brochure
                         available at City facilities, and also provides outreach at many
                         City events, such as the Wistaria Festival and Public Works Open
                         House. Diversion rates for the City of Sierra Madre have been at
                         about 57 percent annually for the past five years, with the exception
                         of a period following the 2012 windstorm event which caused a
                         drop to approximately 54 percent.
                         Resolution 98‐06 adopted in December of 1997 created the City of
                         Sierra Madre’s Household Hazardous Waste Element. This
                         document outlined strategies and planning to eliminate
                         household hazardous wastes from the City’s waste stream. Sierra
                         Madre residents are provided with opportunities to safely
                         dispose of common household goods that are not allowed into
                         the traditional waste stream. Items such as light bulbs, batteries,
                         used oil, electronic waste, and certain solvents and cleaners are
                         dangerous to the environment and prohibited from landfills. The
                         City works closely with the County of Los Angeles to create and
                         maintain programs to collect and safely dispose of such waste.
                         Once a year, the City hosts a County‐sponsored Household
                         Hazardous Waste Roundup at the Mariposa Parking Lot. The event
                         accepts the hazardous waste at no charge to the resident. A
                         calendar of such events that are being hosted by nearby cities is
                         maintained and available to residents, and the County’s website
                         is also a source for such reference.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 129

In addition to roundup events, the City collects used batteries via a
program with County of Los Angeles Libraries, and three local
businesses have also signed up to be collection centers for used
batteries through a San Gabriel Valley Council of Governments
program. Used sharps needles, syringes, lancets, etc. are also
considered hazardous waste, and the City provides approved
containers and information on locations where these can be safely
disposed. Finally, the City has partnered with the Cities of
Bradbury and Monrovia to administer a used oil collection grant
from CalRecycle to provide and publicize certified used oil
collection centers in the area.
SUMMARY OF          WASTE MANAGEMENT AND RECYCLING
GOALS
1. A higher level of recycling of materials by individuals,
   businesses, and City government.
2. A healthy and clean City.
OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
The City has established the following objectives and policies for
waste management and recycling in Sierra Madre.                  The
implementation measures are contained in the Implementation
Chapter at the end of the General Plan.
  Objective R18: Providing adequate trash collection services for
  Sierra Madre residents and businesses.
Policies:
R18.1           Maintain a contract with a waste hauler to provide
                service to residences, businesses, institutions and
                City government facilities for trash collection.
R18.2           Maintain a contract with a single waste hauler to
                provide trash collection services to commercial
                businesses, thereby simplifying the commercial
                recycling program.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 130
                         R18.3          Continue to provide opportunities for the disposal
                                        of large household items.
                          Objective R19: Improving the waste diversion and recycling
                          programs already in place.
                         Policies:
                         R19.1          Require the waste collection provider to provide
                                        recycling bins to all customers in the City, including
                                        in the business district. Cardboard should be
                                        collected at sites in the business district.
                         R19.2          Continue the collection of new types of plastic.
                         R19.3          Continue to enforce the Construction and
                                        Demolition Ordinance to require builders to
                                        separate and recycle discarded building materials,
                                        including lumber, metal, cement, etc.
                         R19.4          City offices shall purchase and use post‐consumer
                                        and recycled products to the extent feasible.
                         R19.5          Promote green waste and recycling programs such
                                        as “green and clean” which increase the usage of
                                        green waste for compost and reduces the amount
                                        of green waste exported.
                         R19.6          Continue to include wildlife‐resistant garbage
                                        containers for the High Activity Wildlife Zone in
                                        the waste disposal contract.
                          Objective R20: Properly disposing toxic and hazardous waste.
                         Policies:
                         R20.1          Continue to work with Los Angeles County
                                        Department of Public Works to provide a free
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                        P a g e | 131

                household hazardous waste pick‐up at least once a
                year.
R20.2           Continue to provide information to community
                members regarding free household hazardous
                waste pick‐up sponsored by Los Angeles County
                Department of Public Works.
 Objective R21: Providing adequate waste disposal systems to
 meet the demands of existing and new development.
Policy:
R21.1           Continue to provide for adequate trash removal,
                 installation and maintenance of trash receptacles
                 on street and in parks, and regular street
                 sweeping.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                P a g e | 132

                         Section Seven:
                         Air Quality
                         OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
                         The City of Sierra Madre’s air shed is part of the South Coast Air
                         Basin, historically one of the most polluted in the nation. The
                         area is called a basin because its geographical formation is that of a
                         depression, with the surrounding mountains containing the air and
                         the pollutants in the valleys and basin below. The basin contains
                         pollutants generated by dense population centers, heavy vehicle
                         traffic and industry. These conditions have led to some of the
                         earliest and strictest controls on land use and vehicles.
                         Atmospheric conditions also affect the Southern California basin.
                         Most important of these are the sea breezes from the Pacific
                         Ocean that push pollutants inland where the mountains act as a
                         barrier to the horizontal dispersion of the pollutants.
                         Compounding this condition is an inversion layer which acts as a
                         lid, preventing the pollutants from escaping upward.
                         Sources of pollution can be categorized into short term and long
                         term impacts. Short term air pollutants result from equipment
                         and dust generated during grading and site preparation. The
                         Environmental Protection Agency estimates that construction
                         activities for a large development project can add 1.2 tons of
                         fugitive dust per acre of soil distributed per month of activity.
                         Long term impacts are generated by pollutants which produce
                         poor ambient air quality smog. In the South Coast Air Basin
                         comprised of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, and San
                         Bernardino Counties, two components interact to produce the
                         high pollution concentrations and smog: emissions and
                         atmospheric conditions.              The South Coast Air Quality
                         Management District (SCAQMD) refers to emissions as either
                         stationary or mobile. Mobile sources refers to motor vehicles and
                         these create approximately 90 per cent of the basin’s air problem.
                         Stationary sources refer to a fixed point such as a factory.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                        P a g e | 133

Air quality controls in California are governed by the federal
Clean Air Act of 1990 and by the California Health and Safety
Code, particularly the California Clean Air Act of 1989. The
federal and state Clean Air Acts require the preparation of a plan
to reduce air pollution to healthful levels. The Southern California
Association of Governments (SCAG) and the SCAQMD are
charged with preparing the Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP)
every three to five years, the most recent of which was adopted by
SCAQMD in 2007 and by the Air Resources Board (ARB) that same
year.
The Air Quality Management Plan is designed to comply with the
provisions of the 1988 Clean Air Act and the 1990 federal Clean Air
Act Amendments, to accommodate growth, to reduce the high
levels of pollutants within the Basin, and to meet federal standards
for all pollutants by 2014.         Principal controls concepts for
improving the Basin’s air quality include: extensive use of clean
fuels, transportation control measures, market incentives, and
facility permitting.
Air quality standards are health based and are set at levels to
protect the most sensitive members of the population. There is
mounting evidence of the negative health effects of long term
exposure to air pollution especially on adults who are ill or have
long term respiratory problems, and in young children whose
lungs are not fully developed. Facilities which house persons
who are potentially sensitive to air pollution are called “sensitive
receptors.”      In Sierra Madre, sensitive receptors have been
identified as pre‐schools, schools, board and care facilities, and
the assisted living facility.
The main source of air pollutants in Sierra Madre are emissions
from motor vehicles. Most pollution in Sierra Madre is generated
by cold engine starts and in the first few miles of travel. There
are also some light manufacturing uses, such as a furniture
manufacturer, welder, and dry cleaners.
In addition, second‐hand smoke has been proven to be harmful.
This is particularly harmful to those living in close proximity to
smokers.
AIR QUALITY GOAL
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                  P a g e | 134

                         Air quality that contributes to health, well‐being, and the
                         enjoyment of life.
                         OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
                         The City has established the following objectives and policies for
                         air quality in Sierra Madre. The implementation measures are
                         contained in the Implementation Chapter at the end of the
                         General Plan.
                          Objective R22: Attaining safe air standards.
                         Policies:
                         R22.1          Cooperate with the South Coast Air Quality
                                        Management District and incorporate the
                                        provisions of the Air Quality Management Plan.
                         R22.2          Prohibit the development of land uses and land
                                        use practices which would contribute significantly
                                        to poor air quality.
                         R22.3          Establish controls and monitor uses in the City
                                        which      contain     operations      or    materials
                                        characterized by air pollutants which individually
                                        or cumulatively could significantly add to the air
                                        basin’s degradation (e.g., furniture manufacturers
                                        using paints and finishes, automobile repair,
                                        printing, and reproduction, and dry cleaners).
                         R22.4          Encourage and participate in regional initiatives
                                        and programs to improve the South Coast Air
                                        Basin’s air quality.
                         R22.5          Publicize the incentives offered by the Southern
                                        California Air Quality Management District, such
                                        as leaf blower and lawnmower exchanges.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 135

 Objective R23: Reducing the amount of vehicular emissions in
 Sierra Madre.
Policies:
R23.1          Establish a transportation system management
               program to encourage the use of transit,
               carpooling, shuttles and other transportation
               options to reduce vehicle miles traveled and
               vehicle trips.
R23.2          Encourage public and school bus owners to
               convert to lower emission burning fuel, which is
               part of the Southern California Air Quality
               Management District Plan.
R23.3          Continue to purchase automobiles and other
               vehicles that use zero or low emission fuels for the
               City’s fleet of vehicles.
R23.4          Allow for local job opportunities including home
               based businesses and telecommuting in Sierra
               Madre.
R23.5          Provide opportunities through appropriate zoning
               for the development of residential units in concert
               with commercial uses.
R23.6          Provide and enhance local transit service to reduce
               personal vehicle trips.
R23.7          Maintain links to the MTA Gold Line light rail
               system.
R23.8          Pursue funding sources for facilities and programs
               linked to regional transit.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                  P a g e | 136

                          Objective R24: Reducing fugitive dust generated from the use
                          of gardening equipment and construction activity.
                         Policies:
                         R24.1          Continue to review guidelines from time to time
                                        regarding the use of gas ‐powered lawn
                                        equipment, and         consider    tightening      the
                                        restrictions on the type of equipment, hours and
                                        duration of operation.
                         R24.2          Require dust abatement measures during grading
                                        and construction operations. This may include use
                                        of reclaimed water or other methods to control
                                        fugitive dust.
                         R24.3          Develop and enforce a fugitive dust control
                                        ordinance that regulates the following: visible dust
                                        emissions, soil stabilization, the carrying and
                                        tracking of dirt offsite, unpaved access and haul
                                        roads, storage piles and bulk materials,
                                        demolition, and dust control plans; the ordinance
                                        should include penalties to encourage compliance.
                          Objective R25: Reducing harmful secondhand smoke in living
                          areas.
                         Policy:
                         R25.1:         Consider developing an ordinance to address
                                        second‐hand smoke and other indoor air
                                        pollutants in multiple‐family dwelling units.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                     P a g e | 137

                         Chapter Three –
                         Hazard Prevention
                         INTRODUCTION
                         The Hazard Prevention Chapter of the Sierra Madre General Plan
                         contains four components: fire safety, flood/landslide, seismic
                         safety (all part of the State‐mandated safety element) and noise
                         (State‐mandated noise element.)
                         Sustainable policies and goals are called out by a green leaf icon.
                         Section One:
                         Fire Safety
                         OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
                         Fire protection in Sierra Madre is provided by the Sierra Madre
                         Fire Department. The Fire Department is made up of career, paid
                         part‐time, and volunteer firefighters. The fire station is located at
                         242 W. Sierra Madre Blvd., next to City Hall. The Fire Department
                         staff consists of volunteers, part‐time paramedics, a part‐time
                         administrative assistant and a full‐time staff that includes
                         captains and the Fire Chief. The daily manning of the Department
                         consists of part‐time paramedics, shift firefighters, an engineer, a
                         duty captain and a battalion chief. The Fire Chief is responsible
                         for the administration of the department. Each captain
                         administers a division of the department to include Fire
                         Prevention, Training, and Emergency Medical Services, and
                         provides for the daily supervision of a duty crew.                  The
                         Captain/Fire Marshal is responsible for fire prevention and the
                         hiring, training and supervision of the engineers.                  The
                         Captain/Paramedic Coordinator is responsible for Emergency
                         Medical Services and the hiring, training and supervision of part‐
                         time paramedics. The Captain/Training Officer is responsible for
                         training/certification programs and the hiring, training and
                         supervision of shift firefighters.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                        P a g e | 138

Since 1996, the average number of calls for fire and medical
emergencies has increased from 700 to 850 annually. The
response time for an emergency is 4‐5 minutes from the time the
call is received at the regional Dispatch Center. All calls are
received at the Police Department Dispatch that then transfers the
call to the Verdugo Fire Communication Center for appropriate
action. In addition to Station Alerting, members of the Fire
Department are equipped with pagers for notification of an
emergency.
The Fire Department participates in the State Master Mutual Aid
Agreement and has a mutual aid agreement with the cities within
Area C, a group of local communities from Burbank to Monrovia
and as far south as Monterey Park. In addition, Sierra Madre
provides first response services for Los Angeles County Fire
Department and the U.S. Forest Service in the hillside brush areas
immediately north of Sierra Madre City limits.
The closest hospitals and medical facilities outside of the high fire
risk areas include the Sierra Madre Medical Center, Arcadia
Methodist Hospital, and Huntington Memorial Hospital in
Pasadena.
High Fire Severity Zone
While Sierra Madre’s location at the base (southern foothills) of
the San Gabriel Mountains affords the City with stunning views
and other natural amenities, it also presents a significant wildfire
hazard to people and structures. The natural, undeveloped
slopes of the hillside areas within the City support open coastal
sage scrub and chaparral habitats that are susceptible to wildfires
common to the San Gabriel Mountains. Additionally,
development in the canyon areas is characterized by narrow
roads with tree canopy coverage. These tree canopies provide
opportunities for hillside wildfires to spread, creating a potential
fire hazard for residents of Sierra Madre. According to the Fire
Hazard Severity Zone Map in Figure 3‐1, areas of the City above
Grand View Avenue are located in the High Fire Severity Zone,
which is the highest possible designation according to the Los
Angeles County Fire Department.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 139

Figure 3-1 Fire Hazard Severity Zone Map
                             Large fires have been part of southern California for many years.
                             In April and May 2008, a fire raged through the foothills above
                             Sierra Madre, forcing the evacuation of all the residents who
                             lived on Grand View Avenue north to the foothills. This fire
                             resulted in over 500 acres being burned, but no houses were
                             destroyed. Table 3‐1 outlines the large historic fires in Los
                             Angeles County in order of structures damaged.
   GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                    P a g e | 140

    Table 3-1 Large Historic Fires in Los Angeles County 1923-2009
SUMMARY OF FIRE SAFETY GOALS
1.       A high level of fire safety for the citizenry.
2.       Proactive and preventative fire protection for existing and
         new development.
3.       Continued participation in mutual aid with cities
         throughout California.
OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
The City has established the following objectives and policies for
fire safety in Sierra Madre. The implementation measures are
contained in the Implementation Chapter at the end of the
General Plan.
  Objective Hz1: Providing adequate service levels of fire
  protection that meets the needs of Sierra Madre residents,
  businesses and visitors.
Policies:
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                  P a g e | 141
                         Hz1.1          Maintain a combination volunteer and paid
                                         fighting force.
                         Hz1.2          Promote public education about fire safety at
                                        home, in the community, and in the work place.
                         Hz1.3           Continue to coordinate the provision of fire
                                        services with all public safety service providers
                                        and monitor their adequacy and responsiveness to
                                        community needs.
                         Hz1.4          Encourage, facilitate, and participate in, where
                                        appropriate, the establishment of methods of
                                        communication between the Fire Department and
                                        Sierra Madre community members to discuss and
                                        resolve issues of responsiveness and sensitivity.
                          Objective Hz2: Providing adequate fire protection necessary
                          for existing and future development.
                         Policies:
                         Hz2.1          Continue to require all existing and new
                                        development to install and maintain adequate
                                        smoke detection systems.
                         Hz2.2          Continue to require all new development to install
                                        automatic fire sprinkler systems.
                         Hz2.3          Continue to require review of building plans by a
                                         Fire Captain.
                         Hz2. 4           Consider water availability in terms of quantity
                                        and water pressure for safety purposes when
                                        considering the size and location of new
                                        residential construction.
                         Hz2.5          Assess the impacts of incremental increases in
                                        development density and related traffic congestion
                                        on fire hazards and emergency response time, and
                                        ensure through the development review process
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                      P a g e | 142
               that new development will not result in a
               reduction of fire protection services below
               acceptable levels.
Hz2.6          Continue to require that new development
               provides adequate hydrants and show sufficient
               evidence that there is adequate water supply/fire
               flow and that it is available to accommodate the
               fire protection needs of new construction.
Hz2. 7         Protect the wild land/urban interface by
               considering fire hazards when evaluating projects
               in the canyon areas.
Hz2. 8         Develop vegetation management plans that
               manage chemise and chaparral to ensure adequate
               firebreaks, to provide adequate access for fire
               protection water systems, and access for
               firefighting.
Hz2. 9         Maintain and update hillside development
               standards which include fire prevention design
               measures.
Hz2.10         Work with Public Works, the Police Department
               and residents to develop a solution to parking issues
               that affect Fire Department access in the canyon
               areas.
 Objective Hz3: Continuing the City’s participation in mutual
 aid throughout California.
Policies:
Hz3.1          Continue          to cooperate with Area C Fire
               Departments for second and third alarm calls and
               continue with the State‐wide Mutual Aid
               Agreements.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 143

                         Hz3.2           Work with Public Works staff of adjacent
                                        jurisdictions to ensure that roadways are adequate
                                         for fire equipment.
                          Objective Hz4: Addressing emergency operations and disaster
                          preparedness as a priority.
                         Policies:
                         Hz4.1          Update the Emergency Operations Plan annually.
                         Hz4.2           Maintain a        fully     operational    Emergency
                                         Operations Center.
                         Hz4.3          Enlist participation from the community and City
                                        staff for emergency operations.
                         Hz4.4          Provide emergency           operations   training     and
                                        conduct test runs.
                         Hz4.5          Review and upgrade emergency operations
                                        equipment such as 911 equipment, and the police
                                        dispatch system as needed to maintain modern
                                        levels of service.
                         Hz4.6          Develop       and      utilize    emergency        public
                                        communication systems.
                          Objective Hz5: Limiting fire hazard through brush and weed
                          abatement.
                         Policies:
                         Hz5.1          Mandate annual brush removal from April to June.
                         Hz5.2          Work with community groups in presenting
                                        information and trainings regarding wildfire
                                        prevention and awareness.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                         P a g e | 144
Hz5. 3        Promote voluntary efforts in tree trimming, and
              brush and weed abatement.
Hz5.4         Identify funds by way of a tree assessment district
              or “environment fund” or other source of funds to
              pay for vegetation trimming and removal of dead
              wood on public property and private properties
              where vegetation is creating a canopy over public
              rights‐of‐way.
   GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                 P a g e | 145

                         Section Two:
                         Flood/Landslide
                         OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
                         Flooding
                         Flooding represents a potential hazard to population and
                         buildings, and as such, it is a component of the State‐mandated
                         safety element. This section addresses the risks of flooding due to
                         the City’s natural terrain, vegetation, rainfall, runoff, and risks
                         associated with flooding due to dam failure.
                         Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) are published by the Federal
                         Emergency Management Agency (FEMA.) As part of the National
                         Flood Insurance program, the maps delineate areas of special
                         flood hazard. The 2008 FIRM for Sierra Madre designates the
                         overwhelming majority of the City as Flood Zone X, defined as
                         “Areas determined to be outside the 0.2% annual chance
                         floodplain.” A small segment of the community, centered along the
                         Little Santa Anita Creek channel, is classified as Zone D, an “Area
                         in which flood hazards are undetermined, but possible.”
                         However, there are specific areas unmapped by FEMA within the
                         City that are considered to be at special risk for flooding. All of
                         these areas are against the foothills and are of significant risk of
                         flooding and landslides, particularly after a brush fire. The
                         canyon urban/wild land interface areas above the City are the most
                         prone to major flooding. In the years immediately following a
                         brush fire in the foothills, these areas can be an extreme hazard to
                         persons and property during heavy rainfall events. Flood in these
                         special risk areas can occur rapidly or slowly depending on the
                         time transpired since the fire, the frequency of rainfall events, the
                         duration of rainfall events, and the intensity of the precipitation.
                         Special flood hazard areas located in the residential portion of the
                         City are subject to minor flooding.
                         Flood hazards associated with stormwater runoff channeled from
                         the mouths of canyons in the northern part of the City have
                         generally been controlled by dams, debris basins, and flood control
                         channels. There is one dam and a total of seven debris
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                      P a g e | 146

basins located within the City. Table 3‐2 below lists the existing
debris structures and dam in a west to east order.
                                         Table 3-2
          Facility Name               Owned/Operated         Type        Capacity
 Sunnyside Debris Basin          LA County Public Works    Earth     Fill .64 DDE
 Bailey Canyon Debris Basin      LA County Public Works    Earth     Fill 1.60 DDE
  Floral Debris Basin            Sierra Madre Public Works Earth     Not available.
 Auburn Debris Basin             LA County Public Works    Earth     Fill 1.12 DDE
 Carter Debris Basin             LA County Public Works    Earth     Fill 1.06 DDE
 Sierra Madre Dam                LA County Public Works    Concrete  Arch Dam 0.53
                                                                     DDE
 Sturtevant Debris Basin         LA County Public Works    Earth     Fill 0.85 DDE
 Lannan Debris Basin             LA County Public Works    Earth     Fill 1.00 DDE
The acronym DDE in Table 3‐2 indicates Design Debris Event, a
term that Los Angeles County Department of Public Works uses
to describe the maximum amount of debris a burned watershed
could produce. As noted in Table 3‐2, the Sunnyside, Floral,
Sierra Madre Dam, and Sturtevant facilities do not have capacity to
contain the amount of debris that their watersheds could produce.
Therefore, residential areas below these facilities are potentially
subject to post‐fire debris flow damage.
While these debris facilities protect most of the large watersheds
above Sierra Madre, some watershed areas remain in an
unprotected condition. If burned in wildfires, these watersheds will
produce debris during rainfall events that will flow unhindered
into the community. The most notable of these is Stonehouse
Canyon, a 67‐acre watershed capable of producing over 20,000
cubic yards of debris. The watershed outlets onto Stonehouse
Drive above its intersection with Grandview Avenue. Other
uncontrolled watersheds that have been identified are listed in
Table 3‐3, again, west to east:
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                 P a g e | 147

                                                              Table 3-3
                                              Watershed Location Area Discharges
                         Unnamed canyon above Mater Dolorosa behind Retreat Center Main Building: 9
                         acres Mater Dolorosa private property
                         Hillside above the private extension of Auburn Avenue northeasterly of the north
                         end of the private street: 6 Acres Private and public portions of Auburn Avenue
                         Unnamed canyon Parallel to and northwesterly from the private street section of
                         Mt. Wilson Trail: 17 Acres across private property into Mt. Wilson Trail at East
                         Mira Monte Avenue
                         Hillside above Skyland Drive northwesterly of 801 Skyland Drive: 19 Acres
                         across private property into Skyland Drive Unnamed Canyon
                         Above Woodland Drive southwesterly of Sierra Madre Dam: 16 Acres across
                         private property into the upper intersection of Woodland and Brookside Yucca
                         Canyon* East end of Yucca Trail: 18 Acres Woodland Drive via Yucca Trail
                         * Los Angeles County Public Works has constructed debris structures in Yucca
                         Canyon.
                         Flooding which occurs as a result of the structural failure of a
                         dam is called dam inundation. Structural failure may be caused
                         by seismic activity. Seismic activity may also cause dam inundation
                         by the action of a seismically induced wave that overtops the dam
                         without also causing dam failure. This action is referred to as a
                         seiche. Landslides flowing into a reservoir are also a source of
                         potential dam failure from overtopping.
                         The major dam which could have a significant impact on the City
                         in the event of dam failure is the Little Santa Anita Dam/Sierra
                         Madre Dam. However, failure of this dam during a catastrophic
                         event, such as a severe earthquake, is considered a very unlikely
                         event. Due to the method of construction of this dam, it has
                         performed well in earthquakes, and failure is not expected to
                         occur.
                         The area one quarter of a mile west of Santa Anita Canyon is an
                         area requiring flood control. According to the Los Angeles
                         County Public Works Department, the City is included in Big Santa
                         Anita Dam’s inundation area. However, even though the dam is
                         located 2 miles northeast of the City, the dam is not considered to
                         be a threat to the City in the event of dam failure. The Sierra Madre
                         Dam operates as a “dry” dam and contains water only during rain
                         as a flood control device.
                         Landslides
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                     P a g e | 148

Severe flooding can also undermine the integrity of the soils in
the hillsides and cause landslides. Landslides represent only one
step in the continuous natural erosion process, and represent a
basic geologic hazard. Ground shaking from an earthquake could
provide the stimulus to initiate downslope movement of an already
unstable earth mass. Movement could also be triggered by heavy
rains or by grading. The landslide areas in the City occur at
elevations between 1,400 and 2,000 feet, thus above the urban areas.
Mudflows, also known as debris flows, are a type of landslide
experienced in Sierra Madre. Mudflows involve very rapid
downslope movement of saturated soil, sub‐soil and weathered
bedrock. Debris flows also include burned or partially burned plant
materials. They originate in hillside areas where the soil horizon is
well developed, but the soil has poor drainage characteristics.
Large mudflows may have the energy to uproot trees and to
carry along boulders several feet in diameter. Because they
can happen with little or no warning and because of the speed with
which they move, mudflows can be quite destructive, especially
along the bottom and at the mouths of canyons. Historically,
mudslides have occurred in several locations within the northern
portion of the City.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                    P a g e | 149

Source: California Office of Emergency Services 2007
                                                   FLOOD/LANDSLIDE GOAL
                                                   A community that is protected from floods and landslides.
                                                   OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
                                                   The City has established the following objectives and policies for
                                                   flood/landslides in Sierra Madre. The implementation measures
                                                   are contained in the Implementation Chapter at the end of the
                                                   General Plan.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                               P a g e | 150
 Objective Hz6: Addressing potential flooding and landslide
 hazards on public and private property.
Policies:
Hz6.1          Require that all new development incorporates
               sufficient measures to mitigate flood hazards,
               including the design of containment systems to
               capture stormwater runoff on‐site, and site
               grading that minimizes stormwater runoff from
               increased impervious surfaces, thereby addressing
               impacts to on‐site structures and adjacent
               properties.
Hz6.2          Require that the landscape of open space areas
               provide the maximum permeable surface area to
               reduce site runoff, and prohibit the paving of a
               majority of these areas.
 Objective Hz7: Providing adequate response in case of
 flooding emergency.
Policies:
Hz7.1          In the event of a flood, coordinate Fire Department
               emergency operations with the Sierra Madre Police
               Department, the Sierra Madre Public Works
               Department, the Sierra Madre Volunteer Search
               and Rescue Team, and other public agencies
               utilizing Incident Command and the National
               Incident Management System (NIMS.).
Hz7.2          Encourage        implementation     of     emergency
               evacuation drills to prepare for the event of floods.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 151

                          Objective Hz8: Maintaining adequate infrastructure to prevent
                          flooding hazards.
                         Policies:
                         Hz8.1          Require that residential tract developers be
                                        responsible for construction of drainage/storm drain
                                        systems improvements that are compatible with
                                        City and County systems within or adjacent to their
                                        project site.
                         Hz8.2          Install    required      public   storm     drainage
                                        improvements.
                         Hz8.3          To the extent feasible, the City shall continue to
                                        cooperate with and facilitate L.A. County’s
                                        maintenance efforts to keep the debris basins
                                        clean.
                          Objective Hz9: Maintaining updated information on flood
                          hazards.
                         Policies:
                         Hz9.1          Obtain and make available to the public updated
                                        flood hazard maps prepared by FEMA.
                         Hz9.2          Evaluate studies of streams, as they become
                                        available, to identify any changes.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                      P a g e | 152

Section Three:
Seismic Safety
OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
The City of Sierra Madre is located in a geologically complex area
that has a very active history of seismic activity due to the large
number of faults in the region.
There are several active and potentially active faults located in the
vicinity of the City. The nearest fault is the Sierra Madre Fault
Zone which passes through the northern part of the City in a west‐
northwesterly direction. This fault zone consists of several sub‐
parallel branches found at the base of the mountains and within
the one‐quarter mile of slope above the mountain base. The
Clamshell‐Sawpit Fault, an off‐shoot of the Sierra Madre Fault
Zone, located approximately 1.5 miles east of Sierra Madre, and
which generated the 1991 Sierra Madre earthquake, is a branch of
the Sierra Madre Fault Zone. This earthquake resulted in $12.5
million in damages, including damage to 403 structures,
22 homes condemned, and 36 toppled chimneys; there were also
18 reported injuries. Another active fault in proximity to the City
is the Raymond Fault located approximately 1.5 miles to the
south.
Faults are continually being found by geologists/seismologists
within the region. These scientists have identified almost 100
faults in the Los Angeles area that are suspected of being capable
of generating earthquakes with magnitudes of 6.0 or greater.
Included within the newly discovered faults are faults that are
classified as “blind thrusts”. These faults do not reach the ground
surface but do connect many of the known surficial faults at
depth and underlie nearly the entire Los Angeles, San Fernando
and San Gabriel basins.           The January 1994 magnitude 6.7
Northridge Earthquake occurred on a north‐dipping thrust fault
connected to a buried thrust and produced severe ground motion
over a wide area. It also caused 57 deaths, 9,253 injuries and left
over 20,000 displaced. An earthquake on any of these many
faults would represent a hazard in the region.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 153

                         The U.S. Geological Survey and the Southern California
                         Earthquake Center say that the Los Angeles area could expect one
                         earthquake every year of magnitude 5.0 for the foreseeable
                         future. The most likely major seismic events to affect Sierra
                         Madre within the next 50 to 200 years most likely would occur as
                         the result of movement along the Sierra Madre Fault, a blind thrust,
                         or the San Andreas Fault.
                         A major earthquake occurring in or near Sierra Madre may cause
                         many deaths and injuries, extensive property damage, fires,
                         hazardous spills, and other hazards, as evidenced by the 1991
                         Sierra Madre earthquake. The effects could be aggravated by
                         aftershocks and by the secondary effects of fire, hazardous
                         material/chemical accidents, and possible failure of the
                         waterways and dams.
                         On a citywide basis, the Sierra Madre, the Raymond, a blind thrust,
                         and the San Andreas are faults considered to represent the greatest
                         hazard to the City. Although significant earthquakes may occur
                         on faults other than those identified, these faults are considered
                         most likely to cause damage in the City. The Sierra Madre Fault
                         Zone is the principal seismic hazard due not only to its potential
                         for ground rupture, but also potential for seismic shaking. The
                         consequences of strong seismic shaking are of greater significance
                         over a far wider area than is ground rupture by active faulting.
                          Earthquakes are caused by the violent and abrupt release of
                         strain built up along faults. When a fault ruptures, energy
                         spreads in the form of seismic waves.           Seismic waves are
                         categorized into two groups: body waves and surface waves. Body
                         waves travel through the earth’s crust and eventually reach the
                         ground interface creating surface waves. Both body waves and
                         surface waves cause the ground to vibrate up and down and side
                         to side at different frequencies depending on the frequency content
                         of the earthquake rupture mechanism, the distance from the
                         earthquake origin to a particular site, and the path and material
                         through which the seismic waves spread.
                         Hazards associated with seismic waves include ground rupture,
                         ground shaking, land sliding, flooding, liquefaction, tsunamis
                         and seiches. The potential hazards that the City could face in an
                         earthquake include the following:
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                     P a g e | 154

Ground Rupture
Ground rupture represents the primary hazard associated with
earthquakes since it is the initial result of seismic events. Surface
rupture poses a difficult seismic problem from an engineering
standpoint because it is far more expensive and complicated to
design a foundation and                  structure to withstand the
displacement of even fractions of a foot than to build without
consideration of rupture. Such ground fractures can cause
parallel displacement in the foundation, causing buildings to
crack and split. Development should be avoided in areas of high
fault rupture potential.
Ground Shaking
The most significant earthquake action in terms of potential
structural damage and loss of life is ground shaking. Ground
shaking is the movement of the earth’s surface in response to a
seismic event.     The intensity of the ground shaking and the
resultant damages are determined by the magnitude of the
earthquake, distance from the epicenter, and characteristics of
surface     geology. This hazard is the primary cause of the
collapse of buildings and other structures.
Increased hazards from earthquakes occur when the seismic
activity occurs in a highly urbanized area. The significance of
ground shaking action from an earthquake is directly related to
the density and type of buildings, and the number of people
exposed to its effect.
Liquefaction
Liquefaction is a phenomenon involving the loss of shear strength
of soil. Liquefaction involves a sudden loss in strength of a
saturated, cohesionless soil (predominantly sand) which is caused
by shock or strain, such as generated by an earthquake, and
results in temporary transformation of the soil to a fluid mass. If
the liquefying layer is near the surface, the effects are much like
that of quicksand on any structure located on it. If the layer is in
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 155

                         the subsurface, it may provide a sliding surface for the material
                         above it.
                         Liquefaction typically occurs in areas where the groundwater
                         surface is less than 30 feet below the ground surface and where
                         the soils are composed predominantly of poorly consolidated fine
                         sand.       There are no liquefaction zones in the City. However,
                         during and after a severe rain, liquefaction could occur should a
                         moderate to severe earthquake take place.
                         The City’s policies and programs for seismic safety are designed
                         to reduce death, injuries, damage to property and economic and
                         social dislocation that could result from earthquakes and related
                         geologic hazards, as well as to enhance the preparedness of City
                         agencies and the community in general to survive, respond to,
                         and recover from a major earthquake.
                         SUMMARY OF SEISMIC SAFETY GOALS
                         1.      Land development that recognizes and addresses seismic
                                 threats when it occurs in areas of the City located on or
                                 along a fault.
                         2.      Minimal loss of life, injury, property damage, economic
                                 and social dislocation, and disruption of vital services due
                                 to earthquakes.
                         3.      A multi‐hazard emergency disaster plan that includes
                                 seismic safety.
                         4.      Effective citywide response to, and rapid recovery from,
                                 an earthquake.
                         OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
                         The City has established the following objectives and policies for
                         seismic safety in Sierra Madre. The implementation measures are
                         contained in the Implementation Chapter at the end of the
                         General Plan.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 156

 Objective Hz10: Assessing the viability of development based
 on seismic safety considerations .
Policies:
Hz10.1         Require that earthquake survival and efficient
               post‐disaster functioning be a primary concern in
               the siting, design and construction standards for
               essential facilities in Sierra Madre.
Hz10.2.        Investigate the limitations on the location of new
               or altered residences and critical, sensitive and
               high occupancy facilities in areas near active
               faults, and consider conducting a comprehensive
               geologic investigation to show where active faults
               pose a hazard to structures.
Hz10.3         Investigate requiring that proposed new or altered
               residences and critical, sensitive, and high
               occupancy facilities located in areas near active
               faults are not approved unless necessary
               subsurface fault investigations have first been
               completed.
Hz10.4         Investigate requiring a thorough subsurface fault
               investigation be conducted for any proposed
               habitable structure on private property in close
               proximity of an active fault zone, and monitor any
               trenching for public buried water lines in the same
               area.    Assign a City employee the duty of
               collecting and assessing of data gathered from the
               above listed efforts with help of a registered
               geologist.
Hz10.5         Create a central depository of all Sierra Madre
               geologic information the City obtains through any
               project approvals          process,   including any
               governmental projects.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                 P a g e | 157

                          Objective Hz11: Minimizing to the extent possible the loss of
                          life, serious injuries, and major social and economic
                          disruption caused by the collapse of or severe damage to
                          vulnerable buildings in an earthquake.
                         Policies:
                         Hz 11.1         Promote public awareness of the need to upgrade
                                        seismically hazardous buildings for the protection
                                        of health and safety in the City.
                         Hz 11.2        Encourage seismic review of buildings.
                         Hz 11.3        Promote seismic upgrading of older residential
                                        and commercial structures with special attention
                                        given to historic structures.
                          Objective Hz12: Enhancing the preparedness by City
                          agencies and      the community to respond to and
                          recover from a major earthquake.
                         Policies:
                         Hz 12.1         Maintain and update multi‐hazard emergency
                                        preparedness plan for the City that includes
                                        seismic safety.
                         Hz 12.2        Maintain and upgrade the City’s disaster response
                                        plans at least annually, conduct periodic tests of
                                        their practicality and effectiveness, and involve
                                        residents and business in the preparation and
                                        testing of the plans.
                         Hz 12.3        Prepare and disseminate to residents and
                                        businesses information regarding seismic risks
                                        affecting the City, measures to protect life and
                                        property before and during an earthquake, and
                                        emergency procedures to follow after an
                                        earthquake.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                    P a g e | 158

Hz 12.4        Incorporate planning for potential incidents
               affecting critical, sensitive and high‐occupancy
               facilities into the City’s contingency plans for
               disaster response and recovery.
Hz 12.5        Ensure that emergency preparedness is the mutual
               responsibility of City agencies, City residents and
               the business community.
Hz 12.6        Develop and implement ongoing City‐wide
               programs for disaster preparedness and recovery
               planning.
 Objective Hz 13: Implementing seismic policies effectively.
Policies:
Hz 13.1         Provide residents and business owners with a
               continuing awareness and expanding knowledge
               of the seismic hazards affecting the City.
Hz 13.2        Adopt and maintain high standards for seismic
               performance of buildings, through prompt adoption
               and careful enforcement of the best available
               standards for seismic design.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                 P a g e | 159

                         Section Four:
                         Noise
                         OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
                         Sound is a disturbance in air pressure. It may be interpreted in
                         different ways depending on one’s perception and may be
                         described in qualitative or quantitative terms. Qualitative terms
                         describe the noise in terms such as loud, soft, noisy, quiet, annoying
                         or pleasant.
                         Quantitative descriptions of sound permit the application of noise
                         standards and criteria as well as measures to mitigate noise
                         impacts. Quantified measurements of sound involve three
                         primary characteristics: Amplitude, frequency, and temporal
                         pattern or duration. Amplitude is the sound pressure measured
                         in Decibels (dB). Decibels are based on a logarithmic scale in
                         order to compress the wide range of sound intensities. Frequency
                         is the rate at which the sound source vibrates or causes the air to
                         vibrate. The frequency in sound measured in Hertz (Hz) which is
                         the number of cycles per second. Temporal pattern or duration is
                         the length of time associated with a sound (e.g. continuous,
                         intermittent, fluctuating, etc.)
                         Human perception of sound also depends on the time of day
                         when the sound occurs. Sound levels that normally occur during
                         daylight hours and that are not considered objectionable may be
                         excessive when they occur at night. The use of frequency‐ weighted
                         sound measurement estimates the human perception of noise or
                         annoying sounds. Frequency weighing is expressed in terms of A‐
                         weighted decibels dB(A). It de‐emphasizes the very low and very
                         high frequency ranges of sound and places greater emphasis on
                         frequencies within the sensitivity range of the human ear.
                         Generally, outdoor noise levels are highly variable. Levels (Ldn)
                         occur as low as 30 to 40 dB(A) in wilderness areas as high as 85‐90
                         dB(A) in urban areas. A normal suburban community would
                         have a typical ambient noise level of 50‐60 dB(A), a very noisy
                         residential area, up to 70 dB(A).
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                         P a g e | 160

In residential areas, major contributors to outdoor noise are
transportation, industry, construction, gardening equipment, and
human and animal sources. Population density is a primary
determinant of ambient noise levels. Based on the population
characteristics of Sierra Madre, the City would be considered as a
normal suburban community with a typical noise level of 55
dB(A) as described above. In addition to the outdoor noise,
additional exposure of humans to noise results from sources
inside homes (e.g. appliances, radio and television, people and
animals) and sources in the workplace, especially from
mechanical and electronic equipment.
Sierra Madre has a noise ordinance in effect that seeks to protect
the citizens of the City from excessive, unnecessary and
unreasonable noises, and contains policies to control the adverse
effects of noise. The ordinance determines allowable noise limits
in terms of the “Local Ambient” noise level.
Sierra Madre is primarily a residential community with no major
highway, freeway or other transportation corridors traversing it.
The City contains 30.4 acres of land devoted to commercial uses
constituting stationary sources of noise. As such, stationary noise
in Sierra Madre is considered minimal and located in the City
center, primarily along Sierra Madre Boulevard west of Baldwin
Avenue to Lima Street and east of Baldwin Avenue to Mountain
Trail Avenue. Along these roadway segments are included
typical commercial establishments such as retail stores,
restaurants, etc. Some additional commercial uses are found east
of Baldwin Avenue on Montecito Avenue, including small
warehousing establishments and small machine‐shops. The
Interstate 210 (I‐210) Freeway is considered a significant source of
noise for the City given its proximity (about 1.25 miles south).
Although some studies claim noise from the I‐ 210 Freeway is not
significant, residents of the City consider it to be a significant
source of noise because freeway noise is amplified by the
topography of the area.
As mandated by the State, noise sensitive receptors must be
identified for a particular jurisdiction. A sensitive receptor is any
area containing schools, hospitals, rest homes, long‐ term medical
or mental care facilities, or any other land use deemed noise
sensitive by the local jurisdiction. In Sierra Madre, the existing
schools are considered sensitive land uses. There are no hospitals
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 161

                         or mental care facilities located in Sierra Madre; however, there
                         are board and care facilities that are considered a sensitive land
                         use.
                         NOISE GOAL
                         A City where the adverse effects of noise on residents are
                         prevented and/or minimized.
                           Objective Hz14: Maintaining the quiet residential character
                           of the City, free from excessive noise from transportation or
                           fixed source generators.
                         Policies:
                         Hz14.1           Formulate measures to mitigate noise impacts
                                          from mobile and stationary noise sources through
                                          compatible land         use     planning   and       the
                                          discretionary review of development projects.
                         Hz14.2           Identify and control the noise levels associated
                                          with transportation and general circulation
                                          patterns in the City to ensure the residential
                                          quality of the community.
                         Hz14.3           Enact noise regulations to prohibit unnecessary
                                          excessive and annoying noise sources. These
                                          controls currently relate to the general category of
                                          disturbing‐ the‐peace nuisances.
                         Hz14.4           Ensure that the noise level of the commercial
                                          districts does not interfere with the normal business,
                                          commercial or residential activities.
                         Hz14.5           To the extent possible, protect schools, hospitals,
                                          libraries, churches, parks and recreational areas
                                          from excessive sound levels so as not to adversely
                                          affect their normal activities.
                         Hz14.6           Review current guidelines regarding the use of gas
                                          powered lawn equipment and consider restricting
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                         P a g e | 162

               the type of equipment, hours and duration of
               operation.
 Objective Hz15: Minimizing the noise impacts associated with
 the development of residential units above ground floor
 commercial uses.
Policies:
Hz15.1         Require that commercial uses developed as part of
               a residential mixed‐use project are not noise
               intensive.
Hz15.2         Design mixed‐use structures to prevent the
               transfer of noise from the commercial use to the
               residential use.
Hz15.3         Require that common walls and floors between
               commercial and residential uses be constructed to
               minimize the transmission of noise and vibration.
 Objective Hz16: Minimizing the impacts of construction noise
 on adjacent uses.
Policies:
Hz16.1         Limit construction activities to reasonable
               weekday and weekend/holiday hours in order to
               reduce noise impacts on adjacent residences.
Hz16.2         Require that construction activities incorporate
               feasible and practical techniques to minimize the
               noise impacts on adjacent uses.
    GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA               P a g e | 163

                         Chapter Four –
                         Community Services
                         INTRODUCTION
                         The Community Services Chapter of the General Plan contains
                         seven components:           police services (State-mandated safety
                         element), recreation services (State-mandated open space
                         element), library services, community events, transit, and public
                         services (both part of the State-mandated circulation element).
                         Sustainable policies and goals are called out by a green leaf icon.
                         Section One:
                         Law Enforcement
                         OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
                         The Sierra Madre Police Department provides general law
                         enforcement services to the City of Sierra Madre.
                         The police facility, located at 242 West Sierra Madre Boulevard, is
                         staffed and open 24 hours a day. The Department is comprised of
                         a Chief, a Captain, sergeants, a corporal, and patrol officers. They
                         are supported by part-time police officers, part-time cadets,
                         dispatchers, part-time dispatchers, reserve police officers and
                         volunteers. Officers respond to an average of 38 calls for service
                         every 24 hours.
                         Sierra Madre enjoys the reputation of having one of the safest
                         cities in California with a very low crime rate. This low crime rate
                         can be attributed to several factors, including: the out-of- the-way
                         location of the City; informed and involved citizens who alert the
                         police to strangers in the community; quick police response; and,
                         visible, professional law enforcement.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 164

There are no major police protection issues facing the City of
Sierra Madre. In the event of a natural disaster, or other
situations, the Police Department can call for mutual aid
assistance from surrounding law enforcement agencies. Even
though there are only 1.2 police officers per 1,000 residents, the
Department is suitably staffed to provide quality services to the
City. A potential threat is a significant increase in population that
would create a proliferation in calls for service and impact traffic,
traffic control, and traffic enforcement, thus requiring additional
staff.
SUMMARY OF POLICE SERVICES GOALS
1. An exceptional level of public safety for the City.
2. Police services being provided in a manner that reflects and is
sensitive to the characteristics and needs of Sierra Madre’s
resident population, business persons and visitors.
OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
The City has established the following objectives and policies for
police services in Sierra Madre. The implementation measures
are contained in the Implementation Chapter at the end of the
General Plan.
  Objectives C1: Having sufficient resources and training to
  achieve an exceptional level of public safety.
Policies:
C1.1            Provide professional police response and
                protection to the community by partnering with
                residents, business persons and visitors to the City.
C1.2            Assess the impact of increases in population on
                response time, calls for service and traffic through
                the development review process so law enforcement
                assets will not be degraded.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 165

                          Objective C2: Addressing crime prevention through public
                          safety programs.
                         Policies:
                         C2.1           Maintain and enhance public awareness and
                                         participation in crime prevention in residential and
                                         business areas.
                         C2.2           Expand existing programs that deal with personal
                                         safety such as police-sponsored safety courses and
                                         neighborhood/business watch programs.
                         C2.3           Educate selected groups such as seniors pertaining
                                         to crime directed at them.
                          Objective C3: Delivering police services in a manner that
                          reflects genuine concern for Sierra Madre community
                          members.
                         Policies:
                         C3.1           Evaluate on a continual basis the delivery of police
                                         services to monitor their adequacy and
                                         responsiveness to community needs.
                         C3.2             Encourage an open dialogue with the community
                                         to address the concerns of residents, visitors and
                                         business      owners    to   resolve     issues       of
                                         responsiveness and sensitivity.
                         C3.3             Involve other City departments when necessary to
                                         resolve matters that fall outside the scope of law
                                         enforcement or code enforcement activity.
                         C3.4            Continually evaluate the training of law
                                         enforcement personnel and their interaction with the
                                         citizens of Sierra Madre.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 166
  Objective C4: Preparing residents, businesses and visitors to
  survive a natural disaster.
Policies:
C4.1            Educate residents, businesses and visitors about
                disaster preparedness.
C4.2            Train law enforcement and all other staff on their
                role in disaster response and recovery.
C4.3            Maximize passive prevention measures for new
                and      existing    development     through     the
                development review process.
C4.4            Work with Sierra Madre’s Community Emergency
                Response Team to have a unified and coordinated
                response to disasters.
C4.5            Coordinate with Sierra Madre’s Emergency Radio
                Station (1630 AM), so that when disaster strikes,
                information can be quickly disseminated to the
                Community.
 Objective C5: Enforcing compliance with City codes.
Policies:
C5.1            Maintain a code enforcement officer in the Police
                Department or in the Development Services
                Department who is charged with the duty of
                identifying violations and enforcing City Codes.
C5.2            Attempt to obtain voluntary code compliance
                within reasonable time frames prior to taking legal
                action.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                  P a g e | 167

                         C5.3           Utilize nuisance abatement procedures and legal
                                         action through the criminal court system when
                                         voluntary code compliance is not effective.
                         C5.4             Respond to complaints from the public in a timely
                                         manner.
                         C5.5           Conduct targeted, pro-active code enforcement of
                                         violations involving matters of concern to the
                                         community.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 168
Section Two:
Recreation Services
OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
The Community Services Department oversees the aquatics, arts,
communications, grants, community projects, parks, community
marketing, recreation classes, seniors, special events, transit and
youth programs. In addition, the Community Services
Department partners with a number of outside organizations to
provide sports, aquatics and other recreational programming.
The Department also coordinates the rental of City facilities and
parks, and organizes special events.
The City maintains six parks – Memorial Park, Milton and Harriet
Goldberg Recreation Area, Kersting Court, Sierra Vista Park, Bailey
Canyon Wilderness Park, and Mount Wilson Trail Park – totaling
approximately 25 acres. In addition, the City owns the Sierra Madre
Canyon Wilderness Area totaling 1,100 acres, although only 120
acres are located within City limits, with the remaining acreage
located in the Angeles National Forest. With a total of 149 acres of
open space, the City of Sierra Madre has a ratio of approximately
13 acres of open space for every 1,000 people. City parks comprise
numerous recreational facilities including areas for organized
sports, picnic areas, swimming pools, gardens and playgrounds
among other amenities through diverse and innovative
programming and broad partnerships.
Due to the lack of vacant land in the City, identifying additional
space for parks and recreational has become increasingly difficult.
Although there have been several recent upgrades to City
facilities, many of the existing facilities are old and in need of repair
and improvement. For a detailed listing of the Division’s
programming goals and objectives as adopted by the City
Council, please refer to the Cultural Arts, Parks & Facilities,
Senior, and Youth Master Plans.
Facilities
Sierra Vista Park - 611 East Sierra Madre Boulevard
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                       P a g e | 169

                         Community Recreation Center
                                Sierra Madre Room
                                Community Services Offices
                                Youth Activities Center
                         Aquatics Center (Under Private Contract)
                                Swimming Lap Pool
                                Wading Pool
                                Dressing and Bathing Rooms
                         Park Area
                                Hal Dapper Field
                                Heasley Field
                                Dog Park
                                Outdoor Restrooms
                                Covered Pavilion
                                Children’s Playground
                                Outdoor Basketball Court
                                Outdoor Volleyball Court
                                Outdoor Tennis Court (2)
                                Picnic Areas
                                Rose Float Building
                         Memorial Park - 200 West Sierra Madre Boulevard
                                Hart Park House – Senior Center
                                Weeping Wall
                                Veterans Memorial Wall
                                Outdoor Restrooms
                                Band shell
                                Covered Pavilion
                                Outdoor Tennis Courts (2)
                                Community Garden
                         Bailey Canyon Wilderness Park - 451 West Carter Avenue
                             Picnic Areas
                             Hiking Trails
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                              P a g e | 170

    Native Botanical Area
    Handicap Accessibility
    Outdoor Restroom
    Fire Ring
    Interpretive display
Milton & Harriet Goldberg Recreation Area - 171 South
Sunnyside Avenue
   Picnic Area
   California Native Plant Garden
   Sand Play Area
   Desert Willow Hut Structure
Mount Wilson Trail Park - 189 East Mira Monte Avenue
   Hiking Trails (Mt. Wilson Trail)
   Historical Richardson House
   Historical Lizzie’s Trail Inn
   Children’s Playground
   Historic Turtle Statue
Kersting Court - Sierra Madre Boulevard and Baldwin Avenue
   Banner Poles
   Flag Pole
   Memorial Bell Tower
   Picnic Area
SUMMARY OF RECREATION SERVICES GOALS
1. A high level of quality recreation, leisure and social programs
   and facilities for the Sierra Madre community.
2. An increased amount of parkland and recreational facilities in
   the City.
OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
The City has established the following objectives and policies for
recreation services in Sierra Madre.            The implementation
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                P a g e | 171

                         measures are contained in the Implementation Chapter at the end
                         of the General Plan.
                        Objective C6: Providing quality recreation, leisure and social
                        programs and facilities for the various segments of the Sierra
                        Madre community.
                         Policies:
                         C6.1           Provide quality programs for youth, adults, and
                                         seniors that meet the needs of the community within
                                         the City’s limited budget.
                         C6.2           Explore the feasibility of offering additional
                                         weekend classes and programs for youth, adults and
                                         seniors.
                         C6.3             Monitor and evaluate recreation programs and
                                         facility usage, including surveying program
                                         participants and the general citizenry.
                         C6.4               Notify City residents seasonally on the types of
                                         recreational programs, special events and facilities
                                         available.
                         C6.5             Encourage sponsorships of programs by local
                                         businesses and participation from the community.
                         C6.6             Explore the possibility for special events involving
                                         running and bicycle programs.
                          Objective C7: Providing equal opportunity and access in all
                          recreation and leisure programs for the physically
                          challenged.
                         Policies:
                         C7.1           Continue to seek outside funding to keep facilities
                                         retrofitted to meet the requirements of the
                                         Americans with Disabilities Act.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                        P a g e | 172

C7.2            Continue to create             programs that      can
                accommodate the physically challenged.
 Objective C8: Preserving existing park space and recreational
 facilities.
Policies:
C8.1            Continue a park maintenance program to secure
                the existing nature and beauty of City Parks and
                open space areas.
C8.2            Involve community youth in park maintenance
                efforts.
C8.3             Install and replace existing landscape with native
                and drought resistant plants in City parks where
                deterioration has occurred.
C8.4            Identify each recreational site with its name and
                encompassing facilities with signage visible to the
                public.
C8.5            Continue to improve the conditions of Hal Dapper
                Field to maintain the field’s safety and usability.
C8.6            Continue to coordinate with Pasadena Unified
                School District, Saint Rita’s, Bethany School, Alverno
                High School, La Salle High School and Passionist
                Father Monastery Retreat Center with regards to
                the feasibility of utilizing their properties for
                recreational or special event use during non-
                operational hours.
C8.7            Continue the public-private partnerships to
                improve and maintain the existing municipal pool
                facilities.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                    P a g e | 173

                         C8.8           Continue a maintenance program for the City’s
                                         recreation center to include routine and long-term
                                         maintenance of the facility.
                         C8.9           Research better use of existing City open space.
                          Objective C9: Providing quality and meaningful senior citizen
                          services and facilities.
                         Policies:
                         C9.1           Continue to monitor and assess the needs of the
                                         senior community.
                         C9.2           Continue to provide hot lunches Monday through
                                         Friday to seniors at a feasible cost to participants
                                         (Nutrition Program).
                         C9.3           Work in cooperation with other agencies to
                                         sponsor a daily hot lunch program to home-bound
                                         seniors (Meals on Wheels).
                         C9.4           Provide educational programs for the community,
                                         especially senior citizens including but not limited
                                         to health care, retirement planning, health
                                         screening, public and personnel safety, tax
                                         assistance, and mature driver courses.
                         C9.5           Maintain the Senior Center to provide additional
                                         senior activities and community meeting space.
                         C9.6           Maintain a senior volunteer core to assist in
                                         accomplishing goals.
                         C9.7           Update the Senior Master Plan.
                         C9.8           Improve and maintain the Hart Park House              to
                                         better serve its seniors.
                         C9.9           Continue to work in conjunction with the Senior
                                         Community Commission to provide programming
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                      P a g e | 174

                such as excursions, special events and educational
                programs.
  Objective C10: Increasing parkland and recreational facilities
  in the City.
Policies:
C10.1           Explore the possibility of creating new activity
                centers such as a multi-purpose ball field for
                soccer, baseball, softball, football, a roller hockey
                rink, skate park, and community gymnasium or a
                center for family recreation activities.
C10.2           Develop relationships with public and private
                facilities such as family entertainment and recreation
                centers, to be used for additional youth activities
                and special events.
C10.3           Expand funds for park acquisition using Quimby
                Act, State park funds, Bicycle Fund, fund-raising
                and business contributions, State and Federal
                grants.
C10.4              Require that all new commercial and residential
                subdivision developments provide open space
                areas on-site for passive or active recreation or
                contribute fees for public development of such
                uses.
 C10.5          Evaluate additional means of obtaining land and
                funding for the purpose of purchasing parkland.
  Objective C11: Coordinating the management of parks and
  recreation efforts throughout the City.
Policies:
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                    P a g e | 175
                         C11.1          Maintain a parks and facilities master plan that
                                         identifies existing facilities and uses, existing
                                         programs and services, existing open space
                                         recreation areas and proposed acquisition,
                                         developments and improvements.
                         C11.2          Maintain and update a maintenance and repair
                                         plan for existing and future City facilities.
                          Objective C12: Establishing a feasible and safe route for bicycle
                          traffic throughout the City.
                         Policy:
                         C12.1          Explore the feasibility of a bicycle lane throughout
                                         the City for recreational and transportation usage.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                         P a g e | 176
Section Three:
Library Services
OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
The Sierra Madre Public Library is located at 440 West Sierra Madre
Boulevard. The City also owns the property behind the Library at
449 Mariposa Avenue; this property was rezoned Civic Zone in
2013 to allow for potential future use by the Library. In addition
to the typical services provided when the Library is open to the
public, the following are services that operate outside business
hours: preschool programs, class visits, volunteer projects, adult
book club, meeting space for community groups, teen docent
training, and local history reference.
The Library Services Department is administered by a five
member board, appointed by the Mayor and approved by the
City Council. The Library staff consists of full-time and part-time
employees. The staff provides information to patrons through
books, magazines, newspapers, music, film, electronic databases,
web resources, and reference inquiries in a variety of formats.
Qualified librarians with a Master’s of Science degree in Library
and Information Services, or related field with experience are
helped by library technicians to actively engage the public to assess
their needs, and to select resources and help them find the sought-
after information. Special Programs and training are used to
introduce library collections, market services, and enhance the use
of technology and electronic resources. Department Staff serves as
liaison to the Library Board of Trustees, Friends of the Library,
Sierra Madre Historical Preservation Society, and local schools.
Library staff is responsible for maintaining the City’s website, City
and Department news, and managing the posting of City
documents and Commission agendas. Staff supports the collection
and preservation of historical images and documents relating to
Sierra Madre and the local mountains. Over 25 Adult and Teen
volunteers help in the Library's daily operations, Summer Reading
Program, and promoting Local History stories.
Eighty-eight percent of all funds budgeted for the Library
Department comes from the City General Fund, an 11 percent
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 177

                         portion of all General Fund expenditures. The remaining 12
                         percent of funds are budgeted from the Internal Services Fund to
                         support the City website and document management.
                         Supplemental funding is provided from the Friends of the Sierra
                         Madre Library, periodic gifts and donations from local
                         philanthropic organizations, and the Sierra Madre Historical
                         Preservation Society which holds a joint archival collection with the
                         Library through a Memorandum of Understanding. Additionally,
                         grant funding from the State of California Library through the
                         Library Services and Technology Act have provided new
                         technology, funded the Teen Docent program, provide staff
                         training funds, and provided book funds for new materials.
                         The existing Sierra Madre Public Library was built in 1955 and
                         designed to hold 25,000 items. Currently over 70,000 items are
                         housed in the library and the basement, and               many new
                         technologies, unforeseen when the building was originally built,
                         such as computers, wi-fi, dvds, audio books, music cds, have
                         been added to the collection. With the addition of the Local History
                         Archives, the California Collection, Rare Books, and sharing the
                         Basement area with the Friends of the Library, access to and storage
                         of items is limited. In addition, the lack of a community room limits
                         the ability to provide public programs and meeting space for the
                         community.
                         The Library building was designed by a well-known “mid-
                         century” architect, Robert Ainsworth, who lived with his family
                         in Sierra Madre at 601 E. Orange Grove, a home he also designed.
                         The City is fortunate to have an example of Ainsworth’s
                         architecture and it might be worth investigating the possibility of
                         renovating the library to retain its architectural history while at
                         the same time, rehabilitating the interior to accommodate new
                         technologies and adequate public space.
                         The Library's collection includes books, periodicals, music cds,
                         dvds, large print, audiobooks, eBooks, Rare Books, California
                         Collection, art works, public computers, extensive local history
                         archives consisting of books, photographs, maps, oral histories, and
                         other materials. Public services include book deliveries to group
                         homes and shut-ins, and programs of public interest including a
                         variety of literary and informational offerings, Special programs
                         include Parenting Workshops, Baby Rhyme Time, Preschool Story
                         hour, Summer Reading Program for all ages,
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 178

Book Clubs, and volunteer opportunities for teens and adults.
Community committees provide annual events such as One Book
One City, Read Campaign, and the Art and Essay Contest.
Special assistance to teachers is offered through class visits,
extended loan periods, and curriculum support.
Current challenges for the City in relation to the Library are: 1)
providing the technological systems and framework for
information access, retrieval, delivery and content development
and collaboration; 2) upgrading, expanding or replacing the 1955
building for current and future public services, including space
for community meetings and library programs and storage for local
history collection; 3) securing funding to maintain and improve
services and the facility.
Improvements to the building made in recent years are: addition
of the Friends’ Library Garden including an outdoor meeting
space with patio seating and Wi-Fi, installation of new HVAC
system, purchase of computer/study carrel, purchase of new lounge
seating configured with tablet arms for laptop use, and a successful
fundraising campaign to remodel the Children’s Library in
2012. Other improvements include the remodel of the Rotary
Children’s room, purchase of art racks to secure and store art
collection, re-purposing of space to create a Local History Room
and study area, purchase of storage cabinets for archive and map
collection, and moving library servers to the basement to create
more workroom space. Additional and future upgrades to the
Library would improve functionality and accessibility according to
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) requirements to better
serve patrons with disabilities. To resolve the building's
shortcomings, an addition, extensive remodel or replacement
would be required. ADA standards for library book stacks and
public and office walkways require more space than is available in
the existing building. The Library Strategic Plan 2014-
2017 established an objective to provide a Facilities Master Plan to
assess the library structure and prioritize capital projects.
The Library building includes the following areas:
    Friends Library Garden
    Jameson Sierra Madre Room (California books, rare books,
     digital storyboard featuring local history archives, and Sierra
     Madre Historical Society files)
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                  P a g e | 179

                              Paula Randall Reading Room (print books for mystery, large
                               print, science fiction, Spanish, teen fiction, and new fiction and
                               non-fiction; media materials for movies, audiobooks and
                               music; current and back issues of magazines and newspapers.)
                              Walt Wesley Computer Literacy Center (4 public computer
                               workstations, reader/printer/scanner for microfilm/fiche,
                               microfilm and microfiche, vending kiosk for prints, scans
                               and copies, copier, printer, and oral history collection).
                             Reading Room (print reference collection, computer/study
                               carrels, Young Adult Collection, and study tables
                              Rotary Children's Room
                              Stacks
                              Employee Office Area
                              Basement (art collection, map collection, Local History
                               Archives, stacks for underutilized materials, Friends
                               Donation/BookSale area)
                         SUMMARY OF LIBRARY SERVICES GOALS
                         1. Library collections, services, and programs that support
                             community needs.
                         2. An improved library facility that meets ADA requirements,
                             supports technological enhancements, and includes a
                             community room.
                         3. Sufficient funding to sustain library services and open hours.
                         4. A Library that provides current, historical, and relevant
                             information to the community.
                         5. A Library that is considered a community asset.
                         OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
                         The City has established the following objectives and policies for
                         library services in Sierra Madre. The implementation measures
                         are contained in the Implementation Chapter at the end of the
                         General Plan.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                          P a g e | 180

 Objective C13: Upgrading the library's technology to meet
 existing and future standards for information delivery,
 individual and collaborative learning and recreational
 activities.
Policies:
C13.1           Review        the     library's     telecommunication
                capabilities and upgrade the facility to
                accommodate current and future technologies for
                use by the public and City employees.
C13.2           Maintain an updated computerized library
                management system to store library records and
                inventory.
C13.3           Evaluate transitioning to new technology for
                materials security and circulation system, or other
                self-service systems.
C13.4           Review and update collection              development
                policies and procedures.
 Objective C14: Evaluating and improving reference services to
 the public and City staff.
Policies:
C14.l           Provide drop-in hours for the public to seek help
                using new technology, i.e. email, text, instant
                messaging, electronic devices and eReaders, use of
                Social Media
C14.2           Provide continuing education opportunities for
                Staff in using digital and reference resources.
 Objective CI5: Expanding community outreach efforts through
 the implementation of programs that promote the library
 collections and resources.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 181
                         Policies:
                         C15.l          Continue to develop the partnership between the
                                         library, local schools, and the Sierra Madre
                                         Historical Preservation Society.
                         C15.2          Identify under-represented groups in the
                                         community and target special programs and
                                         volunteer opportunities to include them (e.g.
                                         young adult, young parents, seniors, etc.)
                         C15.3          Maintain and enhance cultural and educational
                                         programs.
                         C15.4          Continue to improve services to people with
                                         special needs, i.e. Titles To Go (homebound delivery
                                         service).
                          Objective C16: Developing and promoting the Library's role as
                          steward of the community's historical materials.
                         Policies:
                         C16.1          Continue to collect, preserve and make accessible
                                         materials relevant to the history of Sierra Madre,
                                         California.
                         C16.2          Facilitate communication between the Sierra
                                         Madre Historical Preservation Society and Library
                                         Board of Trustees to ensure exhibition and
                                         protection of important local history materials.
                         C16.3          Assist in the administration and preservation
                                         planning for the Sierra Madre Oral History Project
                                         and Digital Storyboards.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                      P a g e | 182
  Objective C17: Maintaining the quality and high commitment
  to public library service among the staff.
Policies:
C17.1           Encourage the professional and paraprofessional
                development of staff through webinars, courses
                and meetings, workshops, seminars, professional
                committee participation, and extension courses.
C17.2           Promote the use of Sommer Library Scholarship
                and Eph Konigsberg Scholarship funds to staff.
  Objective C18:       Maintaining quality library collections
  (regardless of format, i.e. print, digital, virtual) and increase
  their access and use by the public.
Policies:
C18.1           Continue to survey the community to assist staff in
                developing collections.
C18.2           Update the existing circulation policy to anticipate
                future needs, address current impact of technology
                on library use and provide procedures that are
                beneficial for both library and public.
 Objective C19: Advancing the historical significance of the
 Library as a vital community gathering place and an
 institution that promotes lifelong learning.
Policies:
C19.1           Promote the library at community gatherings,
                events and functions.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                  P a g e | 183
                         C19.2          Develop a new strategy and funding for an
                                         addition/remodel, or new facility to address
                                         multiple community needs including space for
                                         library programs, local history materials, public
                                         use of technology and meeting and work areas.
                         C19.3          Implement the Sierra Madre Public Library
                                         Strategic Plan, and continue to evaluate and
                                         update it as necessary to establish facility and
                                         service priorities.
                          Objective C20: Maintaining the strong involvement and
                          support of community volunteers.
                         Policies:
                         C20.1          Promote the Friends of the Sierra Madre Library's
                                         fund raising activities.
                         C20.2          Expand the use of community volunteers under
                                         the direction of staff; include programs for teens and
                                         adults.
                          Objective C21: Pursuing other funding opportunities.
                         Policies:
                         C21.1          Apply to grants and foundations for funds.
                         C21.2          Solicit private donations.
                         C21.3          Actively pursue Federal, State and local funding
                                         opportunities.
                         C21.4          Continue working with the Friends of the Sierra
                                         Madre Library, Sierra Madre Community
                                         Foundation       and      Sierra   Madre    Historical
                                         Preservation Society other local community
                                         philanthropic organizations to secure future
                                         funding.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                        P a g e | 184
Section Four:
Community Cultural and
Special Events
OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
The City has many private cultural art groups and schools within
the City limits. These are an outstanding resource of the
community’s cultural environment. Creative Arts Group is one of
those providing cultural activities for the community. In addition,
the City operates one Library. The City has a very long tradition
of offering many one-day and weekend special events, most of
which are organized and operated by citizen volunteers:
Special Events
Sierra Madre Rose Float. The community of Sierra Madre is one of
the oldest participants in the Pasadena Tournament of Roses
Parade. The Sierra Madre Rose Float Association is a non-profit,
all volunteer organization dedicated to entering a float in the
annual Pasadena Tournament of Roses Parade. It is a completely
“Self-Built” float – it is designed, constructed, and decorated by
volunteers. The SMRFA has won major awards several years
since 2006, including The Governor’s Trophy, The Lathrop K.
Leishman Award for the most beautiful entry for a non- commercial
float, The Princess Trophy, and the Founder’s Trophy. The
SMRFA raises all the necessary funds to build the float.         In
addition to float construction, the Association also selects
residents (usually three local young women) to represent the
Association at community events and ride on the float during the
parade. The float is constructed and decorated in the float barn
behind the tennis courts in Sierra Vista Park.
Friends of the Library. The Friends is a non-profit fundraising and
support group for the City’s Library. Fundraising events include an
annual Wine and Food Tasting event, Art Fair, and
sponsorship of a Concert in the Park in August. These funds
assist in the purchase of books, materials, community programs
and improvements to the library facilities.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                 P a g e | 185

                         Huck Finn Day. Every spring, a fishing tournament for children is
                         sponsored by Civic Club, Kiwanis, and the Fire Department in
                         conjunction with the Community Services Department. Families
                         camp out on Friday night, and the fishing starts on Saturday
                         morning.
                         Wistaria Festival. The Chamber of Commerce sponsors the
                         Wistaria Festival one Sunday in March. The main attraction is the
                         Wistaria Vine, which covers two homes, and is in the Guinness
                         Book of World Records as the world’s largest flowering vine.
                         There is music and a street fair featuring arts and crafts as well as
                         activities in Memorial Park.
                         Easter Egg Hunt. The Saturday before Easter, the Sierra Madre
                         Volunteer Firefighter’s Association sponsors an Easter Egg hunt
                         in Memorial Park complete with eggs, candy and the Easter Bunny.
                         Mt. Wilson Trail Race. This is the second oldest trail race in the
                         country, first run in 1908, and is sponsored by the City and
                         organized by a volunteer MWTR committee. The 8.6 mile race starts
                         on pavement, uphill, to a dirt path no more than three feet wide. It
                         features an elevation gain of over 2,100 feet; approximately 4.3
                         miles to the turnaround point at Orchard Camp. Most of the race
                         takes place on the Mount Wilson Trail, where some sections have
                         vertical drop-offs of several hundred feet. Boy Scout and Cub Scout
                         Troops provide water at two locations: the 2.3 mile marker (at First
                         Water) and the turnaround point. The race takes place on a
                         Saturday in May, and trail race festivities include a pasta feed the
                         night before the race, a kid’s race, and kid’s art show, and a beer
                         garden.
                         Compost Giveaway. The Community Services Department in
                         conjunction with Athens Services provides the Sierra Madre
                         community with free organic compost twice a year in spring and
                         fall. This event is held in Sierra Vista Park.
                         Halloween Happening. Sponsored by the Community Services
                         Department, Kiwanis and Civic Club safe activities are provided for
                         community youth during Halloween. Events include painting the
                         windows of businesses downtown, a costume parade and
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 186

contest. A special committee is formed annually                with
representative from all participating organizations.
Community Yard Sale. The Community Services Department in
partnership with the Senior Community Commission host a
community yard sale at Sierra Vista Park in June. Proceeds from
this event benefit the Senior Community Commission and extra
items are donated to a local thrift shop.
Family Movie Fridays. The Community Services Department hosts
the movies series each summer at the Memorial Park band shell.
Patrons of all ages attend this outdoor movie event. The series
varies in length depending on the amount of sponsors received each
year.
4th of July. A volunteer 4th of July Committee coordinates activities,
varying from 1 to 3 days, to celebrate Independence Day. This
committee meets throughout the year and anyone can volunteer to
help. Activities include the pre-party in Memorial Park with food
booths, beer garden and dancing, the 4th of July Parade, post-
parade festivities, food booths, dancing, games, free admission to
the City pool, and a general community celebration.
Concerts in the Park. The Community Services Department
sponsors Sunday Concerts in Memorial Park during the summer
from the Sunday following 4th of July through August. Concerts
are sponsored by different community groups or businesses and
food booths and drink may be provided.
Wellness in the Park. The Community Services Department and
Senior Community Commission host this event promoting
wellness and health geared for the senior population. Various
vendors and organizations are present to provide seniors with
health educational materials, health screenings and vaccinations.
This event is held in Memorial Park in September.
Summer Fun in the Park. The Community Services Department hosts
educational and fitness-based activities on Tuesday and Thursday
mornings during the months of June through August at no charge.
Winter Holidays. In celebration of the December holidays, the
Chamber of Commerce, community religious groups and the City
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                    P a g e | 187
                         provide a variety of activities. The festivities begin with Dickens
                         Village, held the last weekend in November, with toboggan rides,
                         horse drawn carriage rides, various booths in Kersting Court, and
                         a visit from Santa Claus. Santa also visits the community on
                         December 24 and distributes stocking to local children in an event
                         sponsored by the Sierra Madre Fire Fighter’s Association. A
                         candlelight walk down Baldwin Avenue is held the third
                         weekend of December and a holiday display is showcased in
                         Kersting Court.
                          Firefighter’s Dance . An annual fundraiser for the Volunteer Fire
                         Fighter’s Association is held the second Saturday in December.
                         The dance is attended by many members of the community to
                         demonstrate their support for the City’s volunteer firefighters.
                         Oktoberfest Golf and Tennis Tournament. A volunteer committee
                         sponsors a golf and tennis tournament, an award ceremony and
                         luncheon every fall to benefit the Sierra Madre Police
                         Department. Funds raised are for youth programs, with
                         programs such as Friday activities in Kersting Court, Summer
                         Fun in the Park, youth flag football, aquatics classes, YAC teen
                         programs, Huck Finn Fishing Derby and Halloween Window
                         Painting. There are other various and assorted special events
                         throughout the year sponsored by community groups and
                         organizations.
                         SUMMARY OF COMMUNITY CULTURAL AND SPECIAL EVENTS
                         GOALS
                         1. A wide range of community cultural and special events.
                         2. A well maintained City website and other means of
                            communication with the latest information on the programs
                            and services offered by the City Departments and City-
                            sponsored agencies.
                         3. Cultural and entertaining programming provided by the City-
                            wide access channel.
                         OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 188

The City has established the following objectives and policies for
community cultural and especial events in Sierra Madre. The
implementation measures are contained in the Implementation
Chapter at the end of the General Plan.
 Objective C23: Maintaining and enhancing opportunities for
 the pursuit and enjoyment of the arts, culture, education and
 creative thought.
Policies:
C23.1           Encourage private cultural organizations (dance,
                music, acting groups, art galleries, book and reading
                societies and similar) to continue their activities in
                the City.
C23.2           Encourage the development of live performances
                and public movie screenings in the City.
C23.3           Explore the feasibility of developing an art
                appreciation program especially for, but not
                limited to, youth and seniors.
C23.4           Continue to inform residents regarding cultural
                organizations, including each organization’s name,
                address, telephone number, description of
                activities, calendar of events and other relevant
                information.
C23.5           Maintain the Arts Advisory Committee to explore
                ways in which the City may further the role of
                performing and fine arts in the community.
  Objective C24: Maintaining and expanding existing television
  production activities and electronic equipment to highlight
  City goals, departments and City-sponsored agencies.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                    P a g e | 189

                         Policies:
                         C24.1          Continue to provide the community with City-
                                         sponsored information and programs by the
                                         electronic bulletin board and various community
                                         access channels and web sites.
                         C24.2          Explore the feasibility of cable casting cultural
                                         entertainment and educational programs for
                                         children and adults on the City-wide community
                                         access channel.
                         C24.3          Maintain service level agreements with vendors
                                         contracted to provide such services.
                          Objective C25: Providing support services for special events.
                         Policies:
                         C25.1          Utilize police resources to maintain public safety
                                         during events.
                         C25.2          Utilize City maintenance workers to prepare
                                         public facilities (such as restrooms and parking
                                         areas) and assist during street closures.
                         C25.3          Use City workers to hang banners advertising
                                         community events over Baldwin Avenue in the
                                         downtown area.
                         C25.4            Provide meeting space for community groups and
                                         event committees.
                         C25.5            Continue programs to make it easier and more cost
                                         effective for local organizations to utilize City
                                         facilities.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                     P a g e | 190
Section Five:
Transit Services
OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
The local transportation program is geared to serve the senior,
disabled and youth populations in Sierra Madre. This program was
created by funds allocated by Local Transit Returns (funded by
State Proposition A).
The “Round About” is a fixed route created by the City to
accommodate library patrons, children attending the After-School
programs, senior citizens attending the senior lunch program,
and pool patrons.
The City also participates in the Metropolitan Transit Authority
RTD bus pass program for seniors.
TRANSIT GOAL
A quality transportation service available to a wide demographic
in the community.
OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
The City has established the following objectives and policies for
transit in Sierra Madre.          The implementation measures are
contained in the Implementation Chapter at the end of the
General Plan.
  Objective C26: Maintaining a program that does not exceed the
  City’s annual transit allocation.
Policies:
C26.1           Explore other transit funding sources.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                P a g e | 191

                         C26.2               Develop inter-jurisdictional coordination of the
                                         transportation program with Arcadia and/or
                                         Pasadena, thereby sharing the cost of the program.
                         C26.3          Ensure that the service providers continue to
                                         provide the most effective service by monitoring
                                         complaints and responses, and evaluating
                                         ridership both monthly and annually.
                         C26.4          Continue to provide the free fixed route services
                                         for the community.
                         C26.5          Continue to coordinate discounted transit services
                                         for seniors, handicapped individuals, or low-
                                         income residents.
                          Objective C27: Having a public information and marketing
                          campaign to advertise City transit services.
                         Policies:
                         C27.1          Continue to provide comprehensive information to
                                         the transit user that is informative, accessible, and
                                         easy to understand.
                          Objective C28: Maintaining a linkage to regional rail services.
                         Policies:
                         C28.1          Continue to work with the Los Angeles County
                                         Metropolitan Transit Authority (Metro) to
                                         maintain the existing bus routes linking the City to
                                         the Gold Line train station in Pasadena and Arcadia.
                         Objective C29: Maximizing utilization of City parking spaces.
                         Policies:
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                         P a g e | 192
C29.1           Provide adequate signage to alert customers and
                residents of the additional parking available
                behind the stores on the boulevard.
C29.2           Make the Mariposa parking lot more accessible
                from the downtown area.
C29.3          Explore the feasibility of creating a Park-and-Ride
                lot for resident commuters.
 Objective C30: Improving traffic safety.
Policies:
C30.1           Ensure the enforcement of speed laws and
                continue to monitor the City’s busy intersections.
C30.2            Continue to evaluate measures, such as speed
                bumps, that reduce speeding.
C30.3           Maintain safety and efficient circulation without
                impacting the village atmosphere.
C30.4            Explore additional handicap parking availability
                for the Hart Park House and downtown business
                district.
C30.5            Educate citizens on traffic laws to enlist voluntary
                compliance.
C30.6           Offer bicycle safety and traffic courses for the
                community sponsored by the Police and
                Community Services Departments.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 193

                         Section Six:
                         Public Services
                         OVERVIEW OF EXISTING CONDITIONS
                         This section discusses City owned and operated municipal utility
                         systems, including the potable water system, the sanitary sewer
                         system, and the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4,
                         storm drains). This section also discusses utility systems operated
                         by Public Utility Commission-governed utility companies, and
                         solid waste disposal services administered by the City and
                         provided by a private contractor.
                         Potable Water System
                         A more detailed analysis of the City’s water system, including the
                         effects of periodic drought conditions, is in Chapter Two – Resource
                         Management. The City of Sierra Madre is the licensee and
                         operator of its own water distribution system under the Sierra
                         Madre Water Department (SMWD). The SMWD provides water
                         to all of its residents and commercial uses totaling approximately
                         3,700 metered connections. The SMWD owns and maintains
                         approximately 46 miles of water mains. As detailed in Chapter
                         Two, Sierra Madre’s traditional groundwater source has decreased
                         to the extent that it became necessary to switch to outside sources
                         of water in late 2013. The use of imported water is expected to be
                         necessary until the aquifer returns to a sustainable level.
                         Prior to 2013, the City did not have an ongoing need for an
                         outside source of water. The City’s water was drawn from four
                         wells located in the vicinity of Sierra Vista Park, from a horizontal
                         well (aka: “tunnel”) in Little Santa Anita Canyon, and on occasion
                         from an emergency water system interconnection with the City of
                         Arcadia. In addition, the City receives surface water from the Big
                         Santa Anita Canyon Dam which is transported to the spreading
                         basins at the City Yard to replenish the East Raymond
                         Groundwater Basin. Surface water from Little Santa Anita
                         Canyon is captured at Camillo Street and diverted to the spreading
                         basins, as is surface water from streets north of
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 194

Grandview Avenue, east of Baldwin Avenue and west of Camillo
Street.
Water is stored at five reservoirs sites in Sierra Madre. These sites
contain a total of eight reservoir tanks with a total capacity of
approximately 7.46 million gallons.
Water Treatment. Chapter Two provides information on the City’s
fluoride variance and Granulated Active Carbon on-site filtration
treatment. The Water Department publishes a full Water Quality
Report each year. The report is a detailed analysis of sourcing,
water quality, and goals, and includes monitoring results for all
applicable chemicals and pollutants. This report is distributed to
the community in publications such as the seasonal Wistaria
Vine, or through billing inserts.
Water Delivery System. Water is distributed from the five reservoir
sites to residential and commercial connections in Sierra Madre
via gravity flow from higher elevations. Due to the topography and
varying elevations, Sierra Madre is divided into three water
pressure zones, each served by two reservoirs. (Grove Reservoir
is actually two separately-operating reservoirs in one structure.)
Water pressure at individual customers’ locations are a function
of the difference in elevation between the serving reservoir and
the customer’s point of use. The pressure does not vary and
cannot be controlled by the City. As a result, some properties at
higher elevations in the community must use pumps to increase
their water pressure.
Future Water Supply. Historically, the Sierra Madre Water
Department has relied on all of its sources, wells and tunnels, to
meet City demands. However, with the continued decline of
water levels in the East Raymond Groundwater Basin, new
limitations on groundwater production from the 1984
adjudication of the Raymond Basin, and the impact of the
drought severely reducing the City’s groundwater recharge
efforts, imported water sources are now relied upon to meet
demand. Significant threats on the City’s water supply include
increase in population, overdevelopment, and on-going drought
conditions.
The drought has driven home the point that Southern California
is an arid region which does not have an adequate local water
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 195

                         supply to meet current water demands, and that supplies of
                         imported water cannot be counted upon in dry periods or in the
                         event of a disaster. Current and future residents of Southern
                         California and particularly Sierra Madre need to make major
                         changes in their use of water in order to ensure that in the future
                         there will be adequate supplies available.
                         Water Conservation. Water conservation can be considered an
                         additional source of potable water because it frees up water that
                         otherwise might be used inefficiently. In light of drought
                         conditions, the City has needed to review and update its
                         “Mandatory Water Conservation Plan” on several occasions during
                         2013 and 2014. The City has also adopted Water Efficient
                         Landscape and Low Impact Development Ordinances to require
                         water conservation efforts associated with development and
                         redevelopment.
                         Sanitary Sewer System
                         The sewer collection system is owned by the City of Sierra Madre
                         and is managed, operated and maintained by the City’s Public
                         Works Department. The 32 mile sewer pipeline system operates
                         on gravity and intersects County Sanitation District trunk pipe lines
                         within the City. The City sewer main lines are eight inches in
                         diameter and are found below most City streets.
                         The Los Angeles County Sanitation District provides, under
                         contract with Sierra Madre, the treatment of wastewater and the
                         ultimate disposal of effluent and solids in compliance with the
                         waste discharge requirements set by the California Regional
                         Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB). Sierra Madre currently
                         provides sewer service to approximately 90 percent of the City
                         residents and commercial establishments. The balance is served
                         by private septic tank systems or by County-owned and operated
                         trunk mains in East Orange Grove Avenue, and South Baldwin
                         Avenue.
                         The City has prepared and is in the process of updating a Sewer
                         System Management Plan. This requirement by the State Water
                         Resources Control Board was accomplished in 2006 and an
                         update is expected to be completed in 2014. The Plan provides
                         specific actions to respond to spills, provides for an analysis on
                         system capacities and areas that are subject to leaks or breaks.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 196

The City does not maintain individual sewer laterals, either on
private property or within street rights-of way. Maintenance of
those portions of the sewer system is considered the
responsibility of the individual property owner served by the
lateral.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (Storm Drains)
The City of Sierra Madre owns and maintains approximately 9.62
miles of storm drains. The City’s drainage system is typical in
design and function of those in other municipalities in Southern
California.      While the system is thoroughly regulated for
pollutants as described in the NPDES section of Chapter 2, it was
created for flood control purposes.
There are a total of seven debris basins located within the City.
Six of the seven debris basins are owned and maintained by the Los
Angeles County Department of Public Works. The basins are
located in the northern portion of the City in the hillside area. The
Los Angeles County Department of Public Works also maintains
the Sierra Madre Dam located at the north end of Woodland
Drive.
Additional information on the flood control capacities for the
City’ storm drain infrastructure is found in Chapter Three – Hazard
Protection.
Solid Waste
Sierra Madre has an exclusive franchise contract with Athens
Services to collect all waste within the City. Refuse collection is
conducted once a week for most residential and commercial
customers. Some commercial and multi-unit properties may have
service more frequently if needed.
For residential customers, Athens Services provides a three-can
system to separate waste from recyclable material and organic
material. Residents pay only for the quantity and/or size of the
waste can and therefore are incentivized to use the recycle and
organic cans. Residents in the hillsides may now receive wildlife
resistant container service from Athens Services to promote
personal and wildlife health and avoid spills of refuse into the
streets and parkways.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                   P a g e | 197

                         Sierra Madre is a member of the Scholl Canyon Wasteshed and
                         much of the material collected by Athens Service is taken there.
                         This proved to be a major advantage with the closing of the
                         Puente Hills Landfill as other communities outside of the Scholl
                         Canyon Wasteshed must now transport waste materials outside
                         of the region.
                         Power
                         Electrical service to the City is provided by Southern California
                         Edison Company (SCE). Existing SCE facilities presently provide
                         adequate electrical service throughout Sierra Madre. As a result
                         there are no current improvement or expansion plans for
                         electrical facilities serving the City. In addition, SCE has indicated
                         that there are no plans to place distribution lines underground
                         within Sierra Madre or within the vicinity of the City.
                         Historically, the City has utilized PUC-mandated Rule 20 funding
                         to have overhead utilities placed underground. An example of
                         this was seen in the undergrounding of overhead utilities and
                         installation of decorative street lighting on North Baldwin
                         Avenue in the late 90s. The Rule 20 program continues today, and
                         the City may at some time select a section of the community for
                         utility undergrounding, and apply to Edison for a Rule 20A
                         undergrounding project using funds banked by Edison on behalf of
                         the City.
                         Telecommunications
                         Sierra Madre’s public access channels available to Time Warner
                         customers include Channel 3 and Channel 98. All City Council
                         and Planning Commission meetings are broadcast live, and
                         repeated throughout the month, on a set schedule. In addition, City
                         Council meetings can be streamed live or reviewed at
                         http://kgem.tv. Recently, Sierra Madre volunteers updated the
                         format for Channel 98 to include historical movies, sitcoms, and
                         documentaries.
                         PUBLIC SERVICES GOAL
                         Adequate and safe public infrastructure (utility systems) that
                         support land uses.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                        P a g e | 198

OBJECTIVES AND POLICIES
The City has established the following objectives and policies for
public services in Sierra Madre. The implementation measures
are contained in the Implementation Chapter at the end of the
General Plan.
 Objective C31: Providing adequate water, wastewater/sewer,
 storm drainage, electrical, and telecommunications systems to
 meet the demands of new and existing development.
Policies:
C31.1           Provide for storm drainage improvements where
                existing systems are deficient.
C31.2           Provide for the maintenance of existing water,
                sewer, and storm drainage systems.
C31.3           Require that new development be contingent upon
                the ability to be served by adequate sanitation
                collection and treatment, water, electrical and
                natural gas energy, telecommunication, storm
                drainage, and other supporting infrastructure.
C31.4           Upgrade areas that are deficient and maintain
                lighting fixtures in good working condition.
C31.5           Require that new development capture for
                percolation on site the maximum practical amount
                of storm water.
C31.6           Provide for the modification of existing drainage
                systems to capture for percolation the maximum
                practical amount of storm water.
     GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                P a g e | 199
                           Objective C32: Expanding the City’s cable television system for
                           the presentation of information regarding community services,
                           activities, and education regarding significant city issues.
                         Policies:
                         C32.1           Continue to cablecast and webcast all City Council
                                         meetings and selected Commission and Board
                                         meetings “live” and uninterrupted on the City
                                         government access channel. In addition, the City
                                         shall continue to make recordings of the meetings
                                         available online.
                         C32.2           Maintain a disaster plan that provides emergency
                                         information on government access television in the
                                         event of a disaster.
GENERAL PLAN |CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                       P a g e | 200

                                                      CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
CHAPTER ONE - LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1   Land Use Implementation Program
IM-1 The City shall continue to enforce the R-1, H, R-C, R-2
and R-3 Zoning Ordinances and amend them as necessary to
maintain single-family, two-family and multiple family
residential areas in the City.
     Implements
           Which                                                                                                                    
       Policy(ies) L1.1, L1.2, L1.3, L1.4
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s) City Attorney
IM-2 The City shall amend the Zoning Code as necessary to
include a program to encourage preservation of existing
housing stock and discourage lot splits. (2015)
     Implements
           Which
                                                               
       Policy(ies) L1.5, L1.7
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s) City Attorney
IM-3 The City shall amend the Municipal Code as necessary
to include a requirement for compliance with all adopted
water conservations measures. (2015-2016)
                    L1.6, L3.7, L4.3, L8.1, L8.2, L8.3, L8.5, L8.6,
                    L12.4, L14.1, L14.2, L14.3, L14.4, L17.1,
                    L17.2, L17.4, L18.1, L18.2, L18.4, L22.1,
      Implements L22.2, L22.4, L26.1, L26.2, L26.4, L26.5,          
            Which L30.1, L30.2, L30.4, L30.5, L36.1, L36.2,
        Policy(ies) L36.3, L39.1, L39.2, L39.4.
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation, Public Works
       Supporting
   Department(s) City Attorney
                                          1

                                                          CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                   2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1    Land Use Implementation Program
IM-4 The City shall adopt a Zoning Ordinance to establish
requirements regarding group living facilities. (2016)
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) L2.1, L2.2, L2.3, L2.4                          
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-5 The City shall continue to enforce the C (Commercial)
Zoning Ordinance, and amend it as necessary to maintain an
area of the City for commercial uses, update standards for
new construction and to include those uses it wishes to
encourage in the downtown area as permitted or
conditionally-permitted uses.
     Implements                                                                                                                         
           Which
       Policy(ies) L3.1, L3.2, L3.3, L3.4, L3.5, L3.6.
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-6 The City shall amend the Zoning Code as necessary to
require that the expansion of existing uses is reflective of and
complements the overall pattern of development without
changing the existing character of development.
     Implements
           Which                                                                                                                        
       Policy(ies) L4.1
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                             2

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                 2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1    Land Use Implementation Program
IM-7 The City shall amend the Zoning Code as necessary to
require that new development that cumulatively comprise
over one acre of land on one or more parcels require a CUP,
unless a specific plan or master plan is approved for the
project.
     Implements
                                                                                                                                      
           Which
       Policy(ies) L4.2
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-8 The City shall amend the Zoning Code as necessary to
preserve the existing street grid pattern and prohibit the use
of cul-de-sacs and require thru streets in new subdivisions
with some exceptions.
     Implements
           Which                                                             
       Policy(ies) L5.1
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s) City Attorney
                                            3

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1   Land Use Implementation Program
IM-9 The City shall establish a pre-application process to
require neighbor notification and appeal opportunities with
respect to any new construction and additions that exceeds
one story in height or significantly increases the volume
and/or footprint of the structure. (2015)
     Implements
                                                               
           Which
       Policy(ies) L6.1
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s) City Attorney
IM-10 The City shall establish guidelines to minimize direct
lines-of-sight between neighboring homes and backyards
and encourage preservation of mountain or basin views as
they relate to new or expanded structures. (2016)
      Implements
            Which                                              
        Policy(ies) L6.2, L6.3
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
       Supporting
   Department(s) City Attorney
IM-11 The City shall continue to enforce the R-1 (One
Family Residential) and R-C (Residential Canyon) Zoning
Ordinances regarding an angle plane height envelope
requirement.
    Implements
          Which                                                                                                                     
      Policy(ies) L6.4
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                           4

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1   Land Use Implementation Program
IM-12 The City shall continue to enforce and amend the R-1
(One Family Residential) Zoning Ordinance as necessary to
ensure that development is compatible in design and scale
with the neighborhood.
     Implements
           Which                                                                                                                     
       Policy(ies) L7.1, L7.2, L7.3, L7.4, L7.6
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-13 The City shall continue to enforce the R-C (Residential
Canyon) Zoning Ordinance, and amend it as necessary to
maintain the density of the Canyon.
    Implements
          Which
                                                                                                                                     
      Policy(ies) L9.1, L9.2, L9.3
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-14 The City shall amend the R-C (Residential Canyon)
Zoning Ordinance to provide incentives to rebuild damaged
or demolished structures to pre-existing dimensions.
     Implements
           Which                                                            
       Policy(ies) L9.4
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s) City Attorney
                                          5

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1   Land Use Implementation Program
IM-15 The City shall continue to enforce the R-C (Residential
Canyon) Zoning Ordinance, and amend as necessary to
preserve the existing rustic atmosphere.
     Implements
           Which
                                                                                                                                     
       Policy(ies) L10.1, L10.2, L10.3, L10.4
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-16 The City shall amend the R-C (Residential Canyon)
Zoning Ordinance to provide incentives to encourage open
porches and discourage enclosures of porches and non-
habitable areas.
     Implements
           Which                                                            
       Policy(ies) L10.5
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-17 The City shall amend the R-C (Residential Canyon)
Zoning Ordinance to include incentives to encourage the use
of materials typical of existing development in the Canyon.
     Implements
           Which                                                            
       Policy(ies) L10.6
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s) City Attorney
                                          6

                                                         CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1    Land Use Implementation Program
IM-18 The City shall amend the R-C (Residential Canyon)
Zoning Ordinance to protect natural elements such as large
rocks, plants and trees.
     Implements
           Which
                                                            
       Policy(ies) L10.7
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation, Public Works (Trees, Grading)
      Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-19 The City shall amend the R-C (Residential Canyon)
Zoning Ordinance to include site plan standards for
development of lots that include or are adjacent to the flood
control channel.
     Implements
           Which                                                            
       Policy(ies) L10.8
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-20 The City shall continue to allow the existing
multifamily residential and retail uses at the junction of
Woodland Drive and Brookside Lane.
     Implements
           Which
                                                                                                                                     
       Policy(ies) L11.1
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                             7

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1   Land Use Implementation Program
IM-21 The City shall amend the R-C (Residential Canyon)
Zoning Ordinance to include zoning overlay standards to
continue to allow the Nature Friends' property to be used for
overnight guest accommodations , group meeting space and
limited commercial activity.
     Implements
                                                                            
           Which
       Policy(ies) L11.2
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s) City Attorney
IM-22 The City shall amend the R-C (Residential Canyon)
Zoning Ordinance to include a discretionary review process
to allow park and open space areas.
      Implements
            Which                                                           
        Policy(ies) L11.3
      Responsible
   Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
       Supporting
   Department(s) City Attorney
IM-23 The City shall develop a program to include economic
assistance, to the extent feasible, to discourage the
deterioration of existing housing stock in the Residential
Canyon (R-C) Zone.
    Implements
                                                                            
          Which
      Policy(ies) L12.1, L12.2
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                           8

                                                         CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                  2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1    Land Use Implementation Program
IM-24 The City shall advertise the availability of the Los
Angeles County Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program on
the City’s website, and disseminate flyers in public locations.
In addition, the City shall reinitiate the Handyworker
Program. (2016)
    Implements
                                                      
          Which
      Policy(ies) L12.1, L12.2
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) Public Works (Handyworker through CDBG)
IM-25 The City shall continue to enforce the R-1 (One
Family Residential) and R-C (Residential Canyon) Zoning
Ordinances regarding on-site parking requirements for new
developments.
    Implements
                                                                                                                                       
          Which
      Policy(ies) L13.1
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-26 The City shall conduct a parking assessment and
enforcement study to alleviate parking constraints in the
Canyon. (2017)
    Implements
          Which
                                                                  
      Policy(ies) L13.2
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) Public Works
                                            9

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                              2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1    Land Use Implementation Program
                                                                                                              Annual
IM-27 The City shall continue to enforce the Hillside
Management Zone Ordinance, and amend as necessary to
address development density, environmental impact of
development, access, water conservation and development
impacts on wildlife.
    Implements                                                                                                                     
          Which
      Policy(ies) L15.1, L15.2, L15.3, L15.4, L15.5
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-28 The City shall continue to enforce the Hillside
Management Zone Ordinance, and amend as necessary to
ensure that hazards are minimized in the hillside with
respect to grading, natural vegetation, fire hazards, land
stability, exposure to geological and geotechnical hazards,
flooding, landslides, and any other hazard or threat to the
public health, safety and welfare.
                                                                                                                                   
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) L16.1, L16.2
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                           10

                                                         CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1    Land Use Implementation Program
IM-29 The City shall amend the Hillside Management Zone
Ordinance to include standards to address the upkeep and
maintenance of sites during construction. (2016)
     Implements
          Which                                                 
      Policy(ies) L16.3
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
    Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney, Public Works
IM-30 The City shall continue to enforce the Hillside
Management Zone Ordinance, and amend as necessary to
protect the views to and from hillside areas to maintain the
image and identity of the City as a village of the foothills.
    Implements
                                                                                                                                     
          Which
      Policy(ies) L17.1, L17.2, L17.3, L17.4, L17.5
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                           11

                                                         CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1    Land Use Implementation Program
                                                                                                               Annual
IM-31 The City shall continue to enforce the R-2 (Two-
Family Residential) Zoning Ordinance to allow for one or
two units per lot, and require a minimum lot area of 7,500
square feet.
    Implements
          Which                                                                                                                     
      Policy(ies) L19.1, L19.2
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-32 The City shall continue to enforce the R-2 (Two-
Family Residential) Zoning Ordinance.
    Implements
          Which L20.1, L20.2, L20.3, L20.4, L20.5, L20.6,
      Policy(ies) L20.7, L20.8, L20.9                                                                                               
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-33 The City shall amend the R-2 (Two-Family
Residential) Zoning Ordinance as necessary to maintain
massing and scale, including limitations on the floor area
ratio, maximum lot coverage, design compatibility,
architectural articulation, front elevation and entry
requirements, and parking requirements.
      Implements                                                           
            Which L20.1, L20.2, L20.3, L20.4, L20.5, L20.6,
        Policy(ies) L20.7, L20.8, L20.9
      Responsible
   Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
       Supporting
   Department(s) City Attorney
                                            12

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1    Land Use Implementation Program
IM-34 The City shall amend the R-2 (Two-Family
Residential) Zoning Ordinance to improve the safety of
individuals with respect to the location of entrances and
height of perimeter fencing and landscaping.
    Implements
          Which                                                            
      Policy(ies) L21.1, L21.2
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-35 The City shall continue to enforce the R-3 (Multiple
Family Residential) Zoning Ordinance.
    Implements
          Which
                                                                                                                                    
      Policy(ies) L23.1, L23.2
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-36 The City shall amend the R-3 (Multiple Family
Residential) Zoning Ordinance as necessary to allow
densities of approximately 13 units per acre and establish a
maximum allowable floor area. (2015)
    Implements
          Which                                                
      Policy(ies) L23.1, L23.2
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                           13

                                                            CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                  2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1      Land Use Implementation Program
IM-37 The City shall amend the R-3 (Multiple Family
Residential) Zoning Ordinance as necessary to ensure that
new development is compatible in scale and character with
existing development, including setbacks, building materials,
front yard paving, parking, building siting, building
orientation, common space, retention of mature trees, facade
design, architectural articulation, and small lot zoning
requirements. (2015)                                          
    Implements
          Which     L24.1, L24.2, L24.3, L24.4, L24.5, L24.6,
      Policy(ies)   L24.7, L24.8
    Responsible
  Department(s)     Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s)     City Attorney
IM-38 The City shall amend the R-3 (Multiple Family
Residential) Zoning Ordinance to improve the safety of
individuals with respect to the location of entrances, height
of perimeter fencing and landscaping, and parking. (2016)
    Implements
                                                                  
          Which
      Policy(ies) L25.1, L25.2, L25.3
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                              14

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                  2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1    Land Use Implementation Program
IM-39 The City shall amend the R-P (Residential
Professional) Zoning Ordinance to create an overlay zone
that allows for certain commercial uses in addition to
residential uses. The overlay zoning ordinance shall include
classifications of permitted and conditionally permitted uses
on a block-by-block basis.
    Implements                                                                
         Which
     Policy(ies) L27.1, L27.2
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
    Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-40 The City shall amend the R-P (Residential
Professional) Zoning Ordinance to encourage adaptive reuse,
prohibit the demolition and replacement of residential
structures with commercial development, allow conversion
of existing structures to limited office/business uses, require
new development to include residential or
residential/limited business uses, and require Planning
Commission approval for a change of use from residential to
office/business uses or new construction of residential                       
structures.
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) L28.1, L28.2, L28.1, L28.2
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                           15

                                                      CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                              2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1   Land Use Implementation Program
IM-41 The City shall continue to enforce the C (Commercial)
Zoning Ordinance.
    Implements
          Which
                                                                                                                                   
      Policy(ies) L31.1, L31.2
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-42 The City shall amend the C (Commercial) Zoning
Ordinance as necessary to limit the allowable floor area,
require a front yard setback to allow outdoor dining, sales
uses, landscaping and decorative paving, and to discourage
on-site parking along the street frontage.
    Implements                                                            
          Which
      Policy(ies) L31.1, L31.2, L31.3
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-43 The City shall continue to enforce the Nonconforming
Uses Ordinance (SMMC Chapter 17.56).
    Implements
          Which
                                                                                                                                   
      Policy(ies) L32.1
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                          16

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1    Land Use Implementation Program
IM-44 The City shall amend the Nonconforming Uses
Ordinance (SMMC Chapter 17.56) as necessary to allow
reconstruction of existing non-conforming structures that
must be replaced due to deterioration or hazard such as fire
and earthquakes. (2017)
    Implements                                                 
          Which
      Policy(ies) L32.1
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-45 The City shall amend the C (Commercial) Zoning
Ordinance as necessary to require windows and doorways
along the street, front elevations designed to mimic
individual storefronts, landscaping designed for form and
function, and incorporation of signage into overall building
design.
    Implements                                                             
          Which
      Policy(ies) L33.1, L33.5, L33.8, L33.9
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                          17

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                 2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1    Land Use Implementation Program
IM-46 The City shall provide incentives to encourage the
following in the C (Commercial) Zone: location of retail uses
along the street frontage, use of design elements that provide
protection to pedestrians, use of architectural design
elements along the sidewalk, use of traditional building
materials, and development of outdoor spaces for dining and
public gathering.
                                                                             
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) L33.2, L33.3, L33.4, L33.6, L33.7
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-47 The City shall amend the C (Commercial) Zoning
Ordinance to provide incentives to encourage the
enhancement of rear entrances to existing businesses.
    Implements
          Which                                                              
      Policy(ies) L34.1
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                           18

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                 2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1    Land Use Implementation Program
IM-48 The City shall amend the C (Commercial) Zoning
Ordinance to require new construction adjacent to a public
parking area to include access from the parking area and the
street.
     Implements
            Which                                                            
        Policy(ies) L34.2
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s) City Attorney
IM-49 The City shall identify opportunities to improve
pedestrian access from public parking areas to commercial
uses, particularly the access from the parking lot of Mariposa
Avenue to the commercial uses on the south side of Sierra
Madre Blvd.
    Implements
                                                                             
          Which
      Policy(ies) L34.3
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney, Public Works
IM-50 The City shall develop a directional signage program,
including educational materials, to encourage the use of
available public parking.
    Implements
          Which
                                                                             
      Policy(ies) L34.4
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney, Public Works
                                           19

                                                            CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                  2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1      Land Use Implementation Program
IM-51 The City shall amend the C (Commercial) Zoning
Ordinance as necessary to prohibit new and the expansion of
institutional facilities, allow a diversity of commercial uses
for local residents and visitors, allow residential uses at the
rear and above the first floor, and establish a minimum
depth for commercial uses with residential at the rear.
                                                                              
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) L35.1, L35.2, L35.3, L35.4, L35.5
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-52 The City shall continue to enforce the M
(Manufacturing) Zoning Ordinance.
    Implements
          Which     L37.1, L37.2, L37.3, L37.4, L37.5, L37.6,
                                                                                                                                       
      Policy(ies)   L37.7
    Responsible
  Department(s)     Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s)     City Attorney
                                              20

                                                            CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                   2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1      Land Use Implementation Program
IM-53 The City shall amend the M (Manufacturing) Zoning
Ordinance as necessary to allow adaptive reuse of existing
structures for mixed-use, light manufacturing that supports
design-related industries, a diversity of craft-related
businesses, entertaining/specialty stores, professional offices,
live/work space, and housing units on the second level or to
the rear of buildings.
                                                                               
    Implements
          Which     L37.1, L37.2, L37.3, L37.4, L37.5, L37.6,
      Policy(ies)   L37.7
    Responsible
  Department(s)     Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s)     City Attorney
IM-54 The City shall amend the M (Manufacturing) Zoning
Ordinance as necessary to ensure compatibility of existing
and new development/uses with adjacent uses, allow
outdoor display of wares close to the street, and examine
parking opportunities to address the shortfall of on-site
parking spaces.
                                                                               
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) L37.8, L37.10, L37.11, L37.12
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                              21

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1    Land Use Implementation Program
                                                                                                               Annual
IM-55 The City shall establish a program to provide
incentives to encourage the addition of street trees to make
the M Zone more attractive, and reducing its industrial
appearance.
    Implements
                                                            
          Which
      Policy(ies) L37.9
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation, Public Works
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-56 The City shall amend the M (Manufacturing) Zoning
Ordinance to change the title to "Artisan Mixed Use" Zoning
Ordinance and include regulations regarding commercial,
light-manufacturing and residential uses, including
maximum allowable floor area requirements.
    Implements                                                             
          Which
      Policy(ies) L38.1, L38.2
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                           22

                                                         CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                 2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1    Land Use Implementation Program
IM-57 The City shall amend the M (Manufacturing) Zoning
Ordinance and the Variances and Conditional Use Permit
Zoning Ordinance (SMMC Chapter 17.60) to require
approval of a conditional use permit to allow a new use on a
site to adequately protect existing adjacent uses.
    Implements                                                               
          Which
      Policy(ies) L38.3
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-58 The City shall continue to enforce the Voter's
Empowerment Ordinance (Measure V) pursuant to SMMC
Chapter 17.35 to maintain residential density and building
height restrictions in the Central Core Area.
    Implements
          Which                                                                                                                       
      Policy(ies) L40.1, L40.2
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-59 The City shall continue to enforce the Institutional (I)
Zoning Ordinance.
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) L41.1, L41.2, L41.3                                                                                                 
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                           23

                                                         CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                  2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1    Land Use Implementation Program
IM-60 The City shall amend the Institutional (I) Zoning
Ordinance as necessary to require compatibility with
adjacent land uses, require approval of a master plan to
allow the expansion of existing institutional sites, and allow
re-use of existing properties subject to approval of a
conditional use permit (CUP) for the following purposes:
relocated large institutions, retreat centers, civic and
religious uses, non-profit or health organizations, housing
for institutional uses, parkland, open space, public recreation               
and schools.
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) L41.1, L41.2, L41.3
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-61 The City shall amend the I (Institutional) Zoning
Ordinance to prohibit a change of use/zone change of school
sites that would allow for uses other than educational uses
unless a finding is made that such sites are not needed to
meet future educational needs and that consideration has
been given to the City's open space and recreation needs.
                                                                              
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) L41.5
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                           24

                                                      CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1    Land Use Implementation Program
                                                                                                               Annual
IM-62 The City shall amend the CIV (Civic) Zoning
Ordinance as necessary to allow for government
agency/services building that are easily accessible to
residents and others users, and allow for the development of
public cultural facilities.
     Implements
          Which                                                            
      Policy(ies) L42.1, L42.2
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
    Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-63 The City shall amend the O (Open Space) Zoning
Ordinance as necessary to allow constructed open space,
including the installation and maintenance of recreational
equipment, and establish a program to educate individuals
about the local environment.
     Implements
           Which                                                                       
       Policy(ies) L43.1, L43.2
    Responsible Planning & Community Preservation,
  Department(s) Community Services, Public Works.
    Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                          25

                                                            CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                      2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            Bi-Annual   On-going
      Table 5-1      Land Use Implementation Program
                                                                                                                      Annual
IM-64 The City shall amend the Open Space Ordinance to
include standards to address preservation of natural open
space (i.e. conservaiton easements), stringent environmental
review of property adjacent to conservation easements, and
dedication of natural and constructed open space and/or
payment of in-lieu fees.
    Implements                                                                    
          Which
      Policy(ies)   L44.1, L44.2, L44.1, L45.1
    Responsible     Planning & Community Preservation,
  Department(s)     Community Services, Public Works.
     Supporting
  Department(s)     City Attorney
IM-65 The City shall process any code amendments
necessary to ensure compliance of the R-1, R-2, R-3, RC, RP,
H, M and C Zoning Ordinances with the Goals and Policies
of the General Plan.
    Implements
                                                                                                                               
          Which     L7.5, L13.3, L17.6, L19.3, L23.3, L29.3, L35.6,
      Policy(ies)   L38.4, L41.5
    Responsible
  Department(s)     Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s)     City Attorney
                                              26

                                                          CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                  2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
Table 5-1    Historic Preservation Implementation Program
IM-1 The City shall engage the services of a historic
preservation consultant to complete a comprehensive survey
of the City's significant historic resources according to the
State Office of Historic Preservation guidelines.
     Implements
                                                                 
           Which L46.1, L46.3, L8.4, L12.3, L14.3, L18.3, L22.3,
       Policy(ies) L26.3, L30.3, L46.3
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-2 The City shall continue to maintain and update its
Register of Historic Cultural Landmarks.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) L46.2                                                                                                   
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-3 The City shall establish historic overlay zones or
districts characterized by the presence of historic structures.
      Implements
            Which
                                                                              
        Policy(ies) L46.4
      Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
       Supporting
  Department(s)
                                            27

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
Table 5-1    Historic Preservation Implementation Program
IM-4 The City shall make available information regarding
historic preservation programs and tours of local historic
resources.
     Implements
           Which
                                                                           
       Policy(ies) L46.5
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-5 The City shall seek the assistance of the Historic
Preservation Society in developing an information base of
preservation techniques and economic incentives for the
benefit of historic property owners.
     Implements
           Which                                                           
       Policy(ies) L46.6
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-6 The City shall consider applying to the State Office of
Historic Preservation to obtain Certified Local Government
Status.
     Implements
            Which
                                                                           
        Policy(ies) L47.1
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s)
                                           28

                                                      CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                             2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
Table 5-1   Historic Preservation Implementation Program
IM-7 The City shall provide information regarding
designation of historic resources and Mills Act Contracts to
owners of properties identified in the comprehensive survey
of historic resources.
      Implements
            Which                                            
        Policy(ies) L47.2
      Responsible
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
       Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-8 The City shall review and amend the Historic
Preservation Ordinance to remove constraints on the use of
historic structures.
     Implements
            Which                                                        
       Policy(ies) L47.3
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-9 The City shall amend the Historic Preservation
Ordinance to include guidelines for rehabilitation and new
construction, demolition control and regulation of uses in
historically designated structures.
     Implements
            Which                                                        
       Policy(ies) L47.4
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s)
                                          29

                                                         CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
Table 5-1    Historic Preservation Implementation Program
IM-10 The City shall continue to require approval of a
Certificate of Appropriateness for alterations to historic
properties that are visible to the public.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) L47.5                                                                                                
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
    Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-11 The City shall review the building and zoning codes to
identify opportunities for relaxation of standards to help
preserve historic structures while still meeting health and
safety standards.
     Implements
           Which                                                           
       Policy(ies) L47.6
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-12 The City shall amend the Historic Preservation
Ordinance as needed to include appropriate methods, such
as but not limited to, tax incentives, protective covenants,
preservation easements, to help preserve historic resources.
     Implements
                                                                           
           Which
       Policy(ies) L47.7, L47.11, L47.12
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s)
                                            30

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
Table 5-1    Historic Preservation Implementation Program
IM-13 The City shall continue to allow for adaptive reuse of
significant historic structures pursuant to the Historic
Preservation Ordinance.
     Implements
            Which
                                                                            
        Policy(ies) L47.8, L47.12
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-14 The City shall assist property owners in obtaining
available preservation loans and grants.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) L47.9
                                                                            
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-15 The City shall set aside funds to retain a professional
advisor or seek a qualified volunteer to provide guidance
and interpretation for staff on the use and interpretation of
applicable regulations and technical preservation
information.
    Implements                                                              
          Which
      Policy(ies) L47.10
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s)
                                           31

                                                         CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            On-going
   Table 5-1    Economic Development Implementation
                        Program                                                                                Annual
IM-1 The City shall develop a plan to encourage new
businesses that complement existing businesses to locate in
the City's core area.
    Implements
          Which
                                                               
      Policy(ies) L48.1, L48.4, L48.1, L50.1, L50.2, L50.3
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-2 The City shall work with the Chamber of Commerce
and/or group of local businesses to explore implementing a
Business Improvement District.
     Implements
           Which
                                                               
       Policy(ies) L48.2, L48.5
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-3 The City shall review the Special Event Permit process
and associated fees.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) L48.2, L49.4                                                                                
     Responsible
  Department(s) Community Services
      Supporting
  Department(s)
                                            32

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                              2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            On-going
   Table 5-1    Economic Development Implementation
                                                                                                              Annual
                        Program
IM-4 The City shall develop a plan that addresses parking,
walkability, and pedestrian activity in the core area.
    Implements
          Which                                                                                   
      Policy(ies) L 49.2, L49.3, L49.6, L49.7, L49.8, L49.9
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-5 The City shall review and update the Parks and
Facilities Master Plan as pertains to Kersting Court.
      Implements
            Which
        Policy(ies) L49.4, L49.5                                          
     Responsible
  Department(s) Community Services
       Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-6 The City shall consider implementing design review
standards for the core area.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) L49.1, L49.8                                           
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s)
                                          33

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
IM-7 The City shall review its business incentive program.
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) L49.1, L49.8, L49.9                                                                           
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s)
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
     Table 5-1    Circulation Implementation Program
IM-1 The City shall continue to use the street classification
system, including Major, Collector, Local Collector and Local
streets.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) L51.1
     Responsible
   Department(s) Public Works
    Supporting
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation                                                                      
IM-2 When reviewing proposed subdivisions, the City shall
limit the development of new roadways to the minimum
required to provide access to properties. The City shall also
limit expansion of existing roadways when considering
traffic volumes for future development.
      Implements
            Which
        Policy(ies) L51.2
      Responsible
   Department(s) Public Works
       Supporting
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation                                                                     
                                           34

                                                          CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                     2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
     Table 5-1     Circulation Implementation Program
IM-3 The City shall continue to set aside sufficient budget to
maintain facilities for bicyclists (such as signage and
pavement marking), pedestrians and transit users. The City
shall also consider whether additional funds are available to
develop new facilities.
      Implements
            Which
        Policy(ies) L51.3, L51.4, L51.5, L51.6
     Responsible
  Department(s) Public Works
       Supporting
  Department(s)                                                                                                               
IM-4 The City shall prepare and implement a Citywide
Sidewalk Master Plan, to include sidewalk maintenance and
prioritization of sidewalk infill projects.
     Implements
            Which
       Policy(ies) L51.7, L51.8, L52.1, L52.5, L52.4, L52.9, L56.3
     Responsible
  Department(s) Public Works
      Supporting
  Department(s)                                                                                                               
IM-5 The City shall consider opportunities to provide
bicycle facilities in the city and include them in the new
bikeway plan as appropriate.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) L52.3, L52.7, L52.8
     Responsible
   Department(s) Public Works
      Supporting Planning and Community Preservation,
   Department(s) Police Department
                                             35

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
     Table 5-1    Circulation Implementation Program
IM-6 The City shall update the City's Traffic calming
guidelines and provide Sierra Madre-specific criteria for the
use of traffic calming devices.
     Implements
            Which
       Policy(ies) L52.2, L53.1, L53.3, L53.4
     Responsible
  Department(s) Public Works
      Supporting
  Department(s) Police Department                                                                                        
IM-7 The City shall update the City's ADA Plan.
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) L52.1, L56.1, L56.2, L56.4
    Responsible
  Department(s) Human Resources, Risk Management
     Supporting
  Department(s) Public Works                                                                                             
IM-8 The City shall review Municipal Code Sections
relating to parking, crosswalks, and pedestrian safety and
amend as necessary.
      Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) L52.6, L54.1, L54.2, L54.3, L56.1, L56.4
      Responsible
   Department(s) Public Works
    Supporting Planning and Community Preservation,
  Department(s) City Attorney                                                                                            
                                           36

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                              2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
     Table 5-1    Circulation Implementation Program
IM-9 The City shall publicize and encourage the use of
public transportation programs, such as light rail, bus and
paratransit services.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) L56.2
     Responsible
  Department(s) Community Services
      Supporting
  Department(s) Public Works                                                                                           
                                           37

                                                      CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
CHAPTER TWO - RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
                                                              2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
Table 5-1   Hillside Preservation Implementation Program
IM-1 The City shall continue to enforce the Hillside Zone
Ordinance and other ordinances that seek to protect the
hillside areas.
      Implements
            Which
        Policy(ies) R1.1
      Responsible
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
       Supporting
   Department(s)                                                                                                       
IM-2 The City shall approach other hillside communities in
the San Gabriel Valley to discuss the feasibility of
establishing a protected hillside corridor along the San
Gabriel Mountains.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R1.2
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s) City Attorney                                                                                         
IM-3 The City shall work with the Sierra Madre Mountains
Conservancy to help it obtain funds to purchase hillside
property, including exploring the use of bond issues,
assessment districts, environmental partnerships, and other
methods for purchasing and managing hillside areas.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R2.1
     Responsible
  Department(s) City Manager
      Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney                                                                                          
                                          38

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
Table 5-1   Hillside Preservation Implementation Program
IM-4 The City shall inform the Council for Watershed
Health that it will provide assistance where possible. The
City shall also help disseminate information regarding the
work done by the Council.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R3.1
     Responsible
  Department(s) Public Works
      Supporting
  Department(s)                                                                                                          
IM-5 The City shall amend the Open Space Ordinance to
identify wildland open space as areas to remain in their
natural state to mitigate flood cycles and capture stormwater
runoff, except where brush abatement is necessary to for fire
safety.
     Implements
            Which
        Policy(ies) R3.2, R3.3, R3.4
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s)                                                            
IM-6 The City shall designate properties purchased by the
Sierra Madre Mountains Conservancy and other non-profit
organizations as natural open space utilizing conservation
easements.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R3.5
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s)                                                                                                         
                                          39

                                                     CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                             2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
Table 5-1   Hillside Preservation Implementation Program
IM-7 The City shall coordinate with other public agencies'
plans and pursue partnerships with local and regional
environmental and conservation organizations to locate and
protect hillside open space areas.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R3.6
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s)                                                                                                       
                                         40

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                              2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            On-going
 Table 5-1    Co-Existence with Wildlife Implementation
                         Program                                                                              Annual
IM-1 The City shall provide brochures, and provide
information on the City's website and eblast to raise
awareness that Sierra Madre is an urban/wildlife interface.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R4.1, R4.4
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s)                                              
IM-2 The City shall promote the establishment of a non-
Brown Act, grassroots committee dedicated to encouraging
the peaceful co-existence with wildlife.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R4.2
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s)                                              
IM-3 The City shall publicize and post signs that announce
Resolution 72-62 which designates Sierra Madre as a Wildlife
Sanctuary.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R4.3
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s)                                              
                                          41

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            On-going
 Table 5-1    Co-Existence with Wildlife Implementation
                         Program                                                                               Annual
IM-4 The City shall provide information to the public
regarding "wild proofing" their property and State laws that
prohibit trapping, killing and relocating wildlife.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R4.5
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s)                                                
IM-5 The City shall continue to enforce regulations
prohibiting spiked iron fencing.
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) R5.1
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s)                                                                                                         
                                          42

                                                     CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                              2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            On-going
 Table 5-1    Co-Existence with Wildlife Implementation
                                                                                                              Annual
                         Program
IM-6 The City shall consider providing incentives for
property owners to modify existing structures to better
accommodate safe passage of wildlife.
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) R5.2
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s)                                               
IM-7 The City shall continue to make adequate waste
removal services available to existing and future residents
and businesses through an ongoing exclusive contract with a
professional waste removal company, including providing
wildlife-resistant trash cans.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R5.3
     Responsible
  Department(s) Public Works
      Supporting
  Department(s)                                                                                                        
IM-8 The City shall disseminate information associated with
the High Activity Wildlife Zone.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R5.4
     Responsible
  Department(s) Public Works
      Supporting
  Department(s)                                                                                                        
                                         43

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                              2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
  Table 5-1   Tree Preservation Implementation Program
IM-1 The City shall continue to enforce the City's existing
Tree Preservation Ordinance
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R10.1, R10.4, R10.8, R10.10                                                                         
     Responsible
  Department(s) Public Works
      Supporting
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation (Code Enforcement)
IM-2 The City shall provide educational materials and
opportunities regarding tree care and maintenance.
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) R10.1, R10.3, R10.6 R10.10, R11.2           
    Responsible
  Department(s) Public Works
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-3 The City shall implement the recommendations of the
Community Forest Management Plan.
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) R10.1, R10.4, R10.3, R11.2                  
    Responsible
  Department(s) Public Works
     Supporting
  Department(s)
                                         44

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            On-going
  Table 5-1   Tree Preservation Implementation Program
                                                                                                               Annual
IM-4 The City shall follow developments in tree care and
maintenance for inclusion into City operations and tree care
educational programs.
    Implements
          Which
                                                               
      Policy(ies) R10.2, R10.6, R10.9, R11.1
    Responsible
  Department(s) Public Works
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-5 The City shall develop funding sources for the
enhancement of the ongoing tree maintenance and planting
program.
    Implements
          Which
                                                               
      Policy(ies) R10.5, R10.3 R10.7, R11.1, R11.2
    Responsible
  Department(s) Public Works
     Supporting
  Department(s) Administration, City Attorney
                                          45

                                                         CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            On-going
      Table 5-1    Waste Management and Recycling
                                                                                                                Annual
                  Implementation Program
IM-1 The City shall continue to make adequate waste                                                                      
removal services available to existing and future residents
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) R18.1, R18.2, R18.3, R19.1, R19.2, R19.6, R21.1
    Responsible
  Department(s) Public Works
     Supporting
  Department(s) Administration
IM-2 The City shall encourage recycling through the                                                                      
purchase of recycled products, enforcement of recycling of
construction and demolition debris, and the promotion
ofcomposting and green waste programs.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R19.3, R19.4, R19.5
     Responsible
  Department(s) Public Works
      Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-3 The City shall continue to provide residents with a                                                                 
proper means of disposal of hazardous waste through
participation in the Household Hazardous Waste Roundup
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R20.1, R20.2
     Responsible
  Department(s) Public Works
      Supporting
  Department(s)
                                           46

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                 2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
     Table 5-1 Air Quality Implementation Program
IM-1 The City shall ensure that it complies with the South                                                                
Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) Air
Quality Management Plan, and other regional initiatives and
programs to improve air quality.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R22.1, R22.4
     Responsible
   Department(s) Public Works Department
      Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-2 The City shall continue to assess the air quality impacts                                                            
from proposed developments and land uses through the
environmental review process.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R22.2
     Responsible
   Department(s)
      Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-3 The City shall continue to enforce abide by the                                                                      
requirements of the South Coast Air Quality Management
District (SCAQMD) regarding air pollutant thresholds.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R22.3
     Responsible
   Department(s)
      Supporting
   Department(s)
                                           47

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
     Table 5-1 Air Quality Implementation Program
                                                                                                                         
IM-4 Staff shall keep apprised of incentives offered by the
South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD)
and shall provide that information to the community.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R22.5
     Responsible
  Department(s) Community Services Department
      Supporting
  Department(s) Public Works Department
                                                                
IM-5 The City shall purchase low or zero emissions alternate-
fuel vehicles for its fleet wherever possible.
      Implements
            Which
        Policy(ies) R23.2, R23.3
     Responsible
  Department(s) Public Works Department
       Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-6 The City shall create a transportation brochure to         
provide the public with multiple options for reducing miles
traveled and vehicle trips.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R23.1
     Responsible
   Department(s) Community Services
      Supporting
   Department(s)
                                           48

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                             2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
     Table 5-1 Air Quality Implementation Program
IM-7 The City shall continue to allow home-based                                                                      
businesses pursuant to the Home Occupation Permit
Ordinance.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R23.4
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-8 The City shall continue to allow residential business                                                            
above or at the rear of commercial uses in the Commercial
Zone.
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) R23.5
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-9 The City shall continue to provide the fixed route local 
transportation services and provide increase social media
marketing for greater public awareness.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R23.6
     Responsible
   Department(s) Community Services Department
      Supporting
   Department(s)
                                          49

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
     Table 5-1 Air Quality Implementation Program
IM-10 The City shall continue to partner with MTA and                                                                   
attend quarterly meetings to ensure access to the Gold Line
light rail system.
      Implements
            Which
        Policy(ies) R23.7
      Responsible
   Department(s) Community Services Department
       Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-11 The City shall partner with regional transit providers               
to identify funding sources to expand transportation
programs.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R23.8
    Responsible
  Department(s) Community Services Department
    Supporting
  Department(s)
                                                                                                                        
IM-12 The City shall continue to enforce the Noise
Ordinance and amend as necessary with respect to the use of
gas-powered lawn equipment.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) R24.1
     Responsible
  Department(s) Police Department
      Supporting Planning and Community Preservation
  Department(s) (Code Enforcement)
                                          50

                                                    CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                            2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
     Table 5-1 Air Quality Implementation Program
                                                                                                                     
IM-13 The City shall continue to enforce dust abatement
measures during grading and construction.
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) R24.2
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation, Public Works
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-14 The City shall continue to enforce applicable City                                                             
ordinances, as well as regional regulations pertaining to
fugitive dust control.
      Implements
            Which
        Policy(ies) R24.3
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation, Public Works
       Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                                                                                                     
IM-15 Staff shall research and review adopted second-unit
smoke ordinances and present the results to the Planning
Commission and City Council for their consideration as to
whether they wish to adopt a second-unit smoke ordinance.
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) R25.1
    Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
     Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
                                        51

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
CHAPTER THREE - HAZARD PREVENTION
                                                                 2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
     Table 5-1    Fire Safety Implementation Program
IM-1 The City shall continue to provide cost efficient fire
and rescue services by maintaining adequate funding and
recruiting and retaining qualified personnel.
     Implements
           Which
                                                                                                                          
       Policy(ies) Hz1.1, Hz1.3, Hz3.1, Hz4.4
     Responsible
  Department(s) Fire Department
      Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-2 The City shall provide educational opportunities for
the public to learn about fire safety by hosting annual
preparedness fairs, fire prevention festivals, brush awareness
evenings, and conducting annual inspections and prevention
programs at local schools.
     Implements
                                                                                                                 
           Which
       Policy(ies) Hz1.2, Hz1.4, Hz5.2
     Responsible
  Department(s) Fire Department
      Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-3 The City shall distribute a semi annual newsletter from
the Fire Department through social media websites,
addressing Fire Prevention issues directly with the
community.
     Implements
           Which                                                                                                 
       Policy(ies) Hz1.2, Hz1.4
     Responsible
  Department(s) Fire Department
      Supporting
  Department(s)
                                           52

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
     Table 5-1    Fire Safety Implementation Program
IM-4 The City shall continue to contract dispatch services to
Verdugo Dispatch Center and monitor response times
through the Verdugo CAD (Computer Aided Dispatch)
system.
     Implements
           Which                                                                                                         
       Policy(ies) Hz1.3, Hz4.3, Hz4.6
     Responsible
  Department(s) Fire Department
      Supporting
  Department(s) Police Department
IM-5 The City shall continue to require adequate fire
protection through the adoption of the State Fire Code with
local amendments for all developments.
      Implements
            Which Hz2.1, Hz2.2, Hz2.3, Hz2.4, Hz2.5, Hz2.6,
                                                                                                                         
        Policy(ies) Hz2.7, Hz2.8, Hz2.9, Hz3.2
      Responsible
   Department(s) Fire Department
       Supporting
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
IM-6 The City shall oversee the maintenance of adequate
brush clearance in the Wildland/Urban Interface within the
High Severity Fire Zone through annual brush inspections.
    Implements
          Which
                                                                                                                
      Policy(ies) Hz2.7, Hz2.8, Hz2.9, Hz2.10, Hz3.2, Hz5.3, Hz5.4
    Responsible
  Department(s) Fire Department
     Supporting
  Department(s) Public Works, Planning and Community Preservation
                                          53

                                                      CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                             2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
     Table 5-1   Fire Safety Implementation Program
IM-7 The City shall continue to improve response times for
Safety Personnel and their equipment in the Canyon areas.
     Implements
           Which Hz1.2, Hz1.4, Hz2.3, Hz2.4, Hz2.5, Hz2.7,
                                                                                                                      
       Policy(ies) Hz2.9, Hz2.10, Hz3.2, Hz5.1
     Responsible
  Department(s) Fire Department
      Supporting
  Department(s) Public Works, Police Department
IM-8 The City shall provide a fully functioning Emergency
Operating Center with annual updates for City disasters.
    Implements
          Which
                                                                                                                      
      Policy(ies) Hz1.3, Hz4.1, Hz4.2, Hz4.3, Hz4.4, Hz4.5
    Responsible
  Department(s) Fire Department
     Supporting
  Department(s) Police Department
IM-9 The City shall collaborate with the Arcadia Fire
Department and Los Angeles County Road Department and
Fire Department in the application of fire retardant and
brush clearance along roadways.
     Implements
           Which                                                                                             
       Policy(ies) Hz2.7, Hz2.8, Hz3.2, Hz5.1
     Responsible
   Department(s) Fire Department
      Supporting
   Department(s) Police Department
                                         54

                                                  CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                        2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
  Table 5-1   Flood/Landslide Implementation Program
                                                        
IM-1 The City shall require that all new tract developments
provide storm drainage infrastructure designed and built
according to Los Angeles County Public Works/Flood
Control District standards to allow for inclusion of those
systems into the County Transfer Drain program.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) Hz6.1, Hz8.1, Hz8.2
     Responsible
  Department(s) Public Works, Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-2 The City shall amend the Grading, Hillside           
Management Zone, Low Impact Development, and/or Water
Efficient Landscape ordinances to limit the amount of
impermeable area that can be constructed as a part of any
development project.
      Implements
            Which
        Policy(ies) Hz6.1, Hz6.2
      Responsible
  Department(s) Public Works, Planning and Community Preservation
       Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-3 The City shall continue to improve emergency                        
coordination between the City's internal departments,
outside agencies, and city residents and business in order to
further emergency preparedness.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) Hz7.1, Hz7.2, Hz9.1
     Responsible
  Department(s) Police, Fire, Public Works
      Supporting
  Department(s) Administration, Finance, Community Services/Human Resources
                                      55

                                                         CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
   Table 5-1    Seismic Safety Implementation Program
IM-1 The City shall consider earthquake safety and post-
disaster functioning when siting, designing and constructing
essential facilities in Sierra Madre.
     Implements
            Which
                                                                                                                        
       Policy(ies) Hz10.1
     Responsible Public Works, Planning & Community
  Department(s) Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-2 The City will consider engaging the services of a
geological consultant to identify areas in the City where
active faults pose a hazard to structures, and to assess the
need for limitations on the location of new or altered
structures near active faults and subsurface investigations
prior to project approval.
     Implements                                                            
           Which
       Policy(ies) Hz10.2, Hz10.3, Hz10.4
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s)
IM- 3 The City shall keep on file any geologic information
obtained through project approvals for future reference.
     Implements
           Which
                                                                                                                        
       Policy(ies) Hz10.5
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s) Public Works
                                            56

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
   Table 5-1    Seismic Safety Implementation Program
IM-4 The City shall make information available to residents,
property owners and emergency responders regarding
seismic upgrade of buildings, including historic structures.
     Implements
           Which                                               
       Policy(ies) Hz11.1, Hz11.2, Hz11.3, H13.1
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-5 The City shall collect and undertake a review of
buildings that are unreinforced masonry (URM) and soft first-
stories.
      Implements
            Which
                                                              
        Policy(ies) Hz11.1, Hz11.2, Hz11.3, H13.1
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
       Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-6 The City shall continue to maintain and update the
multi-hazard emergency preparedness plan for the City, and
improve emergency coordination between the City's internal
departments, outside agencies, and city residents and
business.
     Implements
          Which                                                                                                         
      Policy(ies) Hz12.1, Hz12.2, Hz12.3, Hz12.4, Hz12.5, Hz12.6
     Responsible Police, Fire, Public Works, Planning &
  Department(s) Community Preservation
    Supporting Administration, Finance, Community
  Department(s) Services/Human Resources
                                          57

                                                      CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                             2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
   Table 5-1   Seismic Safety Implementation Program
IM-7 The City shall continue to enforce the Building Code
and adopt any updates to seismic requirements in a timely
manner.
     Implements
           Which
                                                                                                                      
       Policy(ies) Hz13.2
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-8 The City shall investigate requiring automatic gas shut-
off in new construction and major renovations.
      Implements
            Which
        Policy(ies) Hz13.2                                    
      Responsible
   Department(s) Planning & Community Preservation
       Supporting
   Department(s)
                                         58

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
        Table 5-1    Noise Implementation Program
IM-1 The City shall review its zoning ordinances and amend
as necessary to include measures to mitigate noise impacts
from mobile and stationary noise sources.
     Implements
           Which
                                                                            
       Policy(ies) Hz14.1
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s) Police Department
IM-2 The City shall identify opportunities to control noise
levels associated with vehicular traffic throughout the City.
     Implements
           Which
                                                                
       Policy(ies) Hz14.2
     Responsible
   Department(s) Police Department
      Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-3 The City shall amend its Noise Ordinance as needed to
prohibit unnecessary excessive and annoying noise sources.
    Implements
          Which
                                                                            
      Policy(ies) Hz14.3
    Responsible
  Department(s) Police Department
     Supporting
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
                                           59

                                                      CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                             2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
       Table 5-1    Noise Implementation Program
IM-4 The City shall continue to enforce its Noise Ordinance
to ensure that noise levels in the commercial areas do not
interfere with the normal business, commercial and
residential activities.
      Implements
            Which                                                                                                     
        Policy(ies) Hz14.4
     Responsible
   Department(s) Police Department, Planning and Community Preservation
       Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-5 The City shall continue to enforce its Noise Ordinance
to protect schools, hospitals, libraries, churches, parks and
recreational areas from excessive sound levels.
     Implements
           Which                                                                                                      
       Policy(ies) Hz14.5
     Responsible
   Department(s) Police Department, Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-6 The City shall consider amending its Noise Ordinance
to further restrict the use of gas powered lawn equipment.
     Implements
           Which
                                                                         
       Policy(ies) Hz14.6
     Responsible
   Department(s) Police Department
      Supporting
   Department(s)
                                         60

                                                         CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                   2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
        Table 5-1    Noise Implementation Program
IM-7 The City shall amend the Commercial Zone Ordinance
to exclude noise-intensive uses that may be allowed in mixed-
use projects.
     Implements
           Which
                                                                               
       Policy(ies) Hz15.1
     Responsible
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-8 The City shall amend the Commercial Zone Ordinance
to require that mixed-use projects be designed to prevent the
transfer of noise between the commercial and residential
uses.
      Implements
            Which                                                              
        Policy(ies) Hz15.2, Hz15.3
      Responsible
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
       Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-9 The City shall continue to limit construction activities to
reasonable weekday and weekend/holiday hours to reduce
noise impacts to residential uses, and enforce noise
regulations addressing construction activities.
     Implements
           Which                                                                                                            
       Policy(ies) Hz16.1, Hz16.2
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s) Police Dept.
                                            61

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
CHAPTER FOUR - COMMUNITY SERVICES
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
  Table 5-1   Law Enforcement Implementation Program
IM-1 The City will seek to respond to all calls for service
within three minutes of a dispatched call. The City will also
increase the number of monthly neighborhood watch
meetings throughout the City and will hold bi-annual
community Town Hall meetings to educate the community
and senior citizens on crime prevention.
     Implements                                                                                                          
           Which
       Policy(ies) C1.1, C2.1, C2.2, C2.3, C3.1, C3.2
     Responsible
   Department(s) Police Departmernt
      Supporting
   Department(s) Community Services-Senior Center
IM-2 The City will review all proposed tract maps and multi-
family development to assess the impact of increases in
population on response time, calls for service and traffic.
     Implements
           Which                                                                                                         
       Policy(ies) C1.2
     Responsible
  Department(s) Police Department
      Supporting
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
IM-3 The City will seek to identify more Neighborhood
Watch block captains & Business Watch participants to
increase crime prevention awareness and vigilance.
    Implements
          Which
                                                                                                                         
      Policy(ies) C2.1, C2.2
    Responsible
  Department(s) Police Department
     Supporting
  Department(s) Community Services-Senior Center
                                          62

                                                          CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                   2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
  Table 5-1    Law Enforcement Implementation Program
IM-4 The City will partner with other City departments to
facilitate their notification and/or response to citizen request
for service traditionally outside the normal course and scope
of the Police Department.
      Implements
             Which                                                                                                          
        Policy(ies) C3.3
      Responsible
   Department(s) Police Department
       Supporting Planning and Community Preservation,
   Department(s) Community Services, Public Works, Fire
IM-5 The City will conduct regular quality of service audits
with citizens who have interaction with police personnel.
The quality of service audits will help identify issues of
concern with overall quality of police service, and help
determine critical training needs that may be needed to
enhance the overall service by police personnel. In addition,
ongoing training will be provided to police personnel in
community policing and human relations.                                                                                     
      Implements
             Which
        Policy(ies) C3.4
      Responsible
   Department(s) Police Department
       Supporting
   Department(s)
                                            63

                                                         CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                   2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
  Table 5-1    Law Enforcement Implementation Program
 IM-6: The City will partner with Community Emergency
Response Team (CERT) volunteers to provide regular public
safety and disaster preparedness training to citizens during
neighborhood watch meetings, town hall meetings, and
business watch meetings. In addition, efforts will be made to
encourage all citizen and visitors to the City to participate in
disaster preparedness programs sponsored by the Fire
                                                                                                                            
Department and CERT.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) C4.1
     Responsible
   Department(s) Police Departmernt, Fire Department
      Supporting
   Department(s) Community Services-Senior Center
 IM-7: The City will provide, with the assistance of the
Community Emergency Response Team (CERT),
community education programs in emergency response and
disaster preparedness for City residents.
     Implements
           Which                                                                                                   
       Policy(ies) C4.1
     Responsible
   Department(s) Police Department, Fire Department
      Supporting
   Department(s) Community Services-Senior Center
                                            64

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                              2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
  Table 5-1   Law Enforcement Implementation Program
IM-8 The City will train all sworn police personnel and all
other staff on the implementation of Standardized
Emergency Management System (SEMS) plan to address
disasters such as earthquakes, flooding, fire, extreme
weather, hazardous material spills, and other accidents.
     Implements
                                                                                                                       
            Which
       Policy(ies) C4.2
     Responsible
  Department(s) Police Department, Fire Department
      Supporting
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
IM-9 The City will develop and maintain an Emergency
Operations Plan and Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan, and
will update it as needed.
      Implements
           Which C4.2                                         
     Responsible
  Department(s) Police Department, Fire Department
       Supporting
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
IM-10 The City will partner with the Fire Department,
Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) and
Emergency Radio Station 1630 AM volunteers to coordinate
disaster response and dissemination of information during a
disaster.
     Implements
           Which                                                                                                       
       Policy(ies) C4.4, C4.5
     Responsible
  Department(s) Police Department, Fire Department
    Supporting
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
                                          65

                                                      CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
  Table 5-1   Law Enforcement Implementation Program
IM-11 City will review existing ordinances and amend as
necessary to incorporate hazard prevention measures for
new and existing development.
     Implements
           Which
                                                               
       Policy(ies) C4.3
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s) Police Department, Fire Department
IM-12 The City will continue to maintain a Code
Enforcement Officer to respond to complaints from the
public in a timely manner and ensure compliance with City
codes and regulations.
     Implements
           Which                                                                                                        
       Policy(ies) C5.1, C5.4
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s) Police Department, Fire Department
IM-13 The City will work with residents and business
owners to ensure code compliance in order to avoid the need
for legal action. When such efforts have been exhausted, the
City will follow Code Enforcement procedures to resolve
violations.
      Implements
                                                                                                                        
            Which
        Policy(ies) C5.2, C5.3
      Responsible
   Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
       Supporting Police Department, Fire Department,
   Department(s) Administrative Services
                                         66

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                              2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
  Table 5-1   Law Enforcement Implementation Program
IM-14 The City will identify and address Code violations
that warrant pro-active, targeted Code enforcement efforts.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) C5.5                                                                                                
     Responsible
  Department(s) Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting Police Department, Fire Department,
  Department(s) Administrative Services
                                          67

                                                         CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                  2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
Table 5-1     Recreation Services Implementation Program
IM-1 The City shall continue to release the Wistaria Vine
Community Newsletter 3 (three) times per year.
    Implements
          Which C6.4
      Policy(ies)                                                                                                          
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-2 The City will continue to host annual special events
such as the Huck Finn Fishing Derby, Mount Wilson Trail
Race, Fourth of July Festivities, Concerts in the Park, Family
Movie Fridays and Halloween Happenings.
     Implements
           Which C6.1                                                                                                      
       Policy(ies)
     Responsible
                   Community Services
  Department(s)
      Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-3 The City will meet with local sports organizations
(including, but not limited to, the Sierra Madre Little League,
Sierra Madre Girls Softball Association, Sierra Madre Pony,
Pasadena Unified and AYSO Region 2) on a bi-annual basis
to plan for upcoming seasons.
      Implements
                                                                                                                           
            Which C6.1, C8.6
        Policy(ies)
     Responsible
                    Community Services
   Department(s)
       Supporting
   Department(s)
                                           68

                                                      CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
Table 5-1    Recreation Services Implementation Program
IM-4 The City will continue to ensure that any aquatics
services contracts includes provisions for accommodations to
meet American with Disabilities Act requirements.
    Implements
          Which C6.1, C7.1, C7.2, C8.7,                                                                                 
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-5 The City will continue to work with Waterworks, or
another aquatics services provider, to provide aquatic
services for youth, adults and seniors.
     Implements
           Which C6.1, C8.7
                                                                                                                        
       Policy(ies)
     Responsible
                   Community Services
  Department(s)
      Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-6 The Community Advisory Board for the aquatic center
will continue to evaluate the program and provide an
avenue  for residents to voice concerns and initiate change.
      Implements
          Which
                  C6.3                                                                                                  
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                Community Services
  Department(s)
    Supporting
  Department(s)
                                          69

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                              2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            On-going
Table 5-1     Recreation Services Implementation Program
                                                                                                              Annual
IM-7 The City will utilize the special event committees to
secure sponsorships for events and programs.
     Implements
          Which C6.5
      Policy(ies)                                                                                             
    Responsible Community Services
  Department(s)
    Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-8 The City will reach out to community cycling and
running businesses to partner for cycling and/or running-
based event.
    Implements
          Which C6.6
      Policy(ies)                                             
    Responsible Community Services
  Department(s)
    Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-9 The City will partner with the Community Advisory
Board to develop programming at the aquatic center for
physically challenged individuals since the pool can
accommodate physically challenged patrons.
    Implements
          Which C7.2                                          
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
                                           70

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                              2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
Table 5-1    Recreation Services Implementation Program
IM-10 The City will continue to contract for park
maintenance services.
    Implements
          Which C8.1
      Policy(ies)                                                                                                      
    Responsible
                  Public Works
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s) Community Services
IM-11 The City will reach out to local schools or the YMCA
Teen Leadership Club to create a volunteer program for park
maintenance/clean-up with the Sierra Madre Environmental
Action Council.
    Implements
          Which C8.2                                          
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-12 The City will seek to secure grants to fund
replacement of park landscape with native plants and
drought-resistant landscaping.
    Implements
          Which C8.3
                                                                                                                       
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
                                          71

                                                      CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
Table 5-1    Recreation Services Implementation Program
IM-13 The City will seek new funding sources to install new
signs at parks and facilities as identified in the Parks and
Facilities Master Plan
      Implements
            Which C8.4
                                                                                                                        
        Policy(ies)
     Responsible
                    Community Services
   Department(s)
       Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-14 The City will continue to work with the Sierra Madre
Pony League to improve the field conditions at Dapper Field.
    Implements
          Which C8.5
      Policy(ies)                                                                                                       
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-15 The City will continue partnership with Pasadena
Unified School District and Alverno High School to share use
of facilities.
    Implements
          Which C8.6                                                                                                    
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
                                          72

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
Table 5-1     Recreation Services Implementation Program
IM-16 The City will reach out to St. Rita's, Bethany and La
Salle schools to seek out opportunities for shared use of
facilities through creation of a Memorandum of
Understanding.
      Implements
             Which C8.6                                                    
        Policy(ies)
      Responsible
                    Community Services
   Department(s)
       Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-17 The City will continue to contract for facility
maintenance services.
    Implements
          Which C8.8, C11.2
      Policy(ies)                                                                                                       
    Responsible
                  Public Works
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-18 Utilize the Parks and Facilities Master Plan Scorecard
to research new opportunities for open space use.
    Implements
          Which C8.9
                                                                           
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
                                           73

                                                     CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                             2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
Table 5-1    Recreation Services Implementation Program
IM-19 The City will continue to monitor and assess the
needs of the senior community through the update process
of the Senior Master Plan.
    Implements
          Which C9.1                                         
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-20 The City will continue to work with the San Gabriel
Valley YWCA to provide lunches to the senior population at
the Hart Park House.
    Implements
          Which C9.2
                                                                                                                      
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-21 The City will continue to work with the San Gabriel
Valley YWCA to provide lunches to homebound seniors
through the Meals on Wheels program.
    Implements
          Which C9.3
                                                                                                                      
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
                                         74

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                 2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
Table 5-1     Recreation Services Implementation Program
IM-22 The City will continue to partner with the Senior
Community Commission to provide monthly senior
programs such as special activities, lunch and learn and the
movie series.
    Implements
          Which C9.4                                                                                                      
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-23 The City will continue to have on-site staff clean the
facility at the end of the day in conjunction with maintaining
the facility maintenance contract.
    Implements
          Which C9.5
                                                                                                                          
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services & Public Works
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-24 The City will continue to seek out volunteers to assist
with programs like the daily lunch service and to provide
classes such as chair yoga and strength training.
    Implements
          Which C9.6                                                                                                      
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
                                           75

                                                      CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                              2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
Table 5-1    Recreation Services Implementation Program
IM-25 The City will continue to work with the Senior Master
Plan Committee and Senior Community Commission to
complete the Senior Master Plan Update.
    Implements
          Which C9.7
                                                                                                                       
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-26 The City will agendize discussion topics on Senior
Community Commission for allocating funds for special
monthly programs, excursions, Senior Rocks, Community
Yard Sale and Health Screening events.
    Implements
          Which C9.8                                                                                          
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-27 The City will create a Community Services
subcommittee to explore the possibility of building new
recreational facilities.
    Implements
          Which C10.1                                                                             
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
                                         76

                                                         CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                 2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
Table 5-1     Recreation Services Implementation Program
IM-28 The City will designate staff to reach out to local
private and public organizations for shared use of facilities.
    Implements
          Which C10.2
                                                                                                     
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-29 The City will agendize for Community Services
Commission to provide direction regarding the expansion of
funding grants for park acquisition.
     Implements
          Which C10.3
      Policy(ies)                                                                                    
    Responsible Community Services
  Department(s)
    Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-30 The City will amend the Subdivision Ordinance to
include a requirement for new commercial and residential
subdivisions to provide open space or contribute fees as part
of new development.
    Implements
          Which C10.4                                                                                
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Planning and Community Preservation
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s) Community Services
                                            77

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                             2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
Table 5-1    Recreation Services Implementation Program
IM-31 The City will coordinate with the interest groups,
such as the Sierra Madre Mountain Conservancy, in order to
evaluate their ability to acquire new land for City parks.
    Implements
          Which C10.5                                                                
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-32 The City will complete a Parks and Facility Master
Plan Scorecard.
     Implements
         Which
                 C11.1
     Policy(ies)                                             
    Responsible
                 Community Services
  Department(s)
    Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-33 The City will partner with other municipalities that
have created new bike lanes for recreational and
transportation uses.
    Implements
          Which C12.1
                                                                                                 
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
                                          78

                                                         CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                 2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
  Table 5-1    Library Services Implementation Program
IM-1 The City shall review and evaluate emerging library                                                                  
technologies, identify funding, prioritize technological
projects, and incorporate projects as goals into Library
Strategic Plan to ensure implementation. The library shall
train staff and community residents in the use of
implemented technologies.
      Implements
            Which
        Policy(ies) C13.1, C13.2, C16.1, C16.3
     Responsible
   Department(s) Library
       Supporting
   Department(s) Information Technology
IM-2 The City shall promote library services to the                                                              
community by continuing relationships with local
organizations and clubs, visits to local schools, surveying
community residents for service priorities, and providing
educational and cultural programs for all ages.
    Implements
          Which C14.1, C15.1, C15.2, C15.3, C15.4, C18.1,
      Policy(ies) C19.1, C19.3
    Responsible
  Department(s) Library
    Supporting
  Department(s) Public Relations, Community Services
IM-3 The City shall utilize allocated training funds and local                                                            
scholarship funds to encourage professional and
paraprofessional training.
     Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) C14.2, C17.1, c17.2
     Responsible
  Department(s) Library
    Supporting Friends of the Sierra Madre Public Library,
  Department(s) and Sierra Madre Community Foundation
                                           79

                                                         CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                   2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
  Table 5-1     Library Services Implementation Program
IM-4 The City shall continue to evaluate all library                                                                        
collections so that they are accessible, browseable, and
relevant to community residents through the use of updated
collection policies, circulation policies, and general library
operational procedures.
     Implements
            Which
        Policy(ies) C16.1, C18.2,
     Responsible
   Department(s) Library
      Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-5 The City shall continue the Memorandum of                                                                              
Understanding agreement with the Sierra Madre Historical
Preservation Society (SMHPS), and assign a Library Board of
Trustee Liaison to attend monthly SMHPS meetings to report
on library and local history matters; library staff will present
to SMHPS twice yearly on status of Local History/Archive
collection.
      Implements
            Which
        Policy(ies) C16.2
     Responsible
   Department(s) Library
    Supporting Sierra Madre Historical Preservation
  Department(s) Society (SMHPS)
                                            80

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
  Table 5-1    Library Services Implementation Program
IM-6 The City shall continue to seek supplemental funding                                                                
opportunities to support library services through local
philanthropic groups, grants, and donations.
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) C19.2, C20.1, C21.1, C21.2, C21.3, C21.4
    Responsible
  Department(s) Library
     Supporting
  Department(s) Finance
IM-7 The City shall continue to provide meaningful                                                                       
volunteer opportunities for residents from teens through
adults. Library staff shall engage and train volunteers in
duties relating to processing of library materials, docent
tours, digitization projects, public programs, marketing, and
as library ambassadors to the community.
      Implements
            Which
        Policy(ies) C20.2
      Responsible
   Department(s) Library
       Supporting
   Department(s) Public Relations, Community Services
                                           81

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                              2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            On-going
  Table 5-1    Library Services Implementation Program
                                                                                                              Annual
IM-8 The City shall adhere to the Library Strategic Plan in                                                            
    Implements
          Which
      Policy(ies) C13.4
    Responsible
  Department(s) Library
     Supporting
  Department(s)
                                           82

                                                         CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            On-going
   Table 5-1    Community Cultural and Special Events
                                                                                                               Annual
                 Implementation Program
IM-1 The City will continue to reach out to local arts
organizations about partnership opportunities, such as
Concerts in the Park and Summer Fun in the Park.
    Implements
          Which C23.1
                                                                                                                        
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-2 The City will continue the Concerts in the Park and
Movies in the Park program.
    Implements
          Which C23.2
      Policy(ies)                                                                                                       
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-3 The City will work with the Community Services
Commission and Senior Commission to create art programs
for youth and seniors.
    Implements
          Which C23.3                                                                  
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
                                         83

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                              2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            On-going
   Table 5-1   Community Cultural and Special Events
                                                                                                              Annual
                Implementation Program
IM-4 The City will continue the Coordinating Council
quarterly meetings to keep public informed of City and non-
City functions
    Implements
          Which C23.4
                                                                                                                       
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-5 The City will seek input from the Arts Advisory
Committee as needed when funding or projects are
presented to the City.
    Implements
         Which C23.5
     Policy(ies)                                                                                              
    Responsible
                 Community Services
  Department(s)
    Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-6 The City will publish the Wistaria Vine Community
Newsletter 3 (three) times a year.
    Implements
          Which C24.1
      Policy(ies)                                                                                                      
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
                                         84

                                                      CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            On-going
   Table 5-1   Community Cultural and Special Events
                                                                                                               Annual
                Implementation Program
IM-7 The City will continue the use of a government
educational channel to broadcast cultural programming.
    Implements
                C24.2
         Which                                                                                                          
    Responsible
                Human Resources
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-8 The City shall ensure that video production contractors
provide the level of service provided for in the contract.
    Implements
         Which C24.3
     Policy(ies)                                                                                                        
    Responsible
                 Community Services
  Department(s)
    Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-9 The City will coordinate with the Police and Fire
Departments regarding Special Event Permits to ensure
public safety during special events.
     Implements
           Which C25.1
                                                                                                                        
       Policy(ies)
     Responsible
                   Community Services
  Department(s)
      Supporting
                   Police Department, Fire Department
  Department(s)
                                         85

                                                         CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            On-going
   Table 5-1     Community Cultural and Special Events
                  Implementation Program                                                                        Annual
IM-10 The City will send Work Orders to the Public Works
Department for large special events to ensure adequate
preparation of facilities.
    Implements
          Which C25.2                                                                                                    
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
                  Public Works
  Department(s)
IM-11 The City will continue to utilize the assistance of the
Public Works Department to hang street banners.
    Implements
          Which C25.3
      Policy(ies)                                                                                                        
    Responsible
                  Public Works
  Department(s)
     Supporting
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
IM-12 The City will continue to provide lower cost options
for the use of meeting facilities by local non-profits on the
annual fee schedule.
    Implements
          Which C25.4
                                                                                                                
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Finance Department
  Department(s)
     Supporting
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
                                            86

                                                      CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                            2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035            On-going
   Table 5-1   Community Cultural and Special Events
                Implementation Program                                                                      Annual
IM-13 The City will provide the annual Volunteer Facility
Attendant training.
    Implements
          Which C25.5
      Policy(ies)                                                                                           
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
                                         87

                                                          CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
  Table 5-1    Transit Services Implementation Program
IM-1 The City will partner with local municipalities to
explore additional transit funding sources.
    Implements
          Which C26.1
      Policy(ies)                                                                       
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-2 The City will establish a committee to explore the
feasibility of partnering with the Cities of Arcadia and
Pasadena to develop regional transit service to decrease
costs.
    Implements
          Which C26.2                                                                               
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-3 The City will continue to present complaints and
suggestions for service improvements to the Community
Services Commission.
     Implements
           Which C26.3
                                                                                                                         
       Policy(ies)
     Responsible
                   Community Services
  Department(s)
      Supporting
  Department(s)
                                          88

                                                       CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                               2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
  Table 5-1    Transit Services Implementation Program
IM-4 The City will maintain contractual agreements with the
transit provider to continue to provide the fixed route service
at no cost to users.
     Implements
            Which C26.4
                                                                
        Policy(ies)
     Responsible
                    Community Services
   Department(s)
      Supporting
   Department(s)
IM-5 Continue to offer discounted Metro Senior Passes
provided by the Senior Community Commission donation
account and offer free fixed-transit service to all users.
     Implements
                  C26.5
          Which
      Policy(ies)
                                                                                                                        
                  Community Services
    Responsible
  Department(s)
    Supporting
  Department(s)
                                          89

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
  Table 5-1    Transit Services Implementation Program
IM-6 The City will continue to attend Metro meetings to
maintain services within Sierra Madre and access to the
Goldline Station.
    Implements
          Which C28.1
                                                                                                                         
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-7 The City will create a signage program to provide
adequate directional signage to alert customers and residents
of parking available behind stores on Sierra Madre Blvd.
    Implements
          Which C29.1, C29.2                                                
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Planning and Community Preservation
  Department(s)
     Supporting
                  Public Works Department
  Department(s)
IM-8 The City will consider the availability of City parking
lots to determine whether a Park-and-Ride lot is feasible.
    Implements
          Which C29.3
                                                                            
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Planning and Community Preservation
  Department(s)
     Supporting
                  Public Works Department
  Department(s)
                                           90

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                 2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
  Table 5-1    Transit Services Implementation Program
IM-9 The City will continue to enforce traffic laws, including
monitoring of busy intersections, to maintain safety and
efficient circulation without impacting the village
atmosphere. The City will also consider the feasibility of
utilizing measures to reduce traffic speed.
    Implements                                                                                                            
          Which C30.1, C30.2, C30.3
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Police Department
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-10 The City will evaluate the feasibility of providing
additional disabled parking for the Hart Park House and
downtown business district.
    Implements
          Which C30.4                                                        
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Public Works Department
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
IM-11 The City will provide biannual traffic control safety
training for citizens at Town Hall meetings.
    Implements
          Which C30.5
                                                                                                                          
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Police Department
  Department(s)
     Supporting
  Department(s)
                                           91

                                                    CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
  Table 5-1   Transit Services Implementation Program     2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
IM-12 The City will develop a new program that teaches
bicycle safety.
    Implements
          Which C30.6
                                                                                  
      Policy(ies)
    Responsible
                  Community Services
  Department(s)
     Supporting
                  Police
  Department(s)
                                        92

                                                        CHAPTER 5: IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM
                                                                2015-2020   2020-2025   2025-2030   2030-2035   Annual   On-going
   Table 5-1    Public Services Implementation Program
IM-1 The City shall review and amend as necessary Titles 15 
(Buildings and Construction), 16 (Subdivisions), and 17
(Zoning) of the Municipal Code to require that all proposed
development be provided with adequate water, sewer,
drainage, electrical, and telecommunications systems to meet
the demands of the project.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) C31.1, C31.2, C31.3, C31.4,C31.5, C31.6
     Responsible
  Department(s) Public Works, Planning and Community Preservation
      Supporting
  Department(s) City Attorney
IM-2 Improve the City's information communication                
systems utilizing all available and cost effective technologies.
     Implements
           Which
       Policy(ies) C32.1, C32.2
     Responsible
  Department(s) Community Services
      Supporting
  Department(s)
                                           93

                               APPENDIX
1. Glossary
2. Statutory Requirements
3. Survey
4. Survey Results
5. Children’s Essays
6. Technical Background Report

                                      GLOSSARY
Note: The definitions used in this General Plan are for purposes of understanding the
Goals and Policies set forth herein.
LIST OF TERMS
Acres, Gross – The total area of a site including portions that cannot be developed (e.g.,
right-of-way, open space).
Acres, Net Developable – The total area of a site excluding portions that cannot be
developed (e.g., right-of-way, open space). Sometimes referred to as the “buildable” area
of the project.
Adaptive Reuse – A method by which a building is adapted to a different use from its
original use, while its general physical form is retained.
Build-out – Development of land to its full potential or theoretical capacity as permitted
under current or proposed planning designations or zoning.
California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) – A State law requiring State and local
agencies to regulate activities with consideration for environmental protection. If a
proposed activity has the potential for a significant adverse environmental impact, an
environmental impact report (EIR) must be prepared and certified as to its adequacy
before taking action on the proposed project.
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) – A grant program administered by the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) for entitlement
communities and by the State Department of Housing and Community Development
(HCD) for non-entitled jurisdictions. This grant allots money to cities and counties for
housing rehabilitation and community development, including public facilities and
economic development.
Compatible Use – Uses capable of existing together or adjacent to each other without
conflict or ill effects.
Consistency, Consistent With – Free from significant variation or contradiction. The
various diagrams, text, goals, policies, and programs in the General Plan must be

consistent with each other, not contradictory or preferential. The term “consistent with”
is used interchangeable with “in conformity with.”
Dark Sky – Starlit sky without interference of illumination from man-made sources.
Demographics – Characteristics of a population, such as age, sex, income, race/ethnicity,
occupation, housing, and other characteristics.
Density, Residential – Densities specified in the General Plan may be expressed in units
per gross acre or per net developable acre.
Development – A man-made change to property, such as buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations.
Development Density - A planning or zoning metric expressed as dwelling units per
acre, or as floor area ratio, to gauge the relative density of the built environment, either
existing or proposed.
Discharge – The amount of water that passes a specific point on a watercourse over a
given period of time. Rates of discharge are usually measured in cubic feet per second
(cfs).
Dwelling Unit (DU) – A room or group of rooms (including sleeping, eating, cooking,
and sanitation facilities), which constitutes an independent housekeeping unit, occupied
or intended for occupancy by one household on a long term basis.
Earthquake – Perceptible trembling to violent shaking of the ground, produced by
sudden displacement of rock below and at the earth’s surface.
Erosion – Movement of material (e.g., soil) from one place to another on the earth’s
surface. Agents of movement include water, ice, wind, and gravity.
Fault – A fracture in the earth’s crust accompanied by a displacement of one side with
respect to the other and in a direction parallel to the fracture.
               •Active Fault: An active fault is a fault that is likely to become the source of
another earthquake sometime in the future. Geologists commonly consider faults to be
active if there has been movement observed or evidence of seismic activity during the
last 10,000 years.

              •Active Fault Zone: An area in which there are several closely spaced active
faults. Earthquake Fault Zones are regulatory zones encompassing faults meeting the
zoning criteria of sufficiently active and well-defined. Zone boundaries generally are
located 500 feet away from active faults in order to accommodate imprecise locations of
faults and the possible existence of active branches.
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) – An independent Federal agency
established to respond to major emergencies. FEMA seeks to reduce the loss of life and
protect property against all types of hazards through a comprehensive, risk-based
emergency management program. In March 2003, FEMA became part of the newly
created U.S. Department of Homeland Security.
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) – Map issued by FEMA that shows special flood
hazard areas, including the 100-year floodplain. It also shows flood insurance rate map
zones and other flood related information applicable to a community.
Flood/Flooding – A general and temporary condition of partial or completed inundation
of normally dry land areas.
Flood Control – Various activities and regulations that help reduce or prevent damages
caused by flooding, such as drainage channels, and flood warning and emergency
preparedness activities.
Floodplain – Any land area susceptible to being inundated by flood waters from any
source.
Floor Area Ratio (FAR) – The ratio of the total floor area of a building to the area of the
lot where the building is located. FAR provides a measure of proportion between lot size
and building size, whereas density limits regulates number of units.
Foothill Slope – A hilly region at the base of a mountain range where the land area varies
in the degree of the upward slant.
General Plan – A compendium of city or county policies regarding their long-term
development, in the form of goals, policies, implementation measures, and maps. The
General Plan is a legal document required of each local agency by the California
Government Code Section 65301 and adopted by the elected officials of the local agency.

Grading – Disturbance of existing land contours, usually to create a flat surface for
development.
Ground Shaking – Caused by seismic activity, ground shaking intensity varies with the
magnitude of the earthquake, the distance from the epicenter, and the type of rock or
sediment through which the seismic waves move. In general, loose or soft saturated
sediments amplify ground shaking more than dense or stiff soils or bedrock materials.
Groundwater – Water within the earth that supplies wells and springs: water in the zone
of saturation where all openings in rocks and soil are filled, the upper surface of which
forms the water table.
Hazardous Material – A material that, because of its quantity, concentrations, or
physical, chemical characteristics poses a significant present or potential hazard to
human health and safety or to the environment if released into the workplace or the
environment. Hazardous materials include, but are not limited to, hazardous substances,
hazardous waste, and any material which a handler or the administering agency has a
reasonable basis for believing that it would be injurious to the health and safety of
persons or harmful to the environment if released into the workplace or the environment.
(California Health and Safety Code 25501).
Hazardous waste – A waste or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity,
concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may either (a) cause, or
significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious, irreversible,
or incapacitating irreversible, illness or (b) pose a substantial present or potential hazard
to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or
disposed of, or otherwise managed. (California Health and Safety Code 25501).
Hillside Corridor – A strip of land on a hill between the top and foot of the hill.
Hillside Management Zone – Single-family residential zone that includes properties
characterized by hillside topography and subject to the requirements of the Hillside
Management Zone Ordinance. For more information, please refer to Title 17 of the City’s
Municipal Code.
Historic Preservation – The field of identifying, protecting, and helping to preserve,
historic and cultural resources, including the maintenance, restoration, and rehabilitation
of historically or culturally significant resources.

Infill – Development and redevelopment of underused buildings and vacant lots in areas
served by existing infrastructure. Development that channels economic growth into
existing areas and conserves open space.
Infrastructure – Public services and facilities, such as sewage-disposal systems, water
supply systems, other utility systems, and roads.
Landform – The natural topographical feature of a land surface.
Land Use – The occupation or use of land or water area for any human activity or any
purpose defined in the General Plan.
Liquifaction – A process whereby soil is temporarily transformed to a fluid form during
intense and prolonged ground shaking or because of a sudden shock or strain.
Lot Coverage – The combined footprint of all habitable and non-habitable buildings on
the lot and calculated as a percentage of the lot area. Lot coverage calculation includes
only floor area of the first (ground) story of buildings (i.e. the “footprint” on the lot).
Measure V – The Voters Empowerment Ordinance, adopted in 2007, pursuant to the
Sierra Madre Municipal Code Chapter 17.35.
Mixed Use – Property on which various uses, such as office, commercial, institutional,
and residential, are combined in a single building or on a single site in an integrated
development project with significant functional interrelationships and coherent physical
design.
Municipal Code – The codification of ordinances pertaining to the administration,
regulation, development, and health and safety in the City of Sierra Madre.
Mutual Aid Agreement – An agreement between agencies and/or jurisdictions to assist
each other in times of emergency or when the other agency’s resources can more
efficiently respond to calls for service than the agency that is the normal service provider.
National Register of Historic Places – The nation’s official list of districts, sites,
buildings, structures, and objects significant in national, regional, or local American
history, architecture, archeology, and culture as maintained by the Keeper of the Register,
within the U.S. Department of the Interior.

Noise – Any sound that is undesirable because it interferes with speech and hearing, or
is intense enough to damage hearing, or is otherwise annoying.              Noise, simply, is
"unwanted sound."
Noise-Sensitive Land Uses – Land uses considered more sensitive to noise than others
due to the amount of noise exposure and types of activities typically involved at the land
use location such as residences, schools, motels and hotels, libraries, religious institutions,
hospitals, nursing homes, and certain types of parks and more sensitive to noise and are
considered noise-sensitive land uses.
Open Space – Consists of two general categories:
               • Constructed – Open space that is improved with playing fields, picnic
grounds, appurtenances and accessory buildings, for organized sports or other
recreational uses.
               • Natural – Open space that is left as natural environment with no
improvements, or only minimal improvements for purposes of access, such as trails or
signage. It is conserved for its wild land characteristics.
Ordinance – A law or regulation adopted by a governmental authority, usually a city or
county.
Overlay – A land use designation on the land use diagram or a zoning designation on a
zoning map that modifies the basic underlying designation in some specific manner.
Permit Streamlining - The administrative process of simplifying and/or cutting time
from, and making more efficient, bureaucratic review and approval processes for various
types of permits and discretionary approvals. This can include planning, building and
safety, public works or other City approvals.
Permeable Pavement - Pavement material types that are serviceable hard surfaces, and
also allow rainwater to percolate into the ground rather than to “run off.” The general
category includes permeable concrete, and a variety of specially designed precast pavers.
Their systems usually include specifications for the substrate type. The purpose is to
allow rainwater to percolate locally into the ground, rather than to allow it to run off
paved areas into storm drains where it is often wasted, draining to the ocean.

Private Trees – Trees located on private lands not in public right-or-way or on other
public lands such as parks.
Public Trees – Trees located in the public right-of-way or on other public lands such as
parks.
Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA) – A quantification by a council of
governments or by the State Department of Housing and Community Development of
existing and projected housing need, by household income group, for all localities within
a region. In the Los Angeles region, the Southern California Association of Governments
(SCAG) approves the RHNA.
Residential Canyon Zone – Single-family residential zone that includes properties
located in the Canyon area of the City as identified in the City’s Zoning Map, and subject
to the requirements of the Residential Canyon Zone Ordinance. For more information,
please refer to Title 17 of the City’s Municipal Code.
Seismic – Pertaining to earthquake or earth vibration, including those that are artificially
induced.
Soil Erosion – The processes by which soil is removed from one place by forces such as
wind, water, waves, glaciers, and construction activity and eventually deposited at some
new place.
Split Pads - The stepping of portions of a building pad up or down a slope, generally
following the natural contour of the earth. This is as opposed to major cut-and-fill
operations with the use of retaining walls that distort the natural contour, in order to
construct a pad all on one level where the contour of the earth has a natural slope.
Storm Drainage System – A system for collecting runoff of stormwater from land and
channels, detention basins, and pump stations.
Stormwater – Precipitation from rain or snow that accumulates in a natural or man-made
watercourse or conveyance system.
Subsurface Fault Investigation – A below the surface fault investigation to ensure that
structures for human occupancy will not be located across active faults. To accomplish
this, the investigation should accurately locate active fault traces and recommend
appropriately wide setbacks.

Sustainable – Community use of natural resources in a way that does not jeopardize the
ability of future generations to live and prosper.
Sustainability – The ability to harvest or use natural resources without depleting or
permanently destroying the resources.
Vision and Guiding Principles – Describes Sierra Madre’s key values and vision, and
sets out guiding principles for the General Plan; developed based on City Council
directives, extensive public input, stakeholder interviews, and Town Hall Forums during
the General Plan development process.
Wildlife Corridors – A strip of habitat connecting wildlife populations separated by
human activities (e.g., roads, development); allows an exchange of individual wildlife
populations; and facilitates reestablishment of wildlife populations in isolated areas.
Zoning – Local codes regulating the use and development of property. A zoning
ordinance divides the city or county into land use districts or “zones,” represented on
zoning maps, and specifies the allowable uses within each of those zones. It establishes
development standards for each zone, such as minimum lot size, maximum height of
structures, building setbacks, and yard size. The City includes the following zones: R-1
(One Family Residential), R-2 (Two-Family Residential), R-3 (Multiple Family
Residential), R-C (Residential Canyon), R-P (Residential Professional), C (Commercial), I
(Institutional), M (Manufacturing), and H (Hillside Management Zone).
Zoning Ordinance – Zoning and planning regulations of the City and any amendments,
modifications, or revisions heretofore or hereafter made in such regulations.

                                  STATUTORY REQUIREMENTS
In 2003, the State adopted requirements for General Plans. As these requirements change with
the times, the link for the current requirement is:
• Office of Planning and Research, State of California, General Plan Guidelines 2003
http://opr.ca.gov/docs/General_Plan_Guidelines_2003.pdf
The State adopted a Streets and Circulation Elements as part of the General Plans in 2010. That
link is:
• Office of Planning and Research, State of California, Update to the General Plan Guidelines:
Complete Streets and the Circulation Elements, December 2010.
http://opr.ca.gov/docs/Update_GP_Guidelines_Complete_Streets.pdf

General Plan Update                                                                               City of Sierra Madre
                                                                                            232 W Sierra Madre Blvd.
What’s Your Vision for                                                                        Sierra Madre, CA 91024
                                                                                  (626) 355-7135 Fax (626) 355-2251
Sierra Madre?                                                                              www.cityofsierramadre.com
The City of Sierra Madre is updating its General Plan, which provides goals, policies, and guidelines for the physical
development of the City for the next ten to twenty years. The following three part survey will help the General Plan
Steering Committee gain a broad perspective of views and values in the community. Your opinion and input are greatly
appreciated. Please complete one survey per person.
                                  Part A: VISION FOR SIERRA MADRE
 1. What are the reasons you chose to live, work, or locate a business in Sierra Madre?
    Comments:
 2. What do you like best about Sierra Madre today?
    Comments:
 3. What are the three (3) most important issues currently facing Sierra Madre?
    Comments:
 4. What do you hope Sierra Madre will be like in twenty years?
    Comments:
 5. What issues do you believe Sierra Madre will face in the next twenty years?
    Comments:

                                        Part B: COMMUNITY ISSUES                                                                                          Part C: GENERAL INFORMATION
                                                                                                                   The City want to get responses from a broad sample of respondents. Please provide some information about yourself.
                    Please rank the following community issues by checking the appropriate box.
                                                                                                                   Check and complete all that apply.
                                                                             Very              Somewhat    Not      1. Do you?
                          DEVELOPMENT                                      Important
                                                                                     Important
                                                                                               Important Important      Live in the City                                            Work in the City
Retain the community’s character of a small village atmosphere
                                                                                                                    2. If you live in the City, do you?
Provide housing for all income levels
                                                                                                                        Own your own home                                           Rent your home
Require residential development to minimize adverse impacts on the
neighborhood                                                                                                            Live with family/friends                                    Other
Encourage a variety of quality commercial/retail and light manufacturing                                            3. If you live in the City, where do you live?
development                                                                                                             Canyon                                                      Other residential area
Ensure that new development provides adequate parking facilities
                                                                                                                        Hillside                                                    Outside the City and where
Require “greener” construction practices even if it means higher fees and
construction costs                                                                                                      Downtown
Develop better-defined rules for home additions and remodels                                                        4. Are you a nonresident who own rental property or a business in the City?
Encourage mixed uses (houses and retail) in the downtown area                                                           Rental property                                             Business
Ensure new residential developments maintain current levels of housing                                              5. How many years have you?
density and open spaces between homes                                                                                   Lived in the City                                           Owned a business in the City
                                                                             Very              Somewhat    Not          Worked in the City
                           CITY SERVICES                                   Important
                                                                                     Important
                                                                                               Important Important
Provide adequate water, waste water/sewer, storm drainage, electrical,                                              6. Your age is?
and telecommunications systems (includes wireless and better cell                                                       Under 18                                                    25-64
service) to meet the demands of existing and new development                                                            18-24                                                       64 or older
Promote fire safety
                                                                                                                    7. What is your total annual (before taxes) hosehold income?
Manage traffic in all areas of Sierra Madre so that no stop lights are
                                                                                                                        Under $33,300                                               $100,001-$200,000
required
Increase the amount of parks/open spaces and facilities                                                                 $33,301-$60,000                                             More than $200,000
Maintain a high level of quality recreation, leisure and social programs                                                $60,001-$100,000
and facilities                                                                                                      8. How do you prefer to get your information regarding the General Plan Update:
Provide Gateway Coach transportation routes throughout the City                                                         Email                                                       Eblast
Provide bike lanes throughout the City
                                                                                                                        City Website                                                U.S. Mail
Support, maintain and enhance art and cultural events
                                                                                                                        Cable TV (SMTV3)                                            Billing insert
Enhance the Library’s informational, recreational and cultural offerings
Ensure that Sierra Madre is a safe place to live, work and visit                                                        Wistaria Vine                                               Text message
                                                                             Very              Somewhat    Not          Phone message                                               Other (please explain)
                          CONSERVATION                                     Important
                                                                                     Important
                                                                                               Important Important  9. Please provide any additional comments regarding important issues facing the City of Sierra Madre
Preserve and protect historical structures, facilities and other locations                                              Comments:
Preserve the identity, image and environment of the hillsides and canyon
Minimize water erosion and construct adequate flood control facilities
Preserve water resources, the night sky and other natural resources
Preserve and protect scenic views throughout the City
Preserve wildlife habitat
Preserve and protect existing trees and promote increasing the stock of
                                                                                                                   You may review the full text of the existing General Plan at the City’s Development Services Department located at 232
trees in the City
                                                                                                                   W. Sierra Madre Blvd., Sierra Madre, CA 91024 or online at www.cityofsierramadre.com. If you have any questions
Please rank the following in order of importance from 1-3, with #1 being the most important to you:                regarding the Sierra Madre General Plan Update project you may contact De Alcorn, Secretary of Service and Volunteering,
Development                              City Services                        Conservation                         at (626) 355-4793.
                                                                                                                    Thank you for completing the survey. Your input will help guide the General Plan Update visioning process!






















































                                                                        GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT
                                                                      City of Sierra Madre
                                                                                                        July 2012
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
Source: Kim Herkewit
                                                                        GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT
                                                                      City of Sierra Madre
                                                                                                        July 2012
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
GENERAL PLAN STEERING COMMITTEE                   COMMUNITY VOLUNTEERS
Denise Delmar, Chair                              The City of Sierra Madre would also like to extend a special thanks to the many
Kenneth Anhalt, Vice Chair                        volunteers who generously donated their time in various capacities during preparation of
                                                  the Technical Background Report. These volunteers are listed below:
Colin Braudrick
Wendy Davis                                       De Alcorn, Secretary of Service and          Seth Hanson
                                                  Volunteering
Leslee Hinton                                                                                  Leslee Hinton
                                                  Pat Alcorn, Committee Chairperson
John Hutt                                                                                      Gary Hood
                                                  Sharon Allen
Ed Miller                                                                                      Linda Hubbard
                                                  Kenneth Anhalt
Debora Sheridan                                                                                Gina Long
                                                  Anita Delmer, Committee Chairperson
Teryl Willis                                                                                   Duncan MacGillivray
                                                  Denise Delmar
MaryAnn MacGillivray, City Council Liaison                                                     MaryAnn MacGillivray
                                                  Margery Bourgeois
Gina Frierman-Hunt, Planning Commission Liaison                                                Jacquie Mayo
                                                  Colin Braudrick
Kevin Paschall, Planning Commission Liaison                                                    Ed Miller
                                                  Owen Braudrick
Danny Castro, Staff Liaison                                                                    Josh Moran
                                                  Caroline Brown
Scott Porter, City Attorney                                                                    Ian Nunley
                                                  Carol Canterbury
                                                                                               Jerry Pearson
                                                  John Capoccia
                                                                                               Deb Sheridan, Volunteer Coordinator
CITY DEPARTMENTS                                  Marta Capoccia
                                                                                               Glen Springer
Community Services                                Joe Catalano
                                                                                               Virginia Stafford
Public Works                                      Barbara Leigh Cline
                                                                                               Jeremiah Stegal
Fire Department                                   Bill Coburn
                                                                                               Oscar Stegal
Police Department                                 Jim Engle
                                                                                               Melissa Thew
Library                                           Joe Feeney
                                                                                               Don Watts
                                                  Erin Golightly
                                                                                               Teryl Willis
                                                  Stefanie Golightly
                                                                                               Marian Woodford
                                                  John Herrmann
4                                               GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION                                         1-1          National Register of Historic Places                   5-4
   Sierra Madre                                           1-3        California Points of Historical Interest               5-5
   This Document                                          1-4        Other Places of Historic Significance in Sierra Madre  5-6
                                                                     Cultural Resources                                    5-10
2. LAND USE AND THE BUILT ENVIRONMENT                   2-1
   Existing Land Use                                      2-3    6. SAFETY                                                 6-1
   Community Design                                      2-10        Fire Services                                          6-2
                                                                     Police Services                                        6-3
3. CIRCULATION                                          3-1
                                                                     Hazards                                                6-5
   Regional Circulation                                   3-3
                                                                     Natural Disaster Prevention and Preparedness          6-16
   Roadway System                                         3-4
                                                                     Noise                                                 6-18
   Intersection Operations                                3-9
   Bicycle Facilities                                    3-15    7. THE NATURAL ENVIRONMENT                                7-1
   Transit Network                                       3-17        Natural Resources                                      7-2
   Commuter Modal Split                                  3-19        Air Quality                                           7-19
                                                                     Greenhouse Gas Emissions                              7-21
4. COMMUNITY SERVICES AND FACILITIES                    4-1
                                                                     Solid Waste and Recycling                             7-23
   Parks and Recreation                                   4-3
                                                                     Energy                                                7-24
   Educational                                            4-6
   Library                                                4-7    8. BIBLIOGRAPHY                                           8-1
   Cultural                                               4-9    9. APPENDICES                                             9-1
5. HISTORIC AND CULTURAL RESOURCES                      5-1          A - AM and PM Level of Service Worksheets              9-3
   Overall Historic Quality of Built Environment          5-3        B - Sierra Madre Historical Landmarks                 9-25
   Individual Historic Resources                          5-3        C - Service Provider Correspondence                   9-31
                                                                     D - Long Term and Short Term Noise Monitoring Results 9-75
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
LIST OF FIGURES
FIGURE                                                         PAGE      FIGURE                                                      PAGE
2-1: Existing Land Use                                           2-2     6-1: FEMA Flood Zones                                         6-7
2-2: Community Design                                           2-10     6-2: Dam Inundation Area                                      6-8
3-1: Regional Circulation System                                 3-2     6-3: Seismic Hazards                                         6-10
3-2: Roadway Network and Average Daily Traffic Volumes           3-7     6-4: Regional Faults                                         6-12
3-3: Existing Intersection Lane Configurations and Peak Hour    3-10     6-5: Fire Hazard Severity Zones                              6-14
    Traffic Volumes
                                                                         6-6: Noise Monitoring Locations                              6-24
3-4: Pedestrian Network                                         3-14
                                                                         7-1: Sensitive Species Occurrences In and Near Sierra Madre   7-6
3-5: Transit Network                                            3-17
                                                                         7-2: Local Geology                                           7-12
4-1: Community Services and Facilities                           4-2
5-1: Historic Resources                                          5-2
6                                                            GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE                                                 PAGE       TABLE                                                           PAGE
2-1: Changing in Housing by Type                         2-5     6-2: Crimes and Arrests in Sierra Madre                           6-4
2-2: Sierra Madre Housing                                2-6     6-3: Crimes by Type in Sierra Madre                               6-4
2-3: Comparison of Income Spent on Housing               2-7     6-4: Southern California Region Earthquakes with a Magnitude     6-11
                                                                     5.0 or Greater
2-4: Residential Demolition and Construction Activity    2-9
                                                                 6-5: Large Historic Fires in California 1923-2003                6-13
2-5: Sierra Madre Corridors                             2-11
                                                                 6-6: Change in Sound Pressure Level                              6-19
3-1: Sierra Madre Roadway Functional Classifications     3-5
                                                                 6-7: Typical Noise Levels from Outdoor and Indoor Sources        6-20
3-2: Sierra Madre Roadways                               3-5
                                                                 6-8: Land Use Compatability for Community Noise Exposure         6-21
3-3: ADT Volumes                                         3-5
                                                                 6-9: City of Sierra Madre Stationary (Non-Transportation) Noise  6-22
3-4: Intersection Data Collection                        3-9
                                                                     Standards
3-5: Intersection LOS Criteria                          3-12
                                                                 6-10: Summary of Measured Ambient Noise Levels                   6-23
3-6: Intersection LOS                                   3-13
                                                                 6-11: Summary of Noise Measurement Locations and Results         6-25
3-7: Existing Pedestrian Facilities                     3-15
                                                                 7-1: Special Status Plant Species Known From the Project Region   7-7
3-8: Modal Transportation Split                         3-19
                                                                 7-2: Special Status Animal Species From Project Region            7-8
4-1: Sierra Madre Parks                                  4-3
                                                                 7-3: Local Air Quality                                           7-20
4-2: Sierra Madre Educational Facilities                 4-6
                                                                 7-4: Year 2010 Electricity Demand for Sierra Madre               7-25
6-1: Emergency Response Calls by Type in Sierra Madre    6-2
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
      8               GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
Source: Kim Herkewitz
                              Chapter 1
                          Introduction
                                            In this chapter      The City of Sierra Madre has assembled the General Plan Steering Committee
                                                                 (Committee)—a team of citizens appointed by the City Council working
                                      SIERRA MADRE               with volunteers, civic leaders, and local residents—to assist in updating the
                                                                 existing General Plan, which was adopted in 1996. The existing General
                                   THIS DOCUMENT                 Plan has served the City well over the past 15 years as a long-range policy
                                                                 document that defines the framework by which the City’s physical, cultural,
                                                                 social and economic resources are to be managed over time.
                                                                 The updated General Plan will still function in much the same manner,
                                                                 with a focus on maintaining the City’s small-town feel and preserving the
                                                                 character of existing neighborhoods, while at the same time improving those
                                                                 neighborhoods and Sierra Madre’s commercial district and enhancing aging
                                                                 structures to meet current building standards and contemporary market
                                                                 needs.
                                                                 To aid the Committee, consultants to the City have prepared this Technical
                                                                 Background Report. As the task of updating each of the General Plan
                                                                 elements is already underway, this report will provide useful information to
                                                                 further refine, update and augment the draft elements as needed.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                1-1

A “birdseye view” of Sierra Madre from the late 19th Century
Source: University of California, Berkeley
1-2                                                          GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

SIERRA MADRE
Incorporated in 1907, the City of Sierra Madre is one of 29 cities in the
San Gabriel Valley region of Los Angeles County. The City encompasses
approximately 3.2 square miles with a population of 10,917 people. It is
located approximately 17 miles northeast of downtown Los Angeles at the
base of the San Gabriel Mountains, as shown in Figure 1-1, Regional Location.
The City is bounded by the cities of Arcadia to the east and south, Pasadena
to the west, and the Angeles National Forest to the north.
Sierra Madre is one of the few cities in the region that has been able to retain its
village quality despite pressures for growth, modernization and diversification
in the surrounding communities. The nearest major transportation corridor
to the City is Interstate 210 (I-210), which runs east and west a mile south
of the City limits. This distance, the lack of “through” arterials, and the fact
that the City has been described in the 1996 General Plan and the City’s most
recent Housing Element as “built out” since the 1940s, has protected Sierra
Madre from the pressure of large-scale, commercial, residential and industrial
development and helped to retain its small-town character.
                                                                                     View of Sierra Madre from the Mt. Wilson Trail
                                                                                     Source: Caroline Brown
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                         1-3

THIS DOCUMENT
This Technical Background Report is one phase of a project to update the
existing General Plan. This report describes where Sierra Madre stands today;
provides a snapshot of existing conditions in the City, including the built
and natural environment; identifies opportunities and constraints facing the
City; and provides much of the technical information and graphics necessary
to prepare the Environmental Impact Report (EIR) for the General Plan
Update.
This report is organized around topics that generally coincide with the topics
included in the General Plan and EIR. The chapters are related to land use,
mobility, community services and facilities, historic and cultural resources,
safety, and natural environment. A separate memo called “Key General Plan
Considerations” highlights some considerations for the General Plan Update
based on this technical background report.
                                                                               Local Business in Downtown Sierra Madre
                                                                               Source: Leslee Hinton
1-4                                                               GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

This page intentionally left blank.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA 1-5
      1-6           GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
Source: Seth Hanson
                                Chapter 2
                        Land Use and
   the Built Environment
                                            In this chapter      The built environment provides the setting for human activity, making up
                                                                 the places where residents live, work, play, and learn. The built environment
                               EXISTING LAND USE                 includes not just public and private buildings but also roads, parks and
                                                                 open space, and all other infrastructure that forms the physical character
                              COMMUNITY DESIGN                   of a community. Together, they create a place that fosters a shared sense of
                                                                 community, the small-town feel that residents value so highly.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                2-1
Figure 2-1 Existing Land Use
                                                             SIERRA MEADOW DR
                                                                                     CARTER AVE                                                                                RD                                   ST
                                                                                                                                                                        I LL
                                                                                                                                                                   H U RCH                                        O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 I LL
                                                                                                            MIRA MONTE AVE                                          C                                     CA M
 MICHILLINDA AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ELKINS AVE
                      FAIRVIEW AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SANTA ANITA AVE
                                                                                                                                              MOUNTAIN TRAIL AVE
                                                                                                                            GRANDVIEW AVE
                                   SUNNYSIDE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                      AVE
                                                   LIMA ST                                    AUBURN AVE   BALDW IN AVE                                                               CANON
                                                                                                                           HIGHLAND AVE
                   MONTECITO AVE
                                                                                                                          SIERRA MADRE BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Existing Land Use
                                                                                                                                                                                    SANTA ANITA CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Single Family Res.                    Institutional
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Multi-Family Res.                     Public Fac./Civic
                                                                                                                          LOWELL AVE
                   RAMONA AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mixed Use Res./Comm.                  Public School
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Commercial                            Public Park
                                                                                HERMOSA AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                     RANCHO RD                 Light Industrial                      Open Space
                   ORANGE GROVE AVE
Source: Los Angeles County Assessor 2010
2-2                                                                                                                              GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
EXISTING LAND USE
Sierra Madre’s land use pattern is well established and not likely to change
over time. The developable areas of the City are built out, with just a handful
of scattered vacant parcels remaining. Future growth could consist of strictly
controlled and limited residential development in the mostly undeveloped
hillside areas along the City’s northern boundary, and possibly some infill
development opportunities that may occur in certain areas of the City,
including the commercial district.
Figure 2-1, Existing Land Use, identifies existing land uses in the City.                Residential                           Open Space
Residential uses occupy nearly 52 percent of the total land area in the City
boundaries, as illustrated in the existing land use distribution chart below.
Other land uses include commercial, light industrial, mixed use, institutional,
civic uses, public schools, and parks. Open space is the most prominent
nonresidential land use and occupies 28 percent of the City’s land. These uses
are described in more detail in the following subsections.
               1.8%
                    1.7%
          4.9%                                                                           Commercial                            Institutional
                                                   Single Family Residential (46.5%) and
 11.7%                                             Multi-Family Residential (5.3%)
                                                   Open Space (25.3%) and Parks (2.9%)
                                                   Street ROW
                                                   Institutional
                                    51.8%
                                                   Civic (0.9%) and Schools (0.8%)
                                                   Commercial (1.1%), Light Industrial
28.1%                                              (0.4%), and Mixed Use (0.1%)
                                           Source: The Planning Center|DC&E, 2012
                                                                                         Civic                                 Light Industrial
                                                                                         Source: Seth Hanson and Leslee Hinton
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                     2-3

HOUSING
Housing characteristics such as unit types, tenancy, vacancy rates, affordability,
and construction affect quality of life and housing choices for current Sierra
Madre neighborhoods and residents. They also influence housing selection
for future residents.
Housing Type
Sierra Madre is primarily a residential community made up predominantly
of single-family housing types. According to the California Department of
Finance (DOF), housing types in Sierra Madre have remained consistent over
the years, as shown in Table 2-1 below. In 2000 and 2010, the majority of the
City’s housing units were single-family detached homes (70 percent and 69
percent, respectively), followed by multifamily buildings of five or more units
(18 and 19 percent, respectively), multifamily buildings of two to four units
(8 percent), and single-family attached units (4 percent).
Recent residential development has not been exclusively single-family. In
fact, it has been 50/50. Countywide in 2010, there was a substantially higher
percentage of housing units in multifamily buildings of five or more units
(35 percent) and a substantially lower percentage of single-family homes (48
percent) than in Sierra Madre. Thus, Sierra Madre is much more oriented
toward single-family residences than the County as a whole, though it is by
no means an exclusively single-family community. Nearby cities in the San
Gabriel Valley showed higher percentages of multifamily buildings of five or
more units in 2010, including Pasadena at 40 percent, Arcadia at 26 percent,
Monrovia at 24 percent, and El Monte at 22 percent; while other cities in
the valley are much more oriented toward single-family than Sierra Madre,
including Duarte at 99 percent, Bradbury and San Marino at 100 percent,            Housing in Sierra Madre
and Temple City at 88 percent.                                                     Source: Caroline Brown, Kim Herkewitz, and Leslee Hinton
2-4                                                                  GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

As shown in the Table 2-1, Sierra Madre grew modestly in the first decade                                                                          Tenure and Vacancy Rates
of the 21st Century. The City added 22 new single-family homes between
2000 and 2010, an increase of 0.61 percent. In the same time period, 56 new                                                                        Tenure refers to the type of agreement in housing occupation–ownership or
multifamily dwelling units were added, resulting in an increase of 4.3 percent.                                                                    lease. Both for-sale and for-rent housing opportunities are vital to providing
In comparison, Los Angeles County as a whole experienced a 3.2 percent                                                                             a range of housing opportunities that can accommodate varying incomes,
increase in single-family homes and a 7.4 percent increase in multifamily                                                                          interest in maintenance, amenities, and household sizes. It is important to
units. It should be noted that the City’s senior housing project completed                                                                         note that single-family homes can be rented, while multifamily residences
in 2007 represented the bulk of the multifamily growth. Not counting this                                                                          (such as condos) can be owner-occupied.
project, multifamily growth was only 0.77 percent.                                                                                                 The housing vacancy rate helps to show whether and how the supply of
                                                                                                                                                   available housing meets the demand for different types of housing. Housing
                                                                                                                                                   policy analyses usually consider vacancy rates of 5 to 6 percent for rental units
Table 2-1 Change in Housing by Type, 2000-2010*                                                                                                    and 1.5 to 2 percent for ownership housing as reasonable.
                                                           2000                                         2010                                       Data from DOF for 2010 concerning Sierra Madre housing tenure and
                                              Number               Portion of             Number                 Portion of               Increase vacancy rates is presented in Table 2-2 at right.
          Housing Type                                                Total                                         Total             2000 to 2010
                                                                                                                                          11 units
                                                                                                                                                   As shown in Table 2-2, approximately 62 percent of the total units in Sierra
  Single-Family Detached                       3,427                  70%                   3,438                   69%              <1% growth    Madre were occupied by owners and 38 percent were occupied by renters in
                                                                                                                                          11 units 2010. By comparison, approximately 45 percent of total units in Los Angeles
  Single-Family Attached                        205                    4%                    216                     4%               5.4% growth  County were occupied by owners and 49 percent by renters. A substantially
  Multifamily                                   377                    8%                    381                     8%                    4 units lower percentage of lower-income residents live in Sierra Madre. Most
  (2 to 4 units)                                                                                                                      1.1% growth  residents face fewer financial barriers to homeownership compared to County
  Multifamily                                   914                   18%                    966                    19%                   52 units residents, which accounts for the larger percentage of homeowners in Sierra
  (5 plus units)                                                                                                                      5.7% growth
                                                                                                                                                   Madre compared to the County.
  Total                                        4,923                 100%                   5,001                  100%                      78
                                                                                                                                                   As also shown in Table 2-2, Sierra Madre had a total of 276 vacant housing
Source: California Department of Finance, Demographic Research Unit, Table E-5 City/County Population and Housing Estimates, 1/1/2010.             units in 2010, or 5.4 percent of the total housing units, the majority of which
*Note: The total number of units shown above is based on the 1/1/2010 DOF E-5 table. The 1/1/2011 E-5 table shows a total unit count of            were for rent (97 units). These vacancy rates are comparable to the County’s
5,113, but does not break down the units by unit type. The DOF will no longer be breaking down the total unit count by unit type (single family    vacancy rate of 5.9 percent, the majority of which were also for-rent.
and multifamily); therefore, it will be up to the City of Sierra Madre to inventory unit types in the future if the City desires this information.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                                                                     2-5

Table 2-2 Sierra Madre Housing, 2010*                                                                                                                Aﬀordability
                                                                                            Number                               Percent             Housing overpayment is generally defined as occurring when renters and
                                                                                                                                                     homeowners must pay more than 30 percent of their gross income for
   Housing Occupancy                                                                                                                                 housing. Overpaying for housing can strip a household of its ability to afford
                                                                                                                                                     other critical needs, such as health care and transportation. In some cases
   Total Housing Units                                                                        5,113                              100%                overpayment results in an inability to afford adequate home maintenance,
                                                                                                                                                     which can cause rapid deterioration of the structure and landscaping.
     Occupied Housing Units                                                                   4,837                              94.6%
                                                                                                                                                     Moderate overpayment is spending between 30 and 49 percent of the
     Vacant Housing Units                                                                      276                                5.4%
                                                                                                                                                     household’s income for housing, while severe overpayment is spending 50
       For Rent                                                                                 97                                1.9%               percent or more for housing. Housing costs for homeowners include mortgage
       For Sale                                                                                 29                                0.6%               payments, utilities, insurance, property taxes, and homeowner association
                                                                                                                                                     fees. Housing costs for renters typically include rent and utilities.
       For Seasonal, Recreational, or Occasional Use                                            38                                0.7%
                                                                                                                                                     Sierra Madre’s overpayment problem is much less severe than the County as
       All Other Vacancies                                                                      88                                1.7%               a whole, including many nearby cities in the San Gabriel Valley. Table 2-3
   Homeowner Vacancy Rate (percent)1                                                          1.0%                                   -               compares Sierra Madre to the County and other cities in the San Gabriel Valley
                                                                                                                                                     with respect to the percent income owners and renters are paying for housing.
   Rental Vacancy Rate (percent)2                                                             5.0%                                   -
                                                                                                                                                     As shown in Table 2-3, according to the 2010 Census, 22.9 percent of Sierra
   Housing Tenure                                                                                                                                    Madre’s owner households and 18.3 percent of renter households expended
   Occupied Housing Units                                                                     4,837                              100%
                                                                                                                                                     between 30 and 49 percent of their gross incomes for housing, compared to
                                                                                                                                                     28.6 percent and 26.2 percent for Los Angeles County, respectively. Severe
   Owner-Occupied Housing Units                                                               2,988                              61.8%               overpayment in Sierra Madre affects 19.4 percent of owner households
     Population in Owner-Occupied Housing                                                     7,390                                  -               and 21.1 percent of renter households, compared to 26.3 percent and 30.2
                                                                                                                                                     percent for the County.
   Rental-Occupied Housing Units                                                              1,849                              38.2%
     Population in Renter-Occupied Housing Units                                              3,526                                  -
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2010 Census.
*Note: The total number of units shown above is based on the 2010 Census, which does not break down the units by unit type, so there is a
discrepancy between this table and Table 2-1, which is from the DOF 1/1/2010 Data File, the last summary done by unit type.
1
  The homeowner vacancy rate is the proportion of the homeowner inventory that is vacant “for sale.” It is computed by dividing the total
number of vacant units “for sale only” by the sum of owner-occupied units, vacant units that are “for sale only,” and vacant units that have
been sold but not yet occupied; and then multiplying by 100.
2
  The rental vacancy rate is the proportion of the rental inventory that is vacant “for rent.” It is computed by dividing the total number of vacant
units “for rent” by the sum of the renter-occupied units, vacant units that are “for rent,” and vacant units that have been rented but not yet
occupied; and then multiplying by 100.
2-6                                                                                                                              GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

Table 2-3 Comparison of Income Spent on Housing                                                NONRESIDENTIAL
                City                        Renters Paying 30-49%      Owners Paying 30-49%    As illustrated in Figure 2-1, Existing Land Use, seven types of development
                                               of Income on Rent       of Income on Mortgage
                                                                                               generally comprise the non-residential land use category in Sierra Madre.
             Arcadia                                  20.4%                    26.0%
                                                                                               These have been condensed into the following four categories and are
              Duarte                                  32.0%                    29.3%           described below: commercial, light industrial, institutional/civic/parks and
             El Monte                                 29.5%                    29.7%           open space. The City of Sierra Madre’s non-residential development profile
            LA County                                 26.2%                    28.6%           includes retail, professional office, neighborhood services and light industrial
            Monrovia                                  27.7%                    30.3%           developments clustered primarily along Sierra Madre Boulevard and Baldwin
                                                                                               Avenue in the “downtown” area of the City and in the East Montecito Avenue
            Pasadena                                  23.9%                    27.9%
                                                                                               neighborhood. The majority of the institutional/civic/park uses as well as the
          San Gabriel                                 23.9%                    29.4%           City’s open space areas occur north of Sierra Madre Boulevard.
           San Marino                                 10.5%                    24.6%
                                                                                               Commercial
          Sierra Madre                                18.3%                    22.9%
           Temple City                                25.9%                    28.6%           Commercial uses include both retail and other service establishments. Office
                                          Renters Paying 50% or More Owners Paying 50% or More uses also fall under the commercial designation, including both general office
                City                           of Income on Rent       of Income on Mortgage   uses and professional/medical offices. Almost all of the commercial land in
             Arcadia                                  26.4%                    23.9%           the City is in the downtown area along Sierra Madre Boulevard, Baldwin
              Duarte                                  28.3%                    27.0%           Avenue, and on adjacent smaller streets (see Figure 2-1, Existing Land Use),
                                                                                               including East Montecito Avenue. The downtown area is characterized by
             El Monte                                 30.6%                     2.9%
                                                                                               retail businesses, such as small specialty shops, restaurants, coffee shops,
            LA County                                 30.2%                    26.3%           beauty salons, branch office banks, auto service, real estate offices, medical
            Monrovia                                  28.8%                    21.3%           offices, and other personal and professional service businesses.
            Pasadena                                  25.9%                    21.1%
                                                                                               Light Industrial/Manufacturing
          San Gabriel                                 29.1%                    20.0%
           San Marino                                 11.1%                    26.3%
                                                                                               The City’s light industrial/manufacturing businesses are located in the well-
                                                                                               established area along East Montecito Avenue between Baldwin Avenue and
          Sierra Madre                                21.1%                    19.4%
                                                                                               Mountain Trail Avenue. These businesses are intermixed with retail businesses,
           Temple City                                32.6%                    23.7%           and single family and multifamily residences. Industrial/manufacturing
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2010 American Community Survey.                                    businesses located in this area include service activities such as plumbing,
                                                                                               and mechanic shops. Retail businesses include photography studios, a florist,
                                                                                               specialty pet store, and other artisan-type activities such as furniture making,
                                                                                               glass making, pottery, and sewing. Although occupancies have changed over
                                                                                               the years, this area remains active.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                 2-7

Institutional/Civic/Parks                                                        SPECIFIC PLANS OR SPECIAL DISTRICTS
Institutional, civic and park uses encompass the second greatest area of land in The City has one specific plan, the Senior Housing Specific Plan, adopted in
Sierra Madre after residential. These include six elementary and high schools    July 2002, for the 46-unit Sierra Vista Senior Housing development located
(both public and private), seven churches, the Passionist Fathers Retreat        at 70 Esperanza Avenue. In terms of a special district, Sierra Madre voters
House, and City-owned facilities. Also included are public facilities and        adopted Measure V in 2007, to preserve the City’s small-town downtown
parks such as City Hall, the Sierra Madre Police and Fire Departments, and       character. This Measure limits building height to 30 feet and two stories and
Memorial Park. Institutional, civic and park uses are immediately surrounded     density to 13 dwellings units per acre in the City’s central core area, including
by residential and commercial areas, and most are well established in the        East Montecito Avenue.
community. These uses are discussed in detail in the Community Services and
Facilities chapter of this report.                                               The City also had one Redevelopment Project Area, established in 1974
                                                                                 pursuant to Section 33355 et seq. of the Health and Safety Code of the
Open Space                                                                       State of California. The Redevelopment Project Area encompassed the City’s
Sierra Madre offers a large amount of open space, mostly within the northern,    commercial district and generally followed the boundaries of the commercial
hillside portion of the City, including the Bailey Canyon Wilderness Area and    and light industrial/manufacturing land use areas. It extended further to the
the historic Mount Wilson Trail. Open space land uses are discussed in detail    west and east, encompassing several blocks of residential properties, as well as
in the Community Services and Facilities chapter of this report.                 the City-owned Sierra Vista Park, recreation center, City yards, and settling
                                                                                 basins located on the north side of Sierra Madre Boulevard at the eastern City
MIXED-USE                                                                        boundary. The project area contained roughly 125 acres.
                                                                                 On December 27, 2011, the California Supreme Court issued a ruling
There are a few mixed-use parcels consisting of both residential and commercial
                                                                                 upholding a law that effectively ended redevelopment in the State. The ruling
uses located in and around the City’s downtown area, mostly on Sierra Madre
                                                                                 upheld the constitutionality of AB 1X 26, which eliminated redevelopment
Boulevard and Baldwin Avenue. Mixed use buildings include the Renaissance
                                                                                 agencies and struck down the “pay to play” compromise in AB 1X 27 that
Plaza and the former Hotel Shirley, both of which contain a mix of office,
                                                                                 would have allowed redevelopment agencies to continue operating as long
retail and residential uses, and a live/work building on E. Montecito Avenue.
                                                                                 as they made ongoing payments to the State’s general fund. Pursuant to
                                                                                 the ruling, all redevelopment agencies were dissolved on February 1, 2012,
                                                                                 following the formal dissolution process contained in AB 1X 26.
2-8                                                                  GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

UNDEVELOPED LAND                                                                Table 2-4 Residential Demolition and Construction Activity
Sierra Madre is a well-established, built-out community. Only a few scattered                              Demolished Housing Units Lost                           Newly Constructed or Permitted Units Gained
vacant parcels exist within the City limits. Additionally, undeveloped natural                                                                  Affordable                                                     Affordable
areas in the City have intentionally been preserved for open space conservation                    Single                                        Units out         Single                                      Units out of
                                                                                                     Unit        Multi-Unit                       of Total           Unit        Multi-Unit                    Total Units
and/or management purposes. These areas are primarily located in hillside            Year        Structure       Structure         Total        Units Lost       Structure        Structure        Total         Gained
areas of the City’s northern boundary, abutting the San Gabriel Mountains.          2001               5              0              5                0                4               0              4             0
The hillside areas have experienced some development activity, largely in the
                                                                                    2002               5              0              5                0                9               0              9             1
form of low-density single-family residential developments.
                                                                                    2003               4              0              4                0                3               0              3             0
REVIEW OF PAST AND CURRENT                                                          2004               9              0              9                0                5               0             51             0
                                                                                    2005               4              0              4                0                3              46              6            46
DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS                                                               2006               7              0              7                0               17               0             17             0
Development activity in Sierra Madre over the past 10 years has almost              2007               3              0              3                0                3               0              3             0
entirely involved residential construction. As shown in Table 2-4, between          2008               2              0              2                0                1               0              1             0
2001 and 2010 the number of residential units that were demolished totaled
                                                                                    2009               0              0              0                0                0               0              0             0
39, all of them single-unit structures. During this same time period, a total
of 94 units were constructed, with the split between single- and multi-unit         2010               0              0              0                0                0               0              0             0
structures being almost equal. Of the 94 units constructed, 47 were designated      2011               0              0              0                0                0               0              0             0
as affordable housing units.                                                         Total            39              0             39                0               45              46             94            47
The majority of the 94 new residential units that were constructed between      Source: Housing Unit Demolition Data Survey prepared by the City of Sierra Madre for the Southern California Association of Governments.
2001 and 2010 were individual residential developments that occurred in
various areas of the City. A large tract development, the 63-acre Stonegate
development (also known as the One Carter subdivision) was approved in the
hillside area of the City in August 2005. While the infrastructure is in place,
to date no home construction has occurred; therefore, it is not represented
in Table 2-4. The Stonegate development is comprised of 28 individual lots,
with lots ranging in size from 0.25 acres to 5 acres. In addition to the City’s
Zoning Code and Hillside Management Zone regulations, all residential
parcels within Stonegate are subject to the Stonegate Residential Design
Guidelines.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                                                              2-9

Figure 2-2 Community Design
                                                                                                      Sierra Madre
                                                                                                          Dam
                   Mater Dolorosa
                   Retreat Center
                         Bailey Canyon           The
                           Trailhead           Wistaria
                                                 Vine
                                                                                      Mount Wilson
                                                                                        Trailhead
                                                                           St. Rita’s
                                                                        Catholic Church
         Alverno                  Pinney
       High School                 House
                                                                Sierra Madre
                                                             Elementary School
                                                   Old North                                                       Sierra Vista
                                                    Church        Kersting                                            Park
                                                                   Court
                                        Civic
                                       Center                Congregational
                                                                  Church                                                        Community Design Elements
                                              The Cannon and
                                                Bandshell in                                                                         Landmarks
                                               Memorial Park
                                                                                                                                     Major Corridors
                                                                                                                                     Focus Areas
2-10                                                                          GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

COMMUNITY DESIGN                                                                 Table 2-5 Sierra Madre Corridors
A community’s identity is often defined by design features such as architecture,          Name                                                           Features
entryways, corridors, nodes, landmarks and streetscapes. Sierra Madre can be      North-South
characterized by a collection of established districts (see district discussion
                                                                                  Michillinda Avenue         Michillinda Avenue forms Sierra Madre’s western boundary, dividing Sierra Madre from its
provided below under District Identification section). These community                                       western neighbor, the City of Pasadena, and providing access to I-210. Michillinda Avenue
design features become particularly important in distinguishing one district                                 also functions as an entry to Sierra Madre from the south.
from another while they make a cohesive image for the City.                                                  The dominant land use along the majority of this corridor is residential, with some
                                                                                                             institutional uses occurring between Grand View Avenue and Sierra Madre Boulevard, as
                                                                                                             shown in Figure 2-1, Existing Land Use. Landscaping (e.g., trees, shrubs, and ground cover)
CORRIDORS                                                                                                    and sidewalks line both sides of this corridor.
                                                                                  Baldwin Avenue             Baldwin Avenue begins at its northernmost point in the City’s hillside area. It then runs
Arterial corridors play a prominent physical role in Sierra Madre. Not only                                  through Sierra Madre and directly into the City of Arcadia, where it merges into I-210
are they the main means by which residents and visitors experience the City,                                 immediately after its intersection with Foothill Boulevard. Baldwin Avenue provides access
                                                                                                             into the City from the south, as well as to the Mount Wilson trail via its intersection with E.
they also serve as the principal access to the residential neighborhoods and                                 Mira Monte Avenue on the north.
business sectors of the community. One important defining characteristic of                                  The land use along this corridor is a mix of single and multi-family residential, commercial,
these corridors is that they are not an important part of the major arterial                                 and institutional uses. The commercial and institutional uses (churches) are clustered
                                                                                                             near the heart of the City’s downtown area, Kersting Court, and encompass the area from
network in the San Gabriel Valley. Sierra Madre has very little “through”                                    Highland Avenue to the north to Suffolk Avenue to the south, as shown in Figure 2.1,
traffic, thus helping to maintain its small-town feel.                                                       Existing Land Use. This portion of the corridor is lined with small commercial/retail shops on
                                                                                                             both sides of Baldwin Avenue. To a lesser extent, other land uses along this central stretch
                                                                                                             include office, civic and religious uses. Landscaping (e.g., trees, shrubs, and ground cover)
The City’s most important corridors can be grouped according to the                                          and sidewalks line both sides of this corridor.
direction (north-south or east-west) in which they transect the City. Table
                                                                                  East-West
2-5 presents the City’s most important corridors and their respective features
that define Sierra Madre. Figure 2-2, Community Design, depicts the corridor      Sierra Madre               Sierra Madre Boulevard is the City’s primary east-west corridor, providing direct access to the
                                                                                  Boulevard                  heart of the City, the downtown area, as well as to Kersting Court. Sierra Madre Boulevard
locations. More information on the City’s streets can be found in Chapter 3,                                 provides access into the City from the communities to the east and west.
Circulation.
                                                                                                             The dominant land use along the majority of this corridor is residential, as shown in Figure
                                                                                                             2-1, Existing Land Use. However, the boulevard is also lined with small commercial/retail
In addition to the main roadway corridors outlined in Table 2-5, other                                       shops on both sides generally beginning at Lima Street on the west and ending at Baldwin
corridors also play a key role in connecting the City’s urbanized areas with                                 Avenue on the east. Commercial buildings set close to the street and well maintained
                                                                                                             sidewalks make pedestrian access to stores easy. There is limited on-street parking;
the wilderness areas of the San Gabriel Mountains north of and abutting the                                  however, many businesses have small parking lots located in the rear of the property and the
City’s northern boundary. These corridors include Mountain Trail, Auburn                                     City maintains a major parking lot on Mariposa Avenue south of the shops on Sierra Madre
                                                                                                             Boulevard. Landscaping (e.g., trees, shrubs, and ground cover) and sidewalks line both sides
Avenue, and Santa Anita Avenue. District Identification                                                      of this corridor. The City’s gateway sign, located on the street median at the intersection of
                                                                                                             Sierra Madre Boulevard and Michillinda Avenue, helps signify arrival into Sierra Madre.
                                                                                  Orangewood                 Orange Grove Avenue is a residential street running the full length of the City and provides
                                                                                  Avenue                     access to its eastern and western neighbors. It also functions as the City’s southern boundary,
                                                                                                             dividing it from neighboring Arcadia. Mature landscaping (e.g., trees, shrubs, and ground
                                                                                                             cover) lines both sides of this corridor.
                                                                                 Source: The Planning Center|DC&E, 2011.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                                            2-11

DISTRICT IDENTIFICATION                                                           Among the unique structures in downtown are the Sierra Madre Playhouse,
                                                                                  an active live-stage theater; the Old City Hall, which was vacated by the City
Sierra Madre is composed of several distinct districts. A district is a           in 1977 and has been adaptively reused as offices as well as a single suite bed
geographical area in a city that has common distinguishing characteristics.       and breakfast inn called the Jailhouse Inn; the former Hotel Shirley, which has
It is distinct enough from other areas that it would be apparent to anyone in     been restored as offices, shops, and residences located on the second level; and
the district that they are in a distinctive place. Each district can have its own the Renaissance Plaza which is now maintained as retail businesses, offices,
unique character, conveyed through elements such as land use, lot size, age       and residences located on the second level, in a courtyard setting. Many of
of structures, and landscaping. Architectural styles can also contribute to the   the structures were built in the early 1900s, although a few newer structures
creation of a sense of place in each district.                                    have been added in the place of fire-damaged and deteriorating buildings.
                                                                                  The pattern of development in the downtown encourages pedestrian activity,
While there is no dominant architectural style in Sierra Madre, residents are
                                                                                  which brings a liveliness to the street. Kersting Court, which is in the heart of
easily able to discern structures that “fit” in the City and those that do not.
                                                                                  the downtown area, is the key social gathering area of the City and is highly
This capability can be attributed to Sierra Madre’s long history of architectural
                                                                                  used in the evenings, on weekends, and during special events. The downtown
eclecticism—a particular source of pride for residents who appreciate the
                                                                                  area is also popular among visiting cyclists that utilize the area as a rest stop
design variety present. Architectural diversity has thus become Sierra Madre’s
                                                                                  on their weekend bike rides.
distinguishing feature, adding to the unique feel of the City and its many
districts.
However, although various districts exist throughout the City, there are
limited features such as landscaping, monument or other signage, or iconic
buildings and structures along the roadways that visually signify to motorists
and passersby that they have exited one district and entered another.
Downtown
The downtown district is located at the center of the City along Sierra Madre
Boulevard and Baldwin Avenue. The district begins east of Lima Street and
continues east to the east side of Baldwin Avenue; and from south of Mariposa
Avenue up Baldwin Avenue to Highland Avenue. The downtown district
can be described as a “village center”, characterized by one- and two-story
commercial buildings with small storefronts housing specialty retail stores,
restaurants, commercial and professional offices, medical offices, service
businesses, institutional and non-profit facilities.
                                                                                  Downtown Sierra Madre
                                                                                  Source: Seth Hanson
2-12                                                                  GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

Light Industrial/Manufacturing Interspersed with some                                   Medium-Density Residential
Residential
                                                                                        The medium-density residential areas are located adjacent to the medium-
East Montecito Avenue is the City’s light industrial/manufacturing district             high density areas. These are characterized by properties with one or two units
and is interspersed with both single family and multifamily residences. This            on a lot. Some of the notable medium density areas are San Gabriel and Santa
street is locally historic in that a number of older industrial structures still exist, Anita Courts in the southeast area of the City, Laurel Avenue and Victoria
as well as other historic structures, such as the original ticket booth for the         Lane. In most cases, the units look like single-family houses, but upon closer
Red Line and the original cabins built for the tuberculosis patients who came           inspection it can be seen that a second unit exists to the side, rear or on the
to the area before Sierra Madre was established. This area includes businesses          second floor of the property. The low-density appearance of these properties
such as plumbers’ and mechanics’ shops; storage facilities; welders; vehicle            is important to the maintenance of the character of the neighborhoods.
storage; research and development firms; and crafts-related businesses, such
as furniture making, glass lamp making, pottery, film making, photography               Low-Density Residential
and an internationally renowned artist’s studio.                                        The low-density residential areas comprise most of the City of Sierra
Medium-High-Density Residential                                                         Madre. Yet, the low-density residential pattern is not homogenous; instead,
                                                                                        it varies throughout the City, reflecting development trends spanning 100
The medium-high density residential areas are located along the Sierra Madre            years. The variety in lot sizes, street layout, and architectural styles enhances
Boulevard corridor to the east and west ends of the commercial district and             Sierra Madre’s charm and has come to be one of the City’s distinguishing
in the neighborhoods that are clustered around the downtown district. They              characteristics.
provide a buffer between the commercial and low-density residential zones of
the City. The streets most identified with medium-high density development
are Esperanza Avenue, Mariposa Avenue from Hermosa Avenue to Baldwin
Avenue, and Laurel Avenue from Baldwin Avenue to Mountain Trail Avenue.
The housing stock in these areas is a mixture of older apartment buildings
from the 1950s through 1970s and newer apartment and condominium
buildings from the 1980s and 1990s. During the 2000s, there were a few
multi-unit condominium developments built within this area, including a
46-unit senior housing project.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                          2-13

Canyon Residential
This residential area, known as “Sierra Madre Canyon” or “The Canyon” by
locals, is located in a natural canyon in the northeast quadrant of the City. It
has its own unique development pattern and architectural style and a more
rural character, which has led to a lifestyle that is valued by its residents.
The boundaries of the canyon extend from Mountain Trail on the west and
Sturtevant Drive on the south and east. The rustic and historic character of
The Canyon is protected through provisions in the City’s Residential Canyon
Zone, which establishes single-family development standards consistent with
the smaller homes and lots in the canyon area.
The Canyon was originally developed in the 1920s for seasonal housing. The
lots are small and the original structures were cottages used by out-of-town
visitors who came to Sierra Madre for rest, recuperation and recreational
purposes. Over time, the cottages have come to be used for permanent year-
round housing. Many original structures remain, but some of them, due
to their age, are in need of rehabilitation or replacement. At one time, the
center of the area known as the lower canyon was developed with commercial
businesses. There was also a community plunge (swimming pool) in this            Mary’s Market in Sierra Madre Canyon
location until the 1950s. Today, a small restaurant called Mary’s Market
                                                                                 Source: Caroline Brown
remains and is often a Canyon community gathering area. The Nature Friends
Lodge and Retreat Center provides overnight accommodations and meeting
space for an international nature organization.
2-14                                                               GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

Landmarks                                                                    FOCUS AREAS
Landmarks are reference points that help identify a specific area of a City. Focus areas are places where urban design elements combine to create a
They provide functional and visual points of reference and can easily be     location suitable for public gatherings and community events. Often, these
identified by people as to their location within the City. The following are areas are situated on public land and have open spaces or large facilities that
notable landmarks in Sierra Madre:                                           make large assemblies possible. A review of the focus areas within the City is
    • Kersting Court with its old school bell tower and pepper trees         provided below.
    • The Hotel Shirley façade                                               Kersting Court
    • The cannon and band shell in Memorial Park                             Kersting Court is located in the center of the downtown district at the
                                                                             intersection of Sierra Madre Boulevard and Baldwin Avenue. A wide court,
    • Saint Rita’s Catholic Church                                           Kersting Court runs at a diagonal connecting Baldwin Avenue to Sierra
                                                                             Madre Boulevard. This diagonal helps to form a triangular island in the area
    • Sierra Madre Congregational Church
                                                                             between the storefronts lining the court and the main streets. Until 1950, it
    • Old North Church                                                       served as the local station for the Red line trolley that followed Sierra Madre
                                                                             Boulevard into Pasadena. The island is landscaped with pepper trees and
    • Alverno High School                                                    allows for passive recreation. Together, the adjacent shops and restaurants
    • The Wistaria Vine on Hermosa Avenue                                    along with the island form the City’s Kersting Court.
    • The Pinney House on Lima Street                                        In addition to the shops and restaurants, which attract visitors and locals on
                                                                             a daily basis, Kersting Court is frequently used by the City as a community
    • Sierra Madre Elementary School                                         gathering place. Throughout the year many City-sponsored activities are
    • The Passionist Fathers Mater Dolorosa Retreat Center                   held at this location, including Family Movie Fridays in the spring, the
                                                                             annual Halloween festivities, and various art activities throughout the year.
    • Sierra Madre Canyon Dam                                                Additionally, the famous annual Mount Wilson Trail Race begins at Kersting
                                                                             Court and many post-race activities are held there.
    • Mount Wilson Trailhead
    • Bailey Canyon Trailhead
    • Trail House at Mount Wilson Trailhead
    • The Sierra Madre Pool
    • The Pioneers’ Cemetery
    • The Baseball diamond
    • The scenic backdrop created by the San Gabriel Mountains
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                             2-15

There are several urban design elements that make Kersting Court a focus       Civic Center
area. Firstly, its prime location in the downtown district affords the court
with a steady flow of pedestrian traffic. Parking spaces are also available on The Civic Center, consisting of City Hall, the Police and Fire Stations, and
both sides of the street, making vehicular access to the court possible. The   Memorial Park, is an important center in Sierra Madre. The City is a major
triangular island is landscaped with pepper trees and shrubs and features      employer and numerous constituents come to City Hall in both the day
the City’s old school bell in a tower. Wooden benches are also provided for    and evening hours for assistance and to attend public meetings. Memorial
sitting and lounging. These elements combine to create an easily recognizable  Park is a recreational center with a number of active and passive recreation
and inviting place that encourages the community to meet and gather, and       opportunities, including a playground, tennis courts, picnic benches, and a
provides a pleasant setting for shoppers and visitors.                         covered pavilion. It is also the location of the Sierra Madre Senior Center,
                                                                               which is housed in the Hart Park House, a multi-purpose structure on the park
                                                                               site. Concerts, festivals, and holiday activities for children in the community
                                                                               are among the numerous activities that take place in Memorial Park.
                                                                               Memorial Park is host to a number of community events during the year, and
                                                                               its open fields and recreation center allow for large gatherings to take place.
                                                                               Thus the Civic Center is positioned to receive almost constant visitation by
                                                                               City employees, citizens, park-goers, and visitors, making it a convenient and
                                                                               important gathering place in the City.
                                                                               Sierra Vista Park
                                                                               The other primary center in the City is Sierra Vista Park, where the City’s
                                                                               recreation center is located. The recreation center includes two public pools, a
                                                                               multi-purpose recreation building housing the Youth Activity Center and the
                                                                               City’s year-round programs for children, teens, and adults. In addition, Sierra
                                                                               Vista Park is the location of the City’s baseball diamonds; tennis, volleyball
                                                                               and basketball courts; the Rose Float building; a dog park; a play area for
                                                                               children, and it is equipped with a covered pavilion and picnic tables.
Kersting Court in the downtown district
Source: Kim Herkewitz
2-16                                                              GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

Memorial Park in Sierra Madre’s Civic Center
Source: Kim Herkewitz
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA 2-17

      2-18          GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
Source: Seth Hanson
                                     Chapter 3
                                 Circulation
                                                   In this chapter  This chapter presents the physical and operational conditions of the circulation
                                                                    network in the City of Sierra Madre, including an evaluation of existing
                            R E G I O N A L C I R C U L AT I O N    conditions for regional roadways, public transit, bicycle and pedestrian
                                                                    circulation. This chapter also describes key terms and methodologies that
                                       R O A D W AY S Y S T E M     explain the current conditions in Sierra Madre’s transportation system. The
                                                                    transportation system in Sierra Madre includes an extensive roadway system,
                       I N T E R S E C T I O N O P E R AT I O N S   a bike and pedestrian system, and a public transit system. Each of these
                                                                    elements is discussed in this chapter.
                                     B I C YC L E FAC I L I T I E S
                                                                    The substantive information provided in this report is organized as follows:
                                      TRANSIT NETWORK                   • A regional assessment of the transportation facilities affecting and
                                                                            affected by the City of Sierra Madre.
                           COMMUTER MODAL SPLIT
                                                                        • Analysis of the road system within the City and the traffic operations
                                                                            on those roads.
                                                                        • An assessment of the pedestrian and bicycle networks within the city.
                                                                        • A detailed look at the transit systems within the City and connecting
                                                                            to other cities/regions.
                                                                        • Discussion of the commuter modal split for the City.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                      3-1

Figure 3-1 Regional Circulation System
Source: Fehr and Peers 2012.
3-2                                    GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
REGIONAL CIRCULATION                                                              RAIL
The City of Sierra Madre is located in the northern San Gabriel Valley. The       Several rail systems operate within the San Gabriel Valley, ranging from
valley is large enough to be considered a specific region in southern California, light rail to freight rail. Los Angeles Metropolitan Transit Authority (Metro)
and is served by road, rail and air travel networks.                              operates the Gold Line light rail train connecting the northern valley to
                                                                                  Downtown Los Angeles. The Metrolink commuter rail system is jointly
FREEWAYS                                                                          operated by several regional transit agencies across four counties, and services
                                                                                  both the northern and southern valley regions through two lines that connect
The San Gabriel Valley features a grid-patterned freeway system connecting        to Downtown Los Angeles to the west, and the Inland Empire to the east.
all of the cities to the rest of southern California, as shown in Figure 3-1,     Amtrak operates interregional trains throughout southern California, with a
Regional Circulation System. The east-west freeways, listed from north to         single station in the southern valley at the City of Pomona. For the City of
south, are Interstate 210 (I-210), I-10, and State Route 60 (SR-60). The          Sierra Madre, the connecting link to this system would be the Metro Gold
north-south freeways, listed from west to east, are SR-110, I-605, and SR-57.     Line.
Given this evenly distributed pattern of coverage, freeway accessibility is high
for most communities in the valley. For the City of Sierra Madre, the main
connecting link to this system is I-210.
I-210 is an east-west travelling freeway servicing the San Gabriel Valley. The
western terminus lies at the interchange with I-5 in the San Fernando Valley,
and the eastern terminus lies in San Bernardino County at the interchange
with I-10. This freeway is a major regional route connecting the foothill
communities to the coast and Inland Empire. The roadway features 6-8 lanes
including High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) lanes and has a posted speed
limit of 65 miles per hour (mph) throughout the valley. I-210 runs through
the City of Arcadia, one half-mile to the south of the Sierra Madre border,
providing access primarily via interchanges at Santa Anita Avenue, Baldwin
Avenue, and Michillinda Avenue, all of which enter the City at some point
in their alignment. I-210 is the gateway connector to the regional freeway
network for the residents of Sierra Madre, and is therefore of key importance
to the City.
                                                                                  Sierra Madre Villa Metrolink Station
                                                                                  Source: Kim Herkewitz
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                    3-3
Metro Gold Line                                                                       ROADWAY SYSTEM
Metro operates the Gold Line light rail train connecting the northwestern
San Gabriel Valley to Downtown Los Angeles. In the vicinity of Sierra Madre           FUNCTIONAL CLASSIFICATION
the track runs in the median of I-210. The eastern terminus of the line in
                                                                                      Sierra Madre’s road network consists of several functional street types arranged
the San Gabriel Valley is in the City of Pasadena, near the Madre Street
                                                                                      primarily in a grid pattern. This standard grid pattern is commonly used in
interchange with I-210. The station is approximately two miles from central
                                                                                      smaller towns that serve a primarily residential function as the network is
Sierra Madre, making it accessible by bicycle, transit, or personal vehicle.
                                                                                      easy to traverse by multiple modes of transportation. The majority of cities
There is a large parking structure at the site as it is currently the end of the line
                                                                                      and towns in the northern San Gabriel Valley feature a similar road network
and commuters from the foothill communities will drive to the station and
                                                                                      layout.
ride the train into Downtown Los Angeles. Metro is currently constructing
the first phase of the Gold Line Foothill Extension that will continue the line       Sierra Madre’s current General Plan identifies four roadway types within
east to the City of Azusa, with the ultimate goal of extending the line to the        the City. Functional classification refers to how a road accommodates two
eastern edge of the San Gabriel Valley. The light rail line is a vital transit link   characteristics: the extent to which the roadway prioritizes the movement
to the region for residents of Sierra Madre, providing access to Los Angeles          of traffic and the level of access provided to adjacent properties. Based on
and the other forms of travel available from the City.                                these generalized characteristics, roadways often vary in terms of right-of-
                                                                                      way, speed, roadway width, number of lanes, intersection and traffic signal
AIR TRAVEL                                                                            spacing, and other factors. Functional classification is generally determined
                                                                                      by the City’s General Plan, in which the functional classification is assigned
There are no international or domestic airline service airports in the San            to a particular roadway based on the criteria above. Table 3-1 identifies these
Gabriel Valley, although there are several general-aviation airports, including       roadway types for Sierra Madre and gives a description of their performance
Brackett Field in La Verne and El Monte Airport in El Monte. There are,               characteristics.
however, several major airports near the valley that could be considered easily
accessible. Los Angeles International Airport is located 35 miles southwest of
Sierra Madre and is accessible via freeway and transit. Ontario International
Airport is located 32 miles east of Sierra Madre at the border to the Inland
Empire and is easily accessible from I-10. Bob Hope Airport is located 20
miles west of Sierra Madre in the City of Burbank and can be accessed via
I-210.
3-4                                                                     GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

Table 3-1 Sierra Madre Roadway Functional Classifications                                                                 Table 3-2 Sierra Madre Roadways
     Roadway Type              Accommodation for Movement of Traffic                    Level of Property Access                         Classification                                    Streets
                            Primary roadway for movement of traffic          Access is provided with limits on driveway                  Major Street                                Michillinda Avenue
      Major Street          at city level prioritizes movement of traffic.   spacing and turns allowed, potentially
                            Can also provide regional connectivity.          through use of traffic control devices.                    Collector Street                          Sierra Madre Boulevard
                                                                                                                                                                                      Baldwin Avenue
                            These roadways provide some level of inter- Collectors typically provide some level of
    Collector Street        City connectivity. Collectors typically do not property access with fewer restrictions than                                                            Orange Grove Avenue
                            provide any regional access or connectivity. typically found on major streets.                          Local Collector Street                          Grand View Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                                        Lima Street
     Local Collector        These roadways provide some level of             Access is prioritized similarly to a local                                                            Mountain Trail Avenue
         Street             intra-City connectivity, collecting traffic from street with more considerations for traffic
                            local streets.                                   flow and visibility.                                         Local Street                                   All others
                            Local streets provide the lowest accom-          Local streets provide the highest level of   Source: Fehr & Peers, 2011.
      Local Street          modation for the movement of traffic             property access. Driveways are closely
                            with lower connectivity and potential for        spaced and there are few access limitations.
                            cul-de-sacs.
                                                                                                                          Table 3-3 ADT Volumes
Source: Fehr & Peers, 2011.
                                                                                                                                             Street                   Location                        ADT  Capacity
                                                                                                                                    Orange Grove Avenue      East of Michillinda Avenue              6,100  15,000
SIERRA MADRE ROADS                                                                                                                  Orange Grove Avenue        West of Rancho Road                   4,600  15,000
The majority of the streets in Sierra Madre fall under the Local Street                                                           Sierra Madre Boulevard     East of Michillinda Avenue              8,600  15,000
classification. Local streets are two-lane roadways without medians, and in                                                       Sierra Madre Boulevard        East of Rancho Road                  3,600  15,000
some cases, without centerlines. Speed limits are typically 25mph or less, and                                                       Grand View Avenue       East of Michillinda Avenue              3,000  15,000
there is a higher likelihood of cul-de-sacs, tight radius turns, and meandering
                                                                                                                                     Grand View Avenue         East of Canon Avenue                  2,700  15,000
alignments. As the majority of streets are local streets, they will not be
individually addressed in this report. The streets that fall into any of the                                                         Michillinda Avenue    North of Orange Grove Avenue             12,900  15,000
other categories are discussed below. Table 3-2 outlines the classified facilities                                                   Michillinda Avenue     South of Grand View Avenue               6,600  15,000
within the City. Table 3-3 shows the Average Daily Traffic (ADT) volumes                                                               Baldwin Avenue      North of Orange Grove Avenue             10,500  15,000
along the major streets within the City, as well as the total capacity of these                                                        Baldwin Avenue       South of Grand View Avenue               3,800  15,000
streets. Total roadway capacity is based on a daily capacity of 7,500 vehicles
                                                                                                                          Source: Fehr & Peers, 2012.
per lane. This capacity value correlates to standards for similar facilities in
neighboring jurisdictions.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                                                         3-5
The roads in Sierra Madre share certain general characteristics: They are all    Sierra Madre Boulevard
two-lane streets with no medians, shading from large trees is typical, and the
roadways are generally wide as compared to other small cities. In many areas,    Sierra Madre Boulevard serves as the primary east-west Collector within the
cross slope can be steep toward the curb lines. Posted speed limits within       City and connects Sierra Madre to Pasadena to the west and Arcadia to the east.
the City are typically between 25 and 35mph. On-street parking is common         The street curves south in Pasadena and continues to San Marino, between
throughout the City, with parallel and slant parking stalls in the downtown      I-210 and I-10. Within Sierra Madre the street maintains an undivided, two-
region. Described below are the primary streets forming the transportation       lane configuration and a posted speed limit of 25 to 30mph.
network in Sierra Madre. Figure 3-2, Roadway Network and Average Daily           Sierra Madre Boulevard travels from the eastern to western borders of the
Traffic Volumes, shows the street network along with lane configurations and     City, and changes character along the way. From the eastern city limit
ADT volumes.                                                                     near Monterey Lane to Baldwin Avenue, the street is primarily residential,
Michillinda Avenue                                                               providing driveway access to single-family homes. At Baldwin Avenue the
                                                                                 character changes to that of a commercial corridor, with abundant businesses
Michillinda Avenue is the only street in the City classified as a Major Road,    and services, municipal buildings, and public facilities. In this section the
traveling north-south and serving as the boundary between Sierra Madre and       speed limit is reduced to 25mph. Upon crossing Lima Avenue, the speed limit
Pasadena to the west. It is one of the primary roads connecting the City to      increases to 30mph and the character returns to residential, with both single-
I-210, and is thus a key part of the regional road network for Sierra Madre.     family dwelling units and apartment dwellings. This condition continues to
The northern portion of the road terminates in a residential neighborhood        the western border at Michillinda Avenue.
against the foothills, while the southern terminus is located in Arcadia at the
intersection with Huntington Drive, a major arterial running through the
San Gabriel Valley. Within Sierra Madre, the street maintains a two-lane,
undivided configuration with a posted speed limit of 35mph. The character of
the roadway is primarily residential within the City, providing access to single
family homes on both the Sierra Madre and Pasadena sides of the border.
There is some commercial development accessible by Michillinda Avenue on
the Pasadena side near the intersection with Sierra Madre Boulevard.
                                                                                 West Sierra Madre Avenue, looking west
                                                                                 Source: Kim Herkewitz
3-6                                                                GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
Figure 3-2 Roadway Network and Average Daily Traffic Volumes
Source: Fehr and Peers 2012.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA 3-7
Baldwin Avenue                                                                    Grand View Avenue
Baldwin Avenue is classified as a Collector within the City, traveling north-     Grand View Avenue is classified as a Local Collector within the City, providing
south and connecting Sierra Madre to I-210. Baldwin Avenue serves as the          an east-west passage in the northern part of Sierra Madre. The main circulatory
central north-south street within the City, forming the downtown core along       function of this street is directing traffic from the foothill communities
with Sierra Madre Boulevard. Having an interchange with I-210 makes               to Santa Anita Avenue, Baldwin Avenue, and Michillinda Avenue so they
Baldwin Avenue a key part of the regional road network for the City. Within       may connect to the rest of the city and I-210. The roadway maintains and
the City the road maintains a two-lane, undivided configuration and a posted      undivided, 2-lane section within the city and a posted speed limit of 30mph.
speed limit of 25-35mph.                                                          Grand View Avenue terminates on the west side at Michillinda Avenue and
                                                                                  on the east side past Santa Anita Avenue in Arcadia. Between Camillo Road
Baldwin Avenue enters the City at the southern limit of Orange Grove Avenue       and Santa Anita Avenue, Grand View Avenue serves as a border between
and continues north with a posted speed limit of 35mph. The character of          Sierra Madre and Arcadia. Within the City the roadway is lined with single-
this area is entirely residential, with single-family homes lining the street. As family houses.
the road approaches Sierra Madre Boulevard, the adjacent land uses change to
commercial, and Baldwin Avenue becomes the downtown main street of the            Orange Grove Avenue
City. The speed limit reduces to 25mph in this area. North of downtown, past
Highland Avenue, the character again returns to residential and the speed         Orange Grove Avenue is classified as a Local Collector within the City and
limit increases to 30mph. There are multiple school zones along this street.      provides an east-west corridor at the City’s southern limit. For the entire
The road continues north, eventually terminating in the foothill communities.     length of Orange Grove Avenue within Sierra Madre it serves as the southern
                                                                                  border with Arcadia. On the western side of the City the street terminates at
                                                                                  Michillinda Avenue. However, the street resumes again in Pasadena, serving
                                                                                  as a larger collector. Orange Grove Avenue terminates on the east side at Santa
                                                                                  Anita Avenue in Arcadia. Throughout Sierra Madre the street maintains a
                                                                                  two-lane, undivided configuration and a 35mph posted speed limit. The
                                                                                  character of Orange Grove Avenue within the City limits is residential, with
                                                                                  single family homes lining both sides of the street for the majority.
Baldwin Avenue south of downtown, looking north
Source: Kim Herkewitz
3-8                                                                 GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

Lima Street and Mountain Trail Avenue                                          Table 3-4 Intersection Data Collection
These two streets are classified as Local Collectors within Sierra Madre. They            Intersection           Type                     AM                              PM
are both north-south running streets that run the entire length of the City                                                 Previously Collected as part of
from the southern limit at Orange Grove Avenue to their end points in the          Grand View Avenue at    Side Street Stop      Alverno High School        Collected by Professional Firm
                                                                                     Michillinda Avenue       Controlled             Master Plan
foothill communities. They are both two-lane, undivided roadways with a
posted speed limit of 30mph, and they both primarily feature single family         Grand View Avenue at      All Way Stop   Collected by Volunteer Group    Collected by Volunteer Group
                                                                                          Lima Street
households.
                                                                                   Grand View Avenue at      All Way Stop   Collected by Volunteer Group    Collected by Volunteer Group
                                                                                   Mountain Trail Avenue
INTERSECTION OPERATIONS                                                            Grand View Avenue at      All Way Stop   Collected by Volunteer Group    Collected by Volunteer Group
                                                                                    Santa Anita Avenue
As part of this Existing Conditions Report, traffic data was collected at
                                                                                  Sierra Madre Boulevard                    Previously Collected as part of
specific intersections around the City. These intersections were selected to                                  Signalized         Alverno High School        Collected by Professional Firm
                                                                                   at Michillinda Avenue                             Master Plan
capture vehicle movement across the entire City. At each intersection, vehicle
movements were collected for both the morning and evening peak periods,           Sierra Madre Boulevard     All Way Stop   Collected by Professional Firm  Collected by Professional Firm
                                                                                        at Lima Street
using different resources for counting. The highest volume intersections were
captured by data collection professionals, while some of the intersections        Sierra Madre Boulevard     All Way Stop   Collected by Professional Firm  Collected by Professional Firm
                                                                                     at Baldwin Avenue
in the northern part of the City were counted by resident volunteers under
                                                                                  Sierra Madre Boulevard     All Way Stop   Collected by Professional Firm  Collected by Professional Firm
direction of the General Plan Steering Committee. Table 3-4 outlines the         at Mountain Trail Avenue
locations and methods of count. Figures 3-3a and 3-3b, Existing Intersection
                                                                                 Orange Grove Avenue at      All Way Stop   Collected by Professional Firm  Collected by Professional Firm
Lane Configurations and Peak Hour Traffic Volumes, show the collected AM               Baldwin Avenue
and PM volumes at each intersection.                                             Orange Grove Avenue at    Side Street Stop
                                                                                         Rancho Road          Controlled    Collected by Professional Firm  Collected by Professional Firm
                                                                               Source: Fehr & Peers, 2011.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                             3-9
Figure 3-3a Existing Intersection Lane Configurations and Peak Hour Traffic Volumes
   Source: Fehr and Peers 2012.
3-10                                                   GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
Figure 3-3b Existing Intersection Lane Configurations and Peak Hour Traffic Volumes
Source: Fehr and Peers 2012.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA         3-11
LEVEL OF SERVICE                                                                Table 3-5 Intersection LOS Criteria
Operations for these intersections are expressed in terms of Level of Service      Level of                           Description                      Signalized Delay Unsignalized Delay
                                                                                   Service                                                                (Seconds)         (Seconds)
(LOS). LOS is a general measure of traffic operating conditions whereby a
                                                                                       A        Operations with very low delay occuring with               < 10.0            < 10.0
letter grade, from LOS A (no congestion) to F (high levels of congestion),                      favorable progression and/or short cycle length.
is assigned. LOS E represents “at capacity” operations. The flow of vehicles                    Operations with low delay occuring with good
without significant impediments is considered “stable” whereas when traffic            B        progression and/or short cycle lengths.                 > 10.0 to 20.0    >10.0 to 15.0
encounters interference that limits the capacity acutely, the flow becomes                      Operations with average delays resulting from
“unstable”. These grades represent the perspective of drivers and are an               C        fair progression and/or longer cycle lengths.           > 20.0 to 35.0    >15.0 to 25.0
                                                                                                Individual cycle failures begin to appear.
indication of the comfort and convenience associated with driving as well
as speed, travel time, traffic interruptions, and freedom to maneuver. For                      Operations with longer delays due to a
                                                                                       D        combination of unfavorable progression, long            > 35.0 to 55.0    >25.0 to 35.0
intersections, LOS is based on the average delay in seconds for the entire                      cycle lengths, or high V/C ratios. Many vehicles
intersection. Table 3-5 describes the LOS delay criteria for signalized and                     stop and individual cycle failures are noticeable.
unsiglalized intersections.                                                                     Operations with high delay values indicating
                                                                                       E        poor progression, long cycle lengths, and high          > 55.0 to 80.0    >35.0 to 50.0
                                                                                                V/C ratios. Individual cycle failures are frequent
For the existing conditions, the LOS was calculated for each of the                             occurrences.
intersections counted within the city. The current City of Sierra Madre                         Operation with delays unacceptable to most
General Plan does not set any specific goals for LOS, but rather indicates that        F        drivers occuring due to over saturation, poor              > 80.0            >50.0
current LOS should be maintained. As such, there is no set standard for what                    progression, or very long cycle lengths.
would be considered deficient for traffic operations at intersections. Table    Source: Highway Capacity Manual (Transportation Research Board, 2000).
3-6 summarizes the LOS data for the analyzed intersections. As shown in the
table, the highest delays occur at the intersection of Orange Grove Avenue
and Baldwin Avenue, which could be considered the primary entry point to
the City. Every other intersection operates at a LOS C or better.
3-12                                                               GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

Table 3-6 Intersection LOS                                                                                                                                PEDESTRIAN FACILITIES
                                                                                    Delay (secs)
                                                                                            1
                                                                                                                           Level of Service               Figure 3-4, Pedestrian Network, indicates the locations where sidewalks
              Intersection                       Traffic Control                AM                  PM                   AM                  PM           currently exist in Sierra Madre. As reflected in the figure, sidewalks are not
       Grand View Avenue at                    Cross Street Stop                                                                                          continuous throughout the City. There are locations where there are sidewalks
         Michillinda Avenue                        Controlled                   13.9                12.1                  B                   B
                                                                                                                                                          present on both sides of the roadway, areas with sidewalks on only one side,
   Grand View Avenue at Lima                      All Way Stop                  10.0                 8.8                  A                   A           and others with no sidewalks at all. In addition to continuity of the sidewalk
                  Street
                                                                                                                                                          network, five other factors that might affect the pedestrian experience were
       Grand View Avenue at                       All Way Stop                  10.0                 8.8                  A                   A           analyzed. The five factors include:
            Mountain Trail
   Grand View Avenue at Santa                     All Way Stop                   8.1                8.2                   A                   A
                                                                                                                                                              • Sidewalk Conditions – This refers to whether the sidewalks are in a state
             Anita Avenue                                                                                                                                        of good repair. Sidewalks that are broken or cracked can sometimes
    Sierra Madre Boulevard at                      Signalized                   29.7                32.2                   C                  C                  deter travel, particularly for those who are mobility impaired such as
         Michillinda Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                 those in wheel chairs, persons using walkers, and strollers.
    Sierra Madre Boulevard at                     All Way Stop                  13.2                14.3                  B                   B
              Lima Street                                                                                                                                     • Shading – Persons are more inclined to walk in areas where there is
    Sierra Madre Boulevard at                     All Way Stop                  19.1                20.4                   C                  C                  shade present, particularly in southern California with its relatively
           Baldwin Avenue
                                                                                                                                                                 warm weather and limited rainfall as compared to other locations.
    Sierra Madre Boulevard at                     All Way Stop                  12.5                10.3                  B                   B
       Mountain Trail Avenue                                                                                                                                  • Grade – Persons are more inclined to walk in areas which are relatively
     Orange Grove Avenue at                       All Way Stop                  30.7                31.7                  D                   D                  flat or have limited grade changes.
           Baldwin Avenue
     Orange Grove Avenue at                    Cross Street Stop                                                                                              • Amenities Offered – All items being equal, persons are more inclined to
             Rancho Road                           Controlled                   12.5                14.5                  B                   B
                                                                                                                                                                 walk in areas that are interesting environments with shopping, retail,
Source: Fehr & Peers, 2012 (see Appendix A for detailed intersection AM and PM LOS worksheets).                                                                  restaurants, and other similar uses.
1
  Delay calculated by Trafficware Synchro V6 per 2000 Highway Capacity Manual methodology. Overall average intersection delay and level of
service are shown for intersections with traffic signal or all way stop control. For intersections with cross street stop control, the delay and level of     • Buffers – A more walkable environment is one in which there is some
service for worst individual movement (or movements sharing a single lane) are shown.                                                                            degree of separation between the pedestrian and the motorist.
                                                                                                                                                          A general evaluation of the pedestrian environment in the corridor is provided
                                                                                                                                                          in Table 3-7.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                                                                         3-13

Figure 3-4 Pedestrian Network
Source: Fehr and Peers 2012.
3-14                          GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
Table 3-7 Existing Pedestrian Facilities
         Criteria                                                      Evaluation
                            Generally within the downtown area the sidewalks are in good condition, free of cracks
        Sidewalk            and fissures. Outside of this area, there is a significant amount of damage to sidewalks due
       Conditions           to tree roots. The main issue is uplifting of slabs, causing lateral peaks and valley along
                            the walkways. This poses an impediment to pedestrians, especially those with disabilities.
        Shading             Shading is very common in the City, with large, shade bearing trees lining most streets,
                            both in parkways or on private property.
                            In the east-west direction, grades are relatively level throughout the City. In the north-
          Grade             south direction, there is a general uphill slope moving toward the foothills in the north,
                            which gets steeper with proximity to the hills. There is an issue with steep segments caused
                            by uplifting from tree roots.
                            In the downtown area amenities are plentiful, with public space, shopping, dining, benches,
  Amenities Offered         and shade. Outside of the area the character is entirely residential, and other than shade
                            and occasional benches, amenities are not offered.
         Buffers            Buffered space is common throughout the city, particularly along roads with more traffic.
Source: Fehr & Peers, 2011.
BICYCLE FACILITIES
There are currently no defined bicycle facilities within the City of Sierra
Madre. The City’s Bikeway Plan has identified the need for a bike lane along
Sierra Madre Boulevard through the length of the City, but this lane has
not been built. However, the streets within the City are generally wide, with
enough cross-sectional space to accommodate bicyclists even when parking
is provided. This is particularly true for the Local Collectors and Local
Streets. During field visits, cyclists were observed in several parts of the City,
participating in what appeared to be both recreational and transportation-
based riding.
                                                                                                                         Pedestrians using a well-shaded sidewalk
                                                                                                                         Source: Seth Hanson
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                       3-15

TRANSIT NETWORK
There are currently two forms of transit in operation within the City: Fixed-
route transit, and paratransit.
FIXED-ROUTE TRANSIT
Within the city, there are two entities operating transit routes: The Los Angeles
Metropolitan Transit Authority (Metro) and The City of Sierra Madre. Figure
3-5, Transit Network, shows the routes and stops for the lines throughout the
City.
Metro
Metro operates two lines within the City:
    • Line 487: This is an express line connecting Downtown Los Angeles
        to the cities of San Gabriel, Sierra Madre, and El Monte. Within
        Sierra Madre the line runs down Sierra Madre Boulevard, with stops
        every few blocks. Headways are approximately 20 minutes during the
        weekday peak periods. This line also stops at the Metro Gold Line
        train station in Pasadena, providing another method of connectivity       Metro Line 268 traveling through Sierra Madre
        to Los Angeles. Because the route runs along Sierra Madre Boulevard,      Source: Kim Herkewitz
        the majority of the City’s residents live within a half-mile of the line,
        making it a usable commuting choice for many.
    • Line 268: This line runs through the western portion of the San
        Gabriel Valley, connecting the cities of Altadena, Pasadena, Sierra
        Madre, Arcadia, and El Monte. Within Sierra Madre the line runs
        along Sierra Madre Boulevard from Michillinda Avenue to Baldwin
        Avenue, and along Baldwin Avenue from Sierra Madre Boulevard
        south to Orange Grove Avenue where it crosses into Arcadia. This line
        operates on 30-minute headways during the weekday peak periods.
3-16                                                                  GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

Figure 3-5 Transit Network
Source: Fehr and Peers 2012.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA 3-17
City of Sierra Madre Gateway Coach                                              PARATRANSIT
The City operates a fixed-route shuttle bus known as the Gateway Coach to       Paratransit is an alternative mode of flexible passenger transportation that
serve residents during the week. The line only operates during the morning,     does not follow fixed routes or schedules. Typically vans or mini-buses
mid-day and evening peak periods, providing access to the Metro Gold Line       are used to provide paratransit service, but also share taxis and jitneys are
station, Downtown Sierra Madre, and the shopping center located at the          important providers. Paratransit services may vary considerably on the degree
intersection of Michillinda Avenue and Sierra Madre Boulevard. Headways         of flexibility they provide their customers. At their simplest they may consist
are 50 minutes, and the standard fare is $1.00 for residents between the ages   of a taxi or small bus that will run along a more or less defined route and then
of 16 and 62, and free otherwise. Several key City locations are linked by      stop to pick up or discharge passengers on request. At the other end of the
the shuttle, including the public schools, library, City Hall, and post office. spectrum—fully demand-responsive transport—the most flexible paratransit
While there are defined stops with scheduled times, the shuttle will also pick  systems offer on-demand call-up door-to-door service from any origin to any
up hailing residents along the route.                                           destination in a service area.
Bus stops within the City vary in terms of amenities offered. Shade is common   The City provides fully demand-responsive transportation service through
at bus stops, but it is provided by trees or buildings, and not bus shelters.   the Dial-A-Ride program. Dial-A-Ride provides same day, curb to curb
This deters transit usage when raining. Benches are sometimes provided at       transit to anyone who meets the qualification conditions: be a city resident,
bus stops, mainly in the downtown area of Sierra Madre Boulevard. Trash         and be either 62 years of age or older, or disabled in a manner that makes
receptacles are also common in the downtown area. For the Gateway Coach         use of regular transit unduly difficult. Any qualifying users must submit an
stops, amenities are less common in the residential neighborhoods. In some      application with the City before using the service. The service will typically
cases, the stops are located in sections without sidewalks.                     not travel to destinations more than two miles outside of City limits, and
                                                                                the standard fare is $1.00 for destinations within the City, and $2.00 for
                                                                                destinations outside the City. The generally small size of the city makes this
                                                                                type of paratransit possible.
                                                                                TRANSIT CONNECTIVITY
                                                                                Both Metro line 487 and the Gateway Coach stop at the Sierra Madre Villa
                                                                                Gold Line station. This station provides access to the regional light rail system
                                                                                as well as serving as a bus transit hub for the northwest San Gabriel Valley,
                                                                                with several bus lines from multiple jurisdictions intersecting. Metro line 487
                                                                                also connects to Downtown Los Angeles, providing access to commuter rail
                                                                                and interstate rail service through Metrolink and Amtrak, respectively. The
                                                                                Dial-A-Ride paratransit service can also access the Metro Gold Line station.
3-18                                                               GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

COMMUTER MODAL SPLIT
The City’s land use patterns and topography play an important role in the
way residents travel in and around the City. Sierra Madre residents have
access to several modes of travel such as walking, bicycling, and public transit.
However, the automobile remains the primary means of travel within the
City.
The 2005-2009 American Community Survey (ACS) was analyzed to
determine commuter mode split for the City of Sierra Madre, Los Angeles
County, State of California and the United States. Table 3-8 provides
a comparison between the City, county, state and national level for these
commute characteristics.
As is clear from Table 3-8, a majority of Sierra Madre residents choose to
drive rather than using other modes of transportation. Residents carpool
at a lower rate than the county, state and national average. Public transit
utilization is less than half of the Los Angeles County rate, and lower than the
state and national levels. Average commute time to work is 28.4 minutes in
Sierra Madre, which nearly matches the Los Angeles County average of 29.0
minutes according to the survey data.
Table 3-8 Modal Transportation Split
  Commute Mode Choice           Sierra Madre City      Los Angeles County California United States
      Single Occupant                74.6%                    72.2%        73.1%        76.1%
          Carpool                     8.3%                    11.6%        12.3%        10.6%
       Public Transit                 3.0%                     7.0%         5.0%        4.8%
     Bicycling/Walking                3.0%                     3.1%         2.8%        2.9%
        Other Means                   0.8%                     1.4%         2.2%        1.7%
                                                                                                   Modes of travel in Sierra Madre
       Work at Home                  10.3%                     4.3%         4.7%        3.9%
                                                                                                   Source: Margery Bourgeois, Seth Hanson, George Maurer
Source: U.S. Census Bureau, 2005-2009 American Community Survey.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                              3-19

      3-20          GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
Source: Seth Hanson
                                 Chapter 4
       Community Services
                          and Facilities
                                              In this chapter    Quality community services and facilities provide Sierra Madre residents and
                                                                 visitors with a variety of opportunities and amenities. A city’s recreational,
                           PA R K S A N D R E C R E AT I O N     educational, and cultural services and facilities, coupled with notable
                                                                 community design elements, are the foundation for a strong social fabric and
                                        E D U C AT I O N A L     built environment.
                                                                 The City of Sierra Madre provides a wide variety of recreational, educational,
                                                 LIBRARY
                                                                 leisure, cultural and social programs, services and activities to its residents and
                                                                 visitors through the myriad of public and private facilities located throughout
                                              C U LT U R A L
                                                                 the City, as shown in Figure 4-1, Community Services and Facilities. Many
                                                                 of the programs offered at these facilities are targeted toward particular age
                                                                 groups such as pre-school, youth, teen, adult, and senior citizens, while others
                                                                 are geared towards particular interest groups, such as visual and performing
                                                                 arts, historical preservation, hiking and camping.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                       4-1

Figure 4-1 Community Services and Facilities
                                                                                                                                                     Nature Friends
                                                                                                                                                     Lodge and
                                                                                                                                                     Retreat Center
                                Bailey Canyon
                                Wilderness Park
               Mater Dolorosa                                                                                       The Howard Whalen
               Passionist                                                                                                Sculpture
               Retreat Center                                                                                             Garden Mount Mount
                                                                                                                                    Wilson
                                                                                                                                     Trail Wilson
                                                                                                                                          Trail Park
                                                                                                                              Lizzie’s
                                                                                                                             Trail Inn
                                                                                                             St. Rita
                                                                                                             Catholic
                                                                                                             School
                                                                                                            The Gooden
               Milton and                                                                                   School
       Alverno Harriet Goldberg
       High                                                    Sierra Madre
               Recreation Area                                    Elementary                                                                                    Sierra
       School
                                                                      School                                                                                    Vista
                                                                                                Bethany                                                         Park
                                                                                               Christian     Foothill
                                                                                                             Creative
                                                                                                             Arts Group
                                                                                                       Mission                                                           Youth Sierra Madre
                                                                     Memorial Park and                 Renaissance                                              Aquatic Activity Community
                                 Sierra Madre
                 Sierra Madre    Library &           Art Exhibits    Hart Park House                                                                             Center Center Nursery School
                 Women’s Club    Historical Archives at City Hall    Senior Center
                                                                                   Sierra Eastwicke Kersting
                                                                                   Madre Village Gift Court        Mama Pete’s
                                                                               Playhouse & Art Gallery             Nursery
                                                                                                                                                                                              Community Facilities
                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                               (  Cultural
                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                               (  Educational
                                                                                                                                                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                               (  Parks & Recreation
4-2                                                                                                          GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

PARKS AND RECREATION                                                           Table 4-1 Sierra Madre Parks
The City’s parks and recreational facilities provide a balance of active- and               Name                     Address                         Description of Amenities
passive-use spaces, and include a range of amenities. Aside from the parks,                                                         Consists of 1,100 acres and includes picnic areas,
Sierra Madre also offers the Bailey Canyon Wilderness Area, the historic                                                            drinking fountain, hiking trails, native botanical area,
                                                                                Bailey Canyon Wilderness    451 W. Carter Avenue    a fire ring, handicap accessibility, outdoor restrooms,
Mount Wilson Trail, and specialized recreation centers. Additionally, the City  Park                                                and a kiosk. 120 acres are within the City limits, with
offers a wide range of recreational programs and organized sports.                                                                  the remaining acreage located in the Angeles National
                                                                                                                                    Forest.
                                                                                                            Intersection of Baldwin Consists of 2,500 square feet and includes small grassy
PARKS, OPEN SPACE, AND TRAILS                                                   Kersting Court              Avenue and Sierra       area, picnic tables and benches, a drinking fountain,
                                                                                                            Madre Boulevard         and a bell tower.
The City of Sierra Madre operates five parks, which include numerous                                                                Consists of 3.5 acres and includes a playground,
recreational facilities including areas for organized sports, picnic areas,     Memorial Park and Hart      222 W. Sierra Madre     a weeping wall, outdoor restrooms, picnic areas,
                                                                                Park House Senior Center    Boulevard               a covered pavilion, a band shell, tennis courts,
swimming pools, gardens and playgrounds among other amenities. A                                                                    community gardens, and a Veteran’s Memorial Wall,
summary of the parks and their amenities is provided in Table 4-1.                                                                  and the Senior Center building.
                                                                                                                                    Consists of 0.21 acre and includes passive recreation
The City’s parks provide an approximate total of 17.8 acres of public           Milton and Harriet Goldberg 171 Sunnyside Avenue    areas, picnic areas, stone benches, native plants, a
recreational open space to its residents. It was identified in the 1996 Sierra  Recreation Area                                     sand play area, a desert willow hut structure, and a dry
                                                                                                                                    stream bed.
Madre General Plan that the City needs more park space, yet since that
                                                                                                                                    Consists of 0.34 acre and includes playground
date no additional space has been added. As part of the ongoing effort to                                   189 E. Mira Monte       equipment, picnic tables, open grass areas, a
                                                                                Mount Wilson Trail Park     Avenue                  restroom, access to Mount Wilson Trail, and the historic
update the City of Sierra Madre’s Parks and Facilities Master Plan, the City’s
                                                                                                                                    Richardson House and Lizzie’s Trail Inn.
Community Services Department has created an online survey to help the
City identify the community’s needs for the parks and recreational facilities.                                                      Consists of 5 acres and includes a community recreation
                                                                                                                                    center office, a youth activity center, an aquatic center,
                                                                                Sierra Vista Park           611 E. Sierra Madre     a covered pavilion, picnic areas, a playground, tennis
Park land dedication and/or the payment of in lieu park fees is governed                                    Boulevard               courts, a volleyball court, a basketball court, baseball
                                                                                                                                    fields, a dog park, outdoor restrooms, and the Sierra
by the provisions outlined in Chapter 16.44 (Regulations for Dedication of                                                          Madre Rose Float Barn.
Land for Park and Recreation Land) of Title 16 (Subdivisions) of the City’s
Municipal Code. The dedication of parkland is based on the type of dwelling
unit and density being proposed, as outlined in Section 16.44.040 (Formula
for Dedication of Land). When parkland is not possible in whole or in part
within a proposed subdivision, the subdivider is required to pay parkland fees
in lieu of dedicating land, as outlined in Section 16.44.050 (Formula for Fees
In Lieu of Land Dedication).
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                                 4-3

MOUNT WILSON TRAIL
The oldest trail in the San Gabriel Mountains was adapted from an Indian
trail by Benjamin (Don Benito) Wilson in 1864 for access to timber. The
trail was used to transport materials, by pack mule, for the Mount Wilson
Observatory, built in 1889 by Harvard College. Eventually, the trail became
a very popular hiking trail and attracted visitors from all over the country.
The Mount Wilson Trail offers an active recreation opportunity for residents
and visitors of Sierra Madre. The trail begins at the corner of Mountain
Trail Avenue and E. Mira Monte Avenue and leads to the Mount Wilson
Observatory at the mountain’s summit, which stands at 5,710 feet above
mean sea level. Once on the trail, several trails lead you to the top of Mount
Wilson. Aside from its natural resources and beauty (e.g., Sturtevant Falls,
vegetation), the Mount Wilson Trail offers a parking area and restrooms,
trailheads, campgrounds, and a visitor’s center. The historic Lizzie’s Trail Inn
and Richardson House stand at the entry to the Mount Wilson Trail.
YOUTH ACTIVITY CENTER
                                                                                   Mt. Wilson Trail
The City of Sierra Madre’s Youth Activity Center (YAC) is located at 611 E.
                                                                                   Source: Seth Hanson
Sierra Madre Boulevard on the second floor of the Community Recreation
center. Through a partnership with the YMCA, the programs for youth
ages 11 to 17 are provided on a year-round basis. Youth members have the
opportunity to drop in after school to 6:00 pm Monday through Thursday
to participate in engaging activities, including crafts, athletics, and assistance
with homework. On Fridays, YAC programming takes place downtown in
Kersting Court.
4-4                                                                   GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

AQUATIC CENTER                                                               SENIOR CENTER
The Aquatic Center, located at 611 E. Sierra Madre Boulevard, provides       Sierra Madre’s Hart Park House has served as Sierra Madre’s Senior Center
several seasonal aquatic programs for residents of all ages. Summer programs for 20 years. Located at 222 W. Sierra Madre Boulevard, the Senior Center
include private and public swim sessions, aqua aerobics, as well as lap      is open Monday through Friday and provides daily low-cost lunches for
swimming. Additionally, the Sierra Madre Dolphins, the City’s youth swim     residents ages 60 years and over. The Senior Center also provides recreation
team, operates in this facility in both the spring and summer seasons. Off-  opportunities including arts, computer education, gardening, physical fitness
season programs consist of fall and spring lap swimming.                     activities, health screenings, and educational activities. Additionally, the Senior
                                                                             Center hosts special luncheons and entertainment events, as well as organizes
                                                                             day trips to local places of interest. Other services include workshops and
                                                                             meetings to discuss issues pertinent to seniors. The Senior Center recently
                                                                             completed a sixth-month major interior renovation in November 2011.
                                                                             RECREATIONAL PROGRAMS AND
                                                                             ORGANIZED SPORTS
                                                                             The City of Sierra Madre offers a wide range of recreational programs and
                                                                             organized sports to its residents, including but not limited to:
                                                                                  • After School and Vacation Day Camps
                                                                                  • Special Interest Classes
                                                                                  • Sierra Madre Swim Team
                                                                                  • Youth Baseball and Softball
                                                                                  • Aquatics Programs
                                                                                  • Junior Lifeguard Program
Aquatic Center                                                                    • Teen Volunteer Program
Source: Seth Hanson
                                                                                  • Community Gardens
                                                                                  • Community Excursions
                                                                                  • Healthy Family Fun
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                  4-5

EDUCATIONAL                                                                      Table 4-2 Sierra Madre Educational Facilities
Public and private schools within Sierra Madre provide education for children     Public Schools
from preschool through high school. The City of Sierra Madre is served by                                  Lower Campus:                    K-5
the Pasadena Unified School District (PUSD). Within Sierra Madre, there                                    141 W. Highland Avenue
                                                                                  Sierra Madre High School                                                None
is one public combined elementary/middle school (Sierra Madre School),                                     Upper Campus:                    6-8
                                                                                                           160 N. Canon
which is housed on two campuses overseen by PUSD. The public high school
for Sierra Madre residents is located in the City of Pasadena. Sierra Madre       Private Schools
is also home to several private schools, including two preschools, three K-8      Mama Pete’s Nursery      71 Suffolk Avenue               Pre-K          None
institutions, and one high school.
                                                                                  Sierra Madre Community   701 E. Sierra Madre Boulevard   Pre-K          None
Table 4-2 presents the public and private educational facilities within the City  Nursery School
of Sierra Madre.                                                                  Bethany Christian        93 N. Baldwin Avenue             K-8      Evangelical Free
                                                                                                                                                    Church of America
According to PUSD staff, the elementary school campus has an enrollment           St. Rita Catholic School 322 N. Baldwin Avenue #B         K-8          Catholic
capacity of 750 students and is currently at capacity. The middle school
                                                                                  The Gooden School        192 N. Baldwin Avenue            K-8        Episcopalian
campus has an enrollment capacity of 550 students and is currently enrolled
with 350 students. Plans for a new middle school campus are underway,             Alverno High School      200 N. Michillinda Avenue       9-12          Catholic
which will be on the same site as the current school and will maintain the                                                               Girls Only
same capacity of 550 students, while increasing square footage for support
facilities consistent with a modern middle school (PUSD 2010). The old
school was demolished in the summer of 2010 and students have been
attending class in portable classrooms, which will continue until the new
middle school is completed. Currently, plans for the new middle school are
at the State Architect for review. Once approved, construction would take
approximately nine to twelve months to complete. It is estimated that the
campus will be completed by Fall 2013.
4-6                                                                 GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

LIBRARY                                                                          Library services for adults include:
                                                                                     • Circulating collection of books, audio books, music CDs, movies,
The Sierra Madre Public Library, constructed in 1955, is located at 440 W.
                                                                                        and magazines
Sierra Madre Boulevard. The library was originally designed to hold 25,000
books. Today, it is the fourth oldest city library in Los Angeles County and the     • Interlibrary loan for items beyond the library’s collection
tenth oldest in Southern California. The 8,762 square-foot building houses a
collection of approximately 76,000 cataloged items, including books, DVDs,           • Reference collection, online resources, and reference staff
CDs, periodicals, and a historical archives collection.                              • Online reference databases
The library offers a wide range of informational, recreational, historical, and      • Reference resources of the Southern California Library Cooperative
cultural services and programs to the residents of Sierra Madre, including              Reference Center
adults, teens and children. Services are expanded through participation in the
Southern California Library Cooperative, a network of 45 area libraries. The         • Downloadable ebooks and audiobooks
library houses local historical archives that are jointly owned and managed          • Spanish collection and Mango language learning program
by the Sierra Madre Historic Foundation and the Library. These archives are
overseen by a professional archivist and are available for research and historic     • Local history collection
education.
                                                                                     • “Titles to Go” homebound delivery service
                                                                                     • Programs and book clubs
                                                                                     • Computers with Microsoft Office and internet access, and also a
                                                                                        wireless network
                                                                                     • Computer classes
                                                                                     • Printing, photocopying, and scanning
                                                                                 Library services for teens include:
                                                                                     • Teen book club
                                                                                     • Teen summer reading program
                                                                                     • Teen collection (includes fiction and non-fiction for seventh through
                                                                                        twelfth grade)
                                                                                     • Teen’s online databases (offers the same resources as outlined above
                                                                                        under children’s online database, but for teens)
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                               4-7

Library services for children include:                                             The Sierra Madre Public Library’s Board of Trustees follows the City’s
                                                                                   strategic planning process to assess the needs of the library for new services
     • Preschool story times (includes stories, songs, puppets and craft           and facilities. The Board has adopted the Sierra Madre Public Library Plan
         activities)                                                               2000 and the Sierra Madre Public Library Strategic Plan(s). According to
     • Parent/child workshop series                                                an updated needs assessment and configuration of lot and building design,
                                                                                   the Library’s Board of Trustees determined that, as of October 2011, the
     • Barks & Books (children are invited to read to a gentle and friendly        total space needed to support ongoing public library services is in the range
         dog visitor)                                                              of 15,000 to 25,000 square feet. Funding is available for a remodel of the
     • Summer reading program                                                      Children’s Library, which will improve the use of existing space. Construction
                                                                                   is expected to begin in early 2012.
     • Personal reference assistance
     • Study space
     • In-library class visits (teachers and leaders of youth organizations
         bring children to the library to listen to stories, do research, and find
         books)
     • Children’s collection (includes board books, picture books, beginning
         readers, fiction, non-fiction, audio books and DVDs)
     • Children’s online databases (in addition to print materials, the online
         databases support both recreational and educational inquiry)
The American Library Association (ALA), the Public Library Association
(PLA), nor the State of California set prescriptive standards for public
libraries. Instead, they advocate an outcomes-based assessment process. The
reason for this is that each library serves a different community with different
needs. For example, a library serving a community with many young families
wants and needs a library with different facilities and services than a library
serving a similar size population with a high percentage of empty-nesters and
retirees.
                                                                                   Sierra Madre Public Library
                                                                                   Source: Seth Hanson
4-8                                                                    GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

CULTURAL                                                                         ART EXHIBITS AT CITY HALL
In addition to providing its residents easy access to a variety of recreational  In an effort to promote the professional development of local artists and their
and educational amenities, services and facilities throughout the City, Sierra   work, the City of Sierra Madre features visual art exhibits at City Hall on
Madre is also home to a number of public and private facilities that offer       a rotating calendar. Art exhibits, which run for eight weeks with a special
a variety of cultural and social activities, events, resources, and programs.    opening reception, are available for viewing during City Hall business hours
Sierra Madre is home to among other things, two museums, a non-profit art        (City of Sierra Madre 2011a).
gallery and an active community of artists, and a playhouse. The downtown
area reveals how important the arts are to the residents of Sierra Madre, as is  FOOTHILL CREATIVE ARTS GROUP
evident in the galleries, art festivals, shows and artwork on display at various
                                                                                 Founded in Sierra Madre in 1960, the Foothill Creative Arts Group at 108 N.
locales. Kersting Court is a significant public space in the downtown area
                                                                                 Baldwin Avenue is the only nonprofit arts center in the community of Sierra
where many cultural and social activities and events take place. City Hall
                                                                                 Madre. The group provides art programs, exhibitions and workshops and is
also hosts visual art exhibits for local artists. Additionally, the Sierra Madre
                                                                                 an integral part of many community activities. In addition to being a learning
Library houses a historic archives collection as mentioned above.
                                                                                 center for people of all ages interested in art, the group sells art from hundreds
Below are descriptions of some of the cultural organizations and venues in       of artists from the San Gabriel Valley and beyond, runs tours of the garden,
Sierra Madre. Descriptions of cultural venues that are also listed as historic   displays and sells jewelry from local designers, and acts as a community center
structures including Lizzie’s Trail Inn (Tavern), the Richardson House and       for local artists. Classes and workshops offered at its facility include drawing
the Sierra Madre Playhouse, are found in Chapter 5, Historic and Cultural        and painting, ceramics and sculpturing, sewing and even puppet-making
Resources.                                                                       (CAG 2011 and SMP 2011a).
                                                                                 KERSTING COURT
                                                                                 Kersting Court, located at the center of town at Sierra Madre Boulevard and
                                                                                 Baldwin Avenue, functions as one of the City’s principal activity nodes. As
                                                                                 described in Chapter 2, Kersting Court is the location for the start or terminus
                                                                                 of numerous civic, holiday, and special events. In fact, Kersting Court is
                                                                                 occasionally closed to vehicular traffic during the evenings, weekends, and
                                                                                 special events for concerts, outdoor dining, arts and crafts fairs, family movie
                                                                                 nights, or similar activities.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                     4-9

MATER DOLOROSA PASSIONIST                                                       NATURE FRIENDS LODGE AND RETREAT
RETREAT CENTER                                                                  CENTER
Nestled in the foothills of the San Gabriel Mountains at 700 N. Sunnyside       Nature Friends, a non-profit membership organization that operates out
Avenue, the Mater Dolorosa Passionist Retreat Center offers a private           of its Sierra Madre Lodge and Retreat Center at 423 Yucca Trail, facilitates
and beautiful natural setting for members of area Catholic parishes and         activities such as hiking, backpacking, nature walks, camping and picnicking
individuals seeking escape from the busy world. In addition to serving as a     in its own backyard–the San Gabriel Mountains. The facility is not only
center for retreats, the center offers a wide range of programs for members of  home for the club, but also a nature sanctuary, retreat center, community
the religious communities and organizations, school faculties and students,     resource, and welcoming garden. The facility is available, on a selective basis,
and youth organizations (MDPRC 2011 and SMP 2011a). Additionally, the           for meetings, retreats, weddings, workshops, seminars, birthday parties or
center hosts a festival once a year that is open to the public.                 picnics. Additionally, the group hosts lectures, movie nights and concerts
                                                                                (NFLA 2008 and SMP 2011a).
                                                                                SIERRA MADRE WOMAN’S CLUB
                                                                                The Sierra Madre Woman’s Club, located at 550 W. Sierra Madre Boulevard,
                                                                                is a volunteer membership organization dedicated to serving the local
                                                                                community while providing club members with opportunities for personal
                                                                                growth. Membership is open to women of all ages and backgrounds. The
                                                                                women have several events that reach out to the community and meet during
                                                                                the day from September to May. There are also additional club activities to
                                                                                garner support for the community and local charities. The women meet at the
                                                                                Essick House, a historic clubhouse built in 1914 that includes a large main
                                                                                room, dining room and several adjacent meeting and resting rooms (SMP
                                                                                2011a). The clubhouse is also the location of many community activities.
Mater Dolorosa Passionist Retreat Center
4-10                                                                GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

CULTURAL, SOCIAL, AND SPECIAL EVENTS
AND PROGRAMS
The City of Sierra Madre offers many special events and programs to its
residents, many of which are organized and operated by citizen volunteers
and sponsored by the City of Sierra Madre. These include, but are not limited
to:
     • Sierra Madre Rose Float
     • Friends of the Library Art Fair
     • Huck Finn Fishing Derby and Campout
     • Wistaria Festival
     • Easter Egg Hunt
     • Mount Wilson Trail Race
     • Halloween Happening
     • 4th of July Celebration
                                                                              Fourth of July Parade
     • Concerts in the Park
                                                                              Source: Bill Coburn
     • Dickens’s Village
     • Firefighter’s Dance
     • Oktoberfest Golf and Tennis Tournament
     • Community Gardens
     • Community Excursions
     • Family Movie Fridays
     • Aquatic Movie Nights
Other special events and programs are also offered throughout the year by
community groups and organizations.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                         4-11

      4-12                          GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
Source: Sierra Madre Public Library
                                 Chapter 5
                           Historic and
            Cultural Resources
                                                In this chapter  Local history and cultural diversity play vital roles in establishing identity
                                                                 and enriching human life and experience in communities. Sierra Madre’s
                              H I S TO R I C R E S O U R C E S   richness of history sets the stage for ongoing community development that
                                                                 can acknowledge and memorialize the past, while informing decisions about
                              C U LT U R A L F A C I L I T I E S the community’s ongoing cultural and historical development. Protecting
                                                                 and celebrating Sierra Madre’s rich history and cultural heritage is of high
                                                                 importance to the community.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                5-1

Figure 5-1 Historic Resources
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      56
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ( 29
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                        SIERRA MEADOW DR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ( 39
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                            59                                                                                                                               8                         !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                           !
                                                                                                           ( CARTER             AVE                                  47                                                    RD               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (                             ST
                                                                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                    (        54                                     L
                                                                                                                                                                                                               H URC
                                                                                                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                            (                                       HI L
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ( 19
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        O
                                                                                                                                              33       MIRA MONTE         AVE 51 52                             C
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    !                                           C AM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       IL L
      MICHILLINDA AVE
                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                             (                                  !
                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                                                (                                                                                                                                       ELKINS AVE
                                FAIRVIEW AVE                                                                                                                                                                                 55
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SANTA ANITA AVE
                                                                                                                                              18                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            (                 1
                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                             (                                                                             ( 26
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           !                 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                         MOUNTAIN TRAIL AVE
                                                42                                                                                             32                   GRANDVIEW AVE                              10                28 6                                                            17
                                               !
                                               (                                                                                              !
                                                                                                                                              (                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                              (                  !!
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ( (                                                              !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  (
                                                                                 36                                                                 16 46(2                                                                 5
                                             SUNNYSIDE AVE
                                                                                                                                                     ( !(!                                                                       AVE
                                                                                                                                AUBURN AVE
                                                                                !
                                                                                (
                                                                                                                                                      BALDWIN AVE
                                                                                                                                                     !     ( 49
                                                                                                                                                           !                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (
                                                                                                                                                                                                  ( 27
                                                                                                                                                                                                  !
                                                                             LIMA ST                                                                                                                                              CANON
                                                                                                                                                       !
                                                                                                                                                       (  12
                                    4                               3 13                                                  41                                        HIGHLAND AVE                                        58
                                   !
                                   (                               ! !
                                                                   (  (                                                   !
                                                                                                                          (                                                                                            !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              50
                                                                        48                                                 44                                                                                                             25 !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             (
                             MONTECITO AVE
                                                                       !
                                                                       (                                                  !
                                                                                                                          (                                                                                                                24
                                                                                                                                                             22
                                 7                            53                                           21 35                             57 34          !SIERRA
                                                                                                                                                            (             MADRE BLVD                            20                                   37
                                !
                                (                            !                                             (!
                                                                                                           ! (( 11
                                                                                                              !                              (!
                                                                                                                                             ! (                                                               !
                                                                                                                                                                                                               (                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    (
                                                             (                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Historic Resources
                                                                                                                                                                                    43                                          SANTA ANITA CT
                                                                                                                                                                                   !
                                                                                                                                                                                   (
                                                                                                                                                      45 LOWELL AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (    City Designated Historic Landmarks
                                                                                                30
                             RAMONA AVE
                                                                                  !
                                                                                  (
                                                                                   23          !
                                                                                               (
                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                      ( !  (                                                                                                                    !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (    National Register of Historic Resources
                         9                                                                                                                            ( 15 40
                                                                                                                                                      !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (    California Points of Historic Interest
                                                                                                            HERMOSA AVE                                                                                                                                    RANCHO RD
                        !
                        (
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                !
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (    Other Places of Historic Interest
                         ORANGE GROVE AVE
5-2                                                                                                                                                                 GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
OVERALL HISTORIC QUALITY                                                         INDIVIDUAL HISTORIC RESOURCES
OF BUILT ENVIRONMENT                                                             Sierra Madre’s rich cultural and historical heritage is exemplified by many
                                                                                 notable resources, as summarized below and shown in Figure 5-1, Historic
The previous section on Land Use provides a physical description of the City,    Resources.
and yet there is a relatively unique quality to it that is not simply described
by the individual historic resources, important as they are, but amounts to a    The City of Sierra Madre is a well-established community whose residents
topophilia, or love of one’s environment.                                        have a deep sense of pride and joy in their historical treasures. In fact, Sierra
                                                                                 Madre has a very active historic preservation community, known as the Sierra
Sierra Madre has a rich and nuanced built environment that includes an           Madre Historical Preservation Society (SMHPS), which was formed in April
accretion of residential, industrial, and commercial structures dating from the  of 1991 when the Preservation Society of Sierra Madre joined the Historical
late 19th century through to the present decade. Buildings of various ages,      Society and together became the Sierra Madre Historical Preservation Society
styles and size are intermingled throughout the town. Neighborhoods such         (SMHPS 2011a). The Society works to collect, preserve, and exhibit the
as the Canyon reflect opportunities and constraints afforded by topography,      City’s local historical and cultural memorabilia, which it showcases through
changing purposes and stylistic preferences. Others -- such as East Montecito    two local museums, Lizzie’s Trail Inn and the Richardson House. The
-- have evolved from our industrial and agricultural past. We have numerous      Society’s volunteers operate, maintain, restore and preserve these museums.
historic buildings that meet Secretary of the Interior’s historic criteria; some The Society also showcases the City’s rich history through its historic archives
are officially listed as historical, some de-listed, and others never listed.    collection (the Sierra Madre Historical Archives) housed at the Sierra Madre
Sierra Madre was built more or less one structure at a time. The resultant       Public Library. Additionally, the City has a Historic Preservation Ordinance
mix of style, size and arrangement creates a visually rich cultural landscape.   (Municipal Code Chapter 17.82), which serves to protect and preserve the
Sierra Madre may have only a few groupings of historic buildings that would      City’s historic landmarks.
warrant establishing historic districts. What we do have is, however, in many    Over several decades the Society has collaborated with the City and raised
respects superior to that. The variety and complexity of our built environment   public awareness to protect numerous significant structures such as the Old
-- with its good, bad, and ordinary buildings -- provides a visually rich and    North Church, Old City Hall, and Richardson House. As of November 2008,
economically resilient matrix that will continue to sustain and shelter our      the City had designated 48 local historic landmarks (see comprehensive list
community and differentiate it from the suburban banality of much of the         provided in Appendix B), which include homes, schools, churches, factories,
rest of Southern California.                                                     as well as various community buildings, and a trail and cemetery.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                    5-3

Two of the City’s landmarks (Episcopal Church of the Ascension and John
Carlton Pegler House) are listed in the National Register of Historic Places.
                                                                                 NATIONAL REGISTER OF
Additionally, two buildings (Lizzie’s Trail Inn and the Richardson House,        HISTORIC PLACES
which are the two museums used by SMHPS) are designated as California
Points of Historical Interest by the California State Office of Historical       EPISCOPAL CHURCH OF THE ASCENSION
Preservation. In addition to these historic landmarks and buildings, the City
is also home to the Wistaria Vine, which is considered a place of historic       Through the efforts of a small but stalwart congregation of the Episcopal
significance, even though it is not listed on any local, state or national list. Diocese of California, a wood-framed church was designed by Pasadena
                                                                                 architect H. Ridgeway and built in 1886 on Baldwin Avenue. The following
Following are descriptions of the buildings that are listed on the National      year (October 1887), the structure was completely destroyed by a fierce
Register of Historic Places and the California Points of Historical Interest,    windstorm. Soon after, the members of the church began to raise funds for
and other buildings and locales in the City that are not included on the         a substantial stone church designed by noted architect Ernest Coxhead. The
City’s list of 48 historic landmarks or on any other local, state or national    new church, constructed in 1888 and dedicated in 1889, continues in use
preservation list, but are of historic significance to the community.            today at 25 E. Laurel Avenue and was placed on the National Register of
                                                                                 Historic Places in 1977 (Reference No. 77000303).
Lizzie’s Trail Inn
Source: Seth Hanson                                                              Episcopal Church of the Ascension
                                                                                 Source: Seth Hanson
5-4                                                                  GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

JOHN CARLTON PEGLER HOUSE                                                     CALIFORNIA POINTS OF HISTORICAL
John Carlton Pegler, a native of Great Britain, arrived in Sierra Madre with  INTEREST
his family in 1893. Built in 1894, this Victorian home was once in the middle
of a 14-acre fruit orchard. Mr. Pegler dug a 235-foot deep well nearby which
supplied all of his water needs. J.C. Pegler served as one of the trustees of
                                                                              LIZZIE’S TRAIL INN (TAVERN)
Sierra Madre when the City was incorporated in 1907. The house, located       Beginning about 1890, a lunch stand and coffee shop stood at the foot of
at 419 E. Highland Avenue, was placed on the National Register of Historic    the Mount Wilson Trail serving hikers and packers on the way up or down
Places in 1988 (Reference No. 88002019).                                      the popular trail. Around 1905, it was being run as a lunch counter by Walt
                                                                              Douglas. In 1913, the ever-evolving structure was moved to, or rebuilt on,
                                                                              the east side of the trail, where it continued under the management of various
                                                                              early-day entrepreneurs. Operated by Lizzie McElwain from 1925 to 1935,
                                                                              Lizzie’s Trail Inn became famous throughout the region for its unchanging
                                                                              menu of fried chicken and ravioli (and “distilled spirits” during prohibition).
                                                                              The Lizzie’s tradition was continued by Thelma and Robert Orme until the
                                                                              business closed in 1948.
                                                                              In 1976, the SMHPS began a restoration of the structure. Today, Lizzie’s
                                                                              Trail Inn, located at 165 E. Mira Monte Avenue at the foot of the Mount
                                                                              Wilson Trail, has been restored and is used as a historical learning center and
                                                                              museum. The museum is owned by the City of Sierra Madre, but operated
                                                                              and maintained by volunteers of SMHPS under a joint agreement. The
                                                                              museum invites visitors to learn about the pack trains that hauled everything
                                                                              up and down the trail, the trails and the mountain camps of early Sierra
                                                                              Madre (SMHPS 2011b and SMNN 2011).
John Carlton Pegler House
Source: Seth Hanson
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                5-5

RICHARDSON HOUSE                                                            OTHER PLACES OF HISTORIC
John Richardson, one of the town’s first residents, came to the area in the SIGNIFICANCE IN SIERRA MADRE
early 1860s and built a ranch and two small houses/cabins on 150 acres of
federal land. One of these small houses, the Richardson House, has since
been restored and is preserved and used as a museum. The Richardson House,
                                                                            BAKER-JAMESON ESTATE
located at 167 E. Mira Monte Avenue at the foot of the Mount Wilson         This Craftsman home was built in 1908 for the C.H. Baker family at a cost
Trail, is owned by the City of Sierra Madre, but operated and maintained    of $7,000. Mr. Baker owned a shoe company in Los Angeles. The Bakers
by volunteers of SMHPS under a joint agreement. The museum is furnished     referred to their 5-acre estate as “Glen Cairn.” (rocky meadow) In 1920, the
with vintage furniture and accessories and displays historical documents,   property was sold to James William Jameson, a Kern County oil entrepreneur.
paintings, and photographs from Sierra Madre’s early days (SMHPS 2011b).    The home, located at 481 W. Highland Avenue, has seven bedrooms and
                                                                            there were extensive gardens, including a Japanese garden. The Jamesons did
                                                                            not have children but they set up a foundation which contributes funds to a
                                                                            number of causes. In 1987, the property was subdivided and 22 new homes
                                                                            were built.
                                                                            BARLOW VILLA (ALVERNO HIGH SCHOOL)
                                                                            PRATT HOUSE
                                                                            Built in 1925 by renowned architects Marston, Van Pelt, and Maybury, the
                                                                            Italian Villa at 336 Sturtevant Drive features impressive architectural details,
                                                                            such as stained glass windows, a Gothic-arched hallway, Moroccan and
                                                                            soaring ceilings, palladian windows, a massive fireplace, and sweeping views.
                                                                            The three-plus acres of the villa’s grounds are covered by a myriad of mature
                                                                            trees, which include groves of camellias and live oaks, bauhinias, ginkgos, silk
                                                                            floss, eucalyptus, and numerous fruit trees (LAC 2011). The villa was built
                                                                            for Mr. Russell A. Pratt, west coast distributor for the Coca Cola Company.
Richardson House
Source: Seth Hanson
5-6                                                             GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

BELLA VISTA TERRACE/LEWIS COURT                                                ESSICK HOUSE
Designed by noted Southern California architect Irving Gill and completed      The historic Essick House at 550 W. Sierra Madre Boulevard, listed by the Los
in 1911, this courtyard housing at Mountain Trail and Alegria Avenues was      Angeles County Museum in its Guide to Architecture in Southern California,
groundbreaking at the time for its advances in natural light, air and spatial  was designed by one of the Woman’s Club’s early members, Mrs. Newman
amenity in low-cost housing, and was published nationally at the time. Of      Essick. This John Austin-style Craftsman home, constructed in 1914, was
Gill’s many buildings, this was reputedly his favorite.                        used as a private residence until purchased by the Woman’s Club in 1972.
                                                                               In January of 1974, the City of Sierra Madre officially declared the site a
CALDWELL/FAIRBANK HOUSE                                                        Point of Historic Architectural Interest and the house was dedicated to the
                                                                               community as the Essick House (SMWC). Today, the Essick house serves as
Located at 647 West Sierra Madre Boulevard, this residence was built in 1907   a venue for special events, gatherings and meetings, including the meeting
by the noteworthy designer-craftsman Louis B. Easton. It was published         place of the Sierra Madre Woman’s Club.
nationally at the time of its construction, noteworthy for its rustic woodwork
and detailing, and cross-ventilation layout. It is being masterfully restored
by the present owners. This home was featured in the March 1908 issue of
Gustav Stickley’s Craftsman Magazine.
CHLOE E. JONES HOUSE
Home of Sierra Madre’s first schoolteacher, now part of a multi-family
complex on N. Hermosa Avenue.
EDGAR W. CAMP HOUSE
This Craftsman-style house, designed by Charles and Henry Greene, was
built in 1904. The feature which distinguishes the Camp house is its massive
fireplace and hearth. The house plan is a modified U-shape with an angling
east wing. Edgar Camp was an attorney who eventually also became a
California State Assemblyman. The residence is located at 327 Sierra Woods
Drive.
                                                                               Essick House (Women’s Club)
                                                                               Source: Kim Herkewitz
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                              5-7

HAWKS ADOBE                                                                    MOUNT WILSON TRAIL
This historic adobe structure located at 37 E. Montecito Avenue was built in   Discussed under Land Use, page 4-4, and referenced here. Lizzie’s Trail Inn
about 1890. Ammi Hawks and his son James secured the help of Mexican           and the Richardson House (described earlier in this chapter) are what remains
laborers to build the adobe. They used soil from Bailey Canyon and mixed       of facilities at the trailhead that also provided supplies and pack animals
it with water and straw. The adobe had only one door, no windows, and a        during the heyday of logging, camps and hotels in the mountains, and what
dirt floor and was perfect for curing lemons. Hawks had citrus crops growing   is referred to as Sierra Madre’s “Great Hiking Era.” The oldest trail in the San
nearby. During the 1930 and 1940s the adobe was used by the Sierra Madre       Gabriel Mountains was adapted from an old Indian Trail by Benjamin “Don
Arts Guild. Art classes met here as well as members of the Arts Guild. In the  Benito” Wilson in 1864 for access to timber. The trail was used to transport
late 1940s, the building was acquired by the Suman Pottery Factory. During     materials by packtrain for the Mount Wilson Observatory, established in
the 1960s and early 1970s, Creative Arts Group was located here until a fire   1889 by Harvard College.
in 1974 destroyed part of the adobe. Since then, the adobe has been home to
many businesses: clothing stores, florist, etc.                                NATURE FRIENDS LODGE AND RETREAT
KERSTING COURT                                                                 The secluded, rustic spot of the lodge and retreat center has two buildings
                                                                               constructed in the 1920’s in the Alpine style by Nature Friends club members.
Kersting Court was the site of the second school building in Sierra Madre.     Work on the lodge and retreat center began in 1920, was finished in 1923
It was torn down and a railway station was erected in 1906. With the           and inaugurated in 1924. It is located at 423 Yucca Trail in a secluded canyon
coming of rail service, this area became Sierra Madre’s downtown business      in the foothills of the Little Santa Anita (Sierra Madre) canyon in the San
district. Charles Kersting, a banker from Michigan, started the Bank of Sierra Gabriel Mountains. The facility is not only home for the Sierra Madre Nature
Madre and built the office building to the north (which still houses many      Friends, but also a nature sanctuary, retreat center, community resource, and
businesses today). During the great hiking era of the 1920s many people        welcoming garden.
came to Sierra Madre by train and enjoyed the trails and mountain resorts.
In 1950, the station was torn down as bus service became the norm for public
transportation. In 1956, this was a film location for the science fiction film
“Invasion of the Body Snatchers”. In 1974, the bell tower was erected to
house the original school bell. The pepper trees were planted on the school
grounds around 1887.
5-8                                                               GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

SIERRA MADRE PLAYHOUSE                                                            THE SIERRA MADRE CANYON
The Sierra Madre Playhouse at 87 W. Sierra Madre Boulevard has evolved from       Discussed under Land Use, page 2-14, and referenced here, should also be
a theatrical heritage that stretches back to the days when Sierra Madre was       noted for the small scale of most of the properties and unique infrastructure
just a tiny village. The structure presently housing the Sierra Madre Playhouse   that is character-defining to the area including the rock walls, narrow, winding
was built in 1932. Its names have changed, as well as its functions (a movie      roads, dam and wash, and other “non-suburban” features that distinguish this
house, an arcade, and now a theatre). It was the Wistaria Theater when it         area.
first opened, then became the Sierra Madre Theatre, and eventually got its
current name, the Sierra Madre Playhouse. The playhouse, in operation since       VARIOUS HISTORIC RESOURCES AT THE
1979, is a nonprofit, non-equity theatre that puts on a wide array of plays and
musicals nine times per year. In addition to staging classics, acting classes are FORMER WILLIS ESTATE
taught by local working actors throughout the year (SMP 2011b).                   The former Willis Estate comprising approximately 64 acres at the top
                                                                                  of Baldwin Avenue, was recently sold for residential development, with a
                                                                                  portion being donated to the Sierra Madre Mountains Conservancy. It had
                                                                                  been the home of Nathaniel C. Carter who acquired the land in 1881. Carter
                                                                                  is considered the founder of Sierra Madre, through his development efforts,
                                                                                  but kept this property, known as “Carterhia” for himself. Historic resources
                                                                                  still in existence include:
                                                                                        • Carter Barn
                                                                                        • George Macomber Cabin (Perhaps the first settlement cabin in Sierra
                                                                                            Madre)
                                                                                        • Willlis Residence (Built by Cornelius Willis in 1939 on the site of
                                                                                            Carter’s residence, designed by John Matthias and published nationally
                                                                                            at the time of its construction. The Willis House is now historically
                                                                                            designated as an individual property.)
                                                                                        • Carterhia Stone Gates (At the top of Baldwin Avenue, substantially
                                                                                            modified by the developer.)
Sierra Madre Playhouse
Source: Ed Miller
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                    5-9

WARD RANCH                                                                        WISTARIA VINE
Edwin Waldo Ward was a luxury food salesman from New York. In 1891, he            Another, more whimsical historic event occurred in 1894, when local resident
moved to Sierra Madre with a dream, to make English-style marmalade. He           Alice F. Brugman purchased a Chinese lavender Wistaria vine in a gallon
first purchased 10 acres of land from the town’s founder, Nathaniel Carter,       container from the Old R.H. Wilson Pioneer nursery in Monrovia and
and planted it with Navel orange trees, which he imported from Spain. He          planted it on their property. Since being planted, the vine has grown to cover
acquired 20 more acres a few years later to bring his total to 30 acres. He built over an acre and weighs over 250 tons. The vine is also listed in the Guinness
the Colonial Revival home and red barn on the ranch site along Highland           Book of World Records as the largest blossoming plant in the world and is
Avenue in 1902 (EWW 2011).                                                        considered one of the Seven Horticultural Wonders of the World.
In 1915 he retired as a salesman and for three years experimented with            Public viewing of the vine, located at 535 N. Hermosa Avenue, has been
marmalade making. By 1918, satisfied he had the recipe he was seeking,            a primary springtime tourist attraction in Sierra Madre since 1918. Every
he began his preserving business. Present day, the Ward Ranch at 273 E.           year in March for an entire Sunday, the Wistaria Festival Committee in
Highland Avenue sits on approximately 2.5 acres and the original house and        cooperation with the Chamber of Commerce, the City and other volunteers
barn are still in use and a part of the E. Waldo Ward & Son Marmalades            host a celebration (Wistaria Festival) in honor of the local Wistaria Vine
business. Behind the home, barely visible from the street, is the original barn,  landmark. The festival includes a craft street faire, vendors, music and food in
which serves as the Ward canning factory building.                                the heart of the town and a public viewing tour of the historic vine. Festival
                                                                                  activities also take place at Memorial Park, which includes more than 150
                                                                                  crafters, live music venues all day, children’s activities and a food court. In
                                                                                  1994 a Centennial Celebration was held for the vine. Completely planned,
                                                                                  promoted, and implemented by volunteers, the Centennial won an award
                                                                                  from the State of California.
                                                                                  CULTURAL RESOURCES
                                                                                  Per the 1996 Sierra Madre General Plan Update EIR, no archeological or
                                                                                  paleontological resources or sites have been identified in the City.
5-10                                                                 GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

Wistaria Vine
Source: De Alcorn
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA 5-11
      5-12            GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
Source: Kim Herkewitz
                                Chapter 6
                                           Safety
                                             In this chapter     The issues of safety are concerned with identifying and, whenever possible,
                                                                 reducing the impact of natural and man-made hazards that may threaten the
                                       FIRE SERVICES             health, safety, and property of Sierra Madre residents, business owners, and
                                                                 visitors. Hazards are an unavoidable aspect of life, and although safety risks
                                   POLICE SERVICES               cannot be completely eliminated, there are measures that can be taken to
                                                                 minimize the level of risk. Together, the City’s fire and police departments,
                                              HAZARDS            residents and businesses can work together to ensure that the various natural
                                                                 and man-made hazards that threaten the City are adequately addressed.
                                N AT U R A L D I S A S T E R
                                  PREVENTION AND
                                      P R E PA R E D N E S S
                                                   NOISE
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                 6-1

FIRE SERVICES                                                                    SMFD has an Insurance Services Office (ISO) fire suppression rating of
                                                                                 4 (with 1 indicating superior fire protection, and 10 not meeting ISO’s
The Sierra Madre Fire Department (SMFD) provides the City of Sierra              minimum standards), and participates in the California Mutual Aid Program
Madre with fire protection (including wildfires) and emergency medical           by providing its resources to the State of California Office of Emergency
services from its fire station, which is centrally located in the downtown area  Services (OES) for combating natural and man-made disasters. Additionally,
of the City at 242 W. Sierra Madre Boulevard. SMFD services a primarily          SMFD has a mutual aid agreement with the US Forest Service, Los Angeles
residential area of approximately 3.2 square miles and 11,000 residents.         County Fire Department, and the ten other Area C departments, which
                                                                                 include the cities of Sierra Madre, Burbank, Pasadena, Glendale, Arcadia,
For many years SMFD was the only all-volunteer fire department in Los            Monrovia, San Gabriel, South Pasadena, Alhambra, and San Marino.
Angeles County; however, over the past years it has shifted from an all-
volunteer force to a combination force (paid and nonpaid). SMFD currently        SMFD’s established performance standard for responding to emergency calls
has a paid staff of 1 Fire Chief, 1 Deputy Chief, 3 Battalion Chiefs, 1 Fire     within its service area (i.e., minutes to reach call location) is five minutes,
Marshal, 1 Paramedic Coordinator, 6 Captains, 6 Engineers, and a volunteer       which is in accordance with the National Fire Protection Association’s 1710
staff of 28 Shift-Auxiliary Firefighters, consisting of 5 crews on a rotating    standard. Table 6-1 presents the type and total number of emergency response
platoon basis (see Service Provider Correspondence in Appendix C).               calls received by SMFD from 2001 to 2010.
The fire stations fleet inventory includes three Type 1 engines, one water       As shown in Table 6-1, emergency response calls have increased by
tender (2,800 gallons), two rescue ambulances, one urban search and rescue       approximately 25 percent from 2001 to 2010 and rescue and first aid calls
trailer, one chief ’s vehicle, one command vehicle, one utility truck, and one   increased by 50 percent. This is due in part to the City’s aging population.
brush patrol truck.
                                                                                 Table 6-1 Emergency Response Calls by Type in Sierra Madre
                                                                                        Call Type             2001        2002         2003        2004         2005        2006        2007        2008          2009         2010
                                                                                          Fires  1
                                                                                                                36          41          38           31          34          36           33          36           28           34
                                                                                     Other Alarms     2
                                                                                                               223         267         219          159         207         256          219         181           200          181
                                                                                      Rescue/EMS     3
                                                                                                               448         438         471          431         447         491          546         634           590          670
                                                                                          Total                707         746         728          621         688         783          798         851           818          885
                                                                                 Source: Fehr & Peers, 2011.
                                                                                 1
                                                                                   Includes structure, equipment, electrical, brush/vegetation, vehicle, rubbish/illegal burn, pole/tree, and food on stove fires.
                                                                                 2
                                                                                   Other alarms includes calls for but not limited to natural gas leaks, suspicious odors, hazardous conditions or materials, fuel/oil spills, bomb
                                                                                 threats, mutual aid, traffic accidents, and false alarms.
                                                                                 3
                                                                                   Includes rescue and first aid calls.
Fire Station
Source: Gary Hood
6-2                                                                  GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

POLICE SERVICES
The Sierra Madre Police Department (SMPD) provides police services to the
City of Sierra Madre. SMPD has full- and part-time members including the
Chief of Police, 4 sergeants, 2 corporals, 1 detective, 3 part-time officers, and
2 part-time cadets. They are supported by 4 non-sworn full-time and 2 non-
sworn part-time dispatchers, 1 non-sworn code compliance/enforcement
officer, 1 parking control officer, ten reserve police officers, and 10 volunteers.
Reserve police officers volunteer their time by assisting with a variety of
law enforcement duties, from providing additional staffing at special City
functions to assisting after natural disasters (City of Sierra Madre 2011b and
2011c). In a 24-hour period, officers respond to an average of 45 to 50 calls
for service. Currently, the police officer to resident ratio in Sierra Madre is 1.7
police officers per 1000 residents.
SMPD also engages in a mutual-aid assistance program for Los Angeles
County, as required by the California Mutual Aid Program. Under the
mutual aid program, SMPD is available on an as-needed basis. SMPD is also
involved in a day-to-day mutual-aid assistance program with the Cities of
Pasadena, Arcadia, and Monrovia.
Additionally, SMPD offers a number of community programs and services,
from fingerprinting to neighborhood and business watch programs. The
Business Watch Program is geared specifically to help prevent crime in
local businesses (e.g., shoplifting, credit card fraud, business scams) while
the Neighborhood Watch Program is geared to prevent crimes within a
neighborhood. Both programs allow business owners and neighbors to look
out for one another and report suspicious activities to police at an early stage,
promoting crime prevention and the timely apprehension of criminals (City
of Sierra Madre 2011b).
                                                                                    Neighborhood Watch Program sign at Laurel Avenue and Cañon Avenue
                                                                                    Source: Jacquie Mayo
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                           6-3

Crime                                                                            By comparison, the County of Los Angeles showed a decrease in total reported
                                                                                 crimes by 8.9 percent and an increase in total arrests by 31.7 from 2005 to
The City of Sierra Madre prides itself on being a safe city. Tables 6-2 and 6-3  2010. Similar to Sierra Madre, reported incidents of crime for the County
present crime data in the City from 2005 to 2010. Principal crimes reported      fluctuated over the past six years, ranging from a low of 307,589 reported
include burglaries, theft, vandalism and driving under the influence (DUI).      incidents in 2007 to a high of 367,893 in 2008. The number of total arrests
Auto theft is the most prevalent of larceny crimes followed by shoplifting,      gradually increased over the past six years in the County, from 107,579 in
theft from private open garages, and theft from private backyards.               2005 to 141,631 in 2010.
As shown in Table 6-2, crimes and arrests have fluctuated over the past six
years, showing the lowest number of incidents in 2005 and the highest in
                                                                                 Table 6-3 Crimes by Type in Sierra Madre
2007. Over the 6-year time span, total crimes reported increased by 19.2
percent and total arrests rose significantly by 93.1 percent. The spike in crime              Crime Type              2005 2006 2007 2008     2009     2010
from 2009 to 2010 can be attributed to one mass financial crime at the EVG
                                                                                  Homicide                             0    1    0     0        0        0
gas station that swept up approximately 500 victims. Increases in burglary
from 2009 to 2010 are most likely due to an increase in Los Angeles gang          Rape                                 1    1    2     0        0        0
members burglarizing San Gabriel Valley communities, and the early release        Robbery                              0    3    0     0        0        4
of offenders from county jails and state prisons (City of Sierra Madre 2011c).    Assault                              35   34   25   30       21       24
The number of DUIs was also abnormally high in 2010 due to an increase of         Burglary                             67   54   36   43       46       58
focus in enforcement. Once these are accounted for, crime within the City is      Theft                               132  124  132   88       89       131
actually down for most categories, as shown in Table 6-3.
                                                                                  Motor Vehicle Theft                  12   15   9     8        6        2
                                                                                  Forgery/Fraud/                       13   20   14   11       11       18
Table 6-2 Crimes and Arrests in Sierra Madre                                      Embezzlement
                                                                                  Vandalism                            75  111  120   91       49       41
                                     2005  2006  2007  2008     2009      2010
                                                                                  Weapons Offense                      3    6    5    10        3        3
 Total Crimes Reported               1,113 1,339 1,420 1,139   1,088      1,351   Prostitution/Sex Offense             9    6    4     2        8        6
 Total Arrests                        246   368   569   407     359        475    Offense Against Family               13   17   2     7        5        4
 Adult Felony                          20   53    60    45       38        51     DUI                                  16   32   49   45       28       61
 Adult Misdemeanor                    139   213   389   289     276        359    Liquor Laws/Drunkeness               15   19   27   31       17       28
 Juvenile Felony                        0    1     5     5       2          5     All Other Offenses                  742  896  995  773       805      971
 Juvenile Misdemeanor                  7    24    35    22       21        20
                                                                                 Source: City of Sierra Madre, 2011c.
 Warrant Arrests                      80    77    80    46       22        40
Source: City of Sierra Madre, 2011c.
6-4                                                                  GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
HAZARDS                                                                            Minor floods have affected the citizens of Sierra Madre since as early as 1889.
                                                                                   Following is a list of floods that have affected the City from 1889 to the
Like many communities, Sierra Madre is subject to numerous potential               present (City of Sierra Madre 2008):
natural and man-made hazards that could affect life and property. Safety
                                                                                       • 1889-1900: Rainfall total for two-month period totaled 23.63 inches
hazards can be generally grouped into two categories: naturally-occurring
                                                                                          and caused flooding.
and man-made. Some hazards – flooding, for example – can be categorized
as both naturally occurring and man-made. Flooding could occur naturally               • April 1926: Heavy rains poured down the Little Santa Anita Canyon,
as a result of intense precipitation in a short duration, which causes rivers,            changing the course of the stream, filling the canyon swimming pool
natural drainage courses, or low-lying areas to overflow, affecting surrounding           with debris, and damaging many homes.
properties. Man-made flooding could occur as a result of failure of a dam,
obstruction of a natural drainage course, or a fire hydrant being broken in an         • March 2, 1938: Rainfall totaled 28.81 inches and caused the worst
automobile accident.                                                                      flood of the Big Santa Anita Canyon, including the destruction of
                                                                                          cabins.
In addition to flooding, the main hazards threatening the City are landslides,
earthquakes, wildfires, and windstorms. It is impossible to predict exactly            • January 19, 1954: Several inches of rain within 24 hours caused
when these disasters will occur, or the extent to which they will affect the City.        mudslides.
However, with careful planning and collaboration among public agencies,                • January 28, 1954: A total of 2.71 inches of rain fell, causing more
private sector organizations, and citizens within the community, it is possible           flooding and mudslides.
to minimize the losses that can result from these natural disasters.
                                                                                       • February 1962: Flooding on Canyon Crest Drive and Carriage House
FLOOD HAZARDS                                                                             Road.
Historical Flooding                                                                    • January 1969: Flooding on Churchill Road; one home at 390
                                                                                          Churchill declared a total loss; heavy storm caused dam overflow
The City of Sierra Madre is susceptible to flooding from primarily flash floods           although flood gates were wide open.
and or flooding as a result of debris flows clogging the public drainage system.
Flooding resulting from general stormwater runoff is another potential                 • October 1978: Flood produced a total of 38 mm of rain and lasted
hazard. However, runoff from the mouths of the canyons has generally been                 two days.
well controlled by dams, basins, and flood control channels. As a result of            • February 2000: Flooding and mudslides from the burn area above
these structural elements, flooding due to stormwater runoff poses little risk            Sierra Madre and Arcadia. Mudflow destroyed public drainage,
to residents or property in Sierra Madre.                                                 portions of Chantry Flats Road, and damaged homes in Arcadia and
                                                                                          Sierra Madre.
                                                                                       • January 2008. Mudslides caused by the grading of the West Ridge on
                                                                                          One Carter/Stonegate.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                    6-5

FEMA Flood Hazards                                                                 The major dam that could have a significant impact on the City in the event
                                                                                   of overtopping or dam failure is the Little Santa Anita Dam, also known as
The City of Sierra Madre is not located within a 100-year flood zone as            Sierra Madre Dam. As shown in Figure 6-2, Dam Inundation Area, a good
indicated on the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) Flood                  portion of the City is within the inundation area of the Sierra Madre Dam,
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) covering the City (FIRM Map Number                       as mapped by the California Office of Emergency Services (OES 2007).
06037C1400F, effective September 26, 2008). The 2008 FIRM for Sierra               Failure of this dam during a catastrophic event, such as a severe earthquake
Madre designates the majority of Sierra Madre as Flood Zone X, indicating          is considered a very unlikely event. The dam has performed well in previous
that it is out of 100- and 500-year flood zones (see Figure 6-1, FEMA Flood        earthquakes and dam failure is not expected. Additionally, the Sierra Madre
Zones). However, two areas of the City, a small segment centered along the         Dam is considered a “dry” dam and functions solely as a flood control device,
Little Santa Anita Creek channel and the northern portion of the City that         only containing water during rainy seasons.
comprises the foothills, are classified as Zone D (see Figure 6-1), indicating
an area in which flood hazards are undetermined, but possible.
The foothill areas are at significant risk of both flooding and landslides,
particularly after a brush fire. As fires remove the vegetation, which helps
to retain soil structure in hillside areas, post-fire soils are often not able to
absorb water effectively. Instead of infiltrating into the soil, rainfall collects
and runs off the surface of hillsides, creating flood conditions. The canyon
areas above the northern portion of the City are also particularly vulnerable.
In the years immediately following a brush fire in the foothills, these areas can
be hazardous to persons and property during a strong rainfall event.
Dam Inundation Flood Hazards
While dams have proven to be effective flood control tools, these structures
also pose additional flood risks. Flooding that results from a structural
failure, known as dam inundation, is the main risk associated with dams.
An additional hazard posed is known as overtopping. Overtopping describes
situations where water escapes over the top of a dam without structural failure.
Both overtopping and inundation can occur as the result of seismic activity.
                                                                                   Little Santa Anita Dam (Sierra Madre Dam)
                                                                                   Source: Josh Moran
6-6                                                                   GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

Figure 6-1 FEMA Flood Zones
                                                                  SIERRA MEADOW DR
                                                                                          CARTER AVE                                                                               RD                                   ST
                                                                                                                                                                            L
                                                                                                                                                                       H URC
                                                                                                                                                                            HI L                                      O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IL L
                                                                                                                 MIRA MONTE AVE                                         C                                     C AM
      MICHILLINDA AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ELKINS AVE
                           FAIRVIEW AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SANTA ANITA AVE
                                                                                                                                                  MOUNTAIN TRAIL AVE
                                                                                                                                GRANDVIEW AVE
                                        SUNNYSIDE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                         AVE
                                                        LIMA ST                                    AUBURN AVE   BALDWIN AVE                                                              CANON
                                                                                                                               HIGHLAND AVE
                        MONTECITO AVE
                                                                                                                              SIERRA MADRE BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                        SANTA ANITA CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Flood Zones
                        RAMONA AVE
                                                                                                                              LOWELL AVE                                                                                           Zone X - Areas determined to be outside the
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.2% annual chance floodplain
                                                                                     HERMOSA AVE                                                                                                         RANCHO RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Zone D - Areas in which flood hazards are
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            undetermined but possible
                        ORANGE GROVE AVE
Source: FEMA 2011.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                                                                                                                    6-7
Figure 6-2 Dam Inundation Area
                                                                  SIERRA MEADOW DR
                                                                                          CARTER AVE                                                                               RD                                   ST
                                                                                                                                                                            L
                                                                                                                                                                       H URC
                                                                                                                                                                            HI L                                      O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     IL L
                                                                                                                 MIRA MONTE AVE                                         C                                     C AM
      MICHILLINDA AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ELKINS AVE
                           FAIRVIEW AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SANTA ANITA AVE
                                                                                                                                                  MOUNTAIN TRAIL AVE
                                                                                                                                GRANDVIEW AVE
                                        SUNNYSIDE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                         AVE
                                                        LIMA ST                                    AUBURN AVE   BALDWIN AVE                                                               CANON
                                                                                                                               HIGHLAND AVE
                        MONTECITO AVE
                                                                                                                              SIERRA MADRE BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                        SANTA ANITA CT
                        RAMONA AVE
                                                                                                                              LOWELL AVE                                                                                     Dam Inundation
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sierra Madre Dam
                                                                                     HERMOSA AVE                                                                                                         RANCHO RD                Sierra Madre Dam Inundation Area
                        ORANGE GROVE AVE
6-8                                                                                                                            GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
LANDSLIDE HAZARDS                                                                 SEISMIC HAZARDS
Landslides are another natural disaster risk relevant to the southern foothills   Southern California has many earthquakes because it straddles the boundary
of the San Gabriel Mountains that lie within the northern boundary of Sierra      between the North American and Pacific plates, and fault rupture often results
Madre, as shown in Figure 6-3, Seismic Hazards. Landslides can occur for          from their motion. Along most of California, the Pacific plate is moving
various reasons. For example, severe flooding can undermine the integrity         northwesterly (relative to the North American plate) at approximately 50
of the soils in the hillsides, therefore causing instability. Landslides may also millimeters/year. Therefore, the faults associated with the plate movement
occur as the result of brush fires, which weaken the soil by removing vegetation  have a northwest trend and are characterized as strike-slip faults. On average,
integral to its support structure. Groundshaking from an earthquake presents      strike-slip faults are near vertical breaks in the rock. When a strike-slip fault
an additional risk; seismic activity of this type can easily initiate a downslope ruptures, the rocks on either side of the fault slide horizontally past each
movement of already unstable earth mass. Grading activities can also trigger      other.
landslides.
                                                                                  The State of California, under the guidelines of the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake
Landslides in the City typically occur at elevations of between 1,400 and         Fault Zoning Act, classifies faults according to the following criteria:
2,000 feet, well above the urban area of the City. A common type of landslide
experienced in Sierra Madre is known as a mudflow. This type of landslide              • Active. Faults showing proven displacement of the ground surface
involves very rapid downslope movement of saturated soil, sub-soil and                     within about the last 11,000 years (Holocene age) that are thought
weathered bedrock. Large mudflows may have enough force to uproot trees                    capable of producing earthquakes.
and to carry along boulders several feet in diameter. Due to their fast speeds,        • Potentially Active. Faults showing evidence of movement within the
mudflows can be very destructive, especially along the bottom and the mouths               last 1.6 million years, but that have not been shown conclusively
of canyons. Mudslides have generally occurred in several locations within the              whether or not they have moved in the last 11,000 years.
northern foothill areas of the City.
                                                                                       • Not Active. Faults that have conclusively not moved in the last 11,000
Historically, two major landslides have occurred in the northern hillside areas            years.
of Sierra Madre. In January 1954, 2,000 residents were urged to evacuate
due to major landslide activity in the City’s hillside areas and the damage was   No areas of the City are within an Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zone.
extensive. In March 1994, a cloudburst below Mount Wilson caused a flash          However, there are many active and potentially active faults within or in
flood and mudslide in Bailey Canyon. The mudslide claimed the lives of two        the vicinity of the City, including the Sierra Madre Fault, Clamshell-Sawpit
hikers, both Sierra Madre residents (City of Sierra Madre 2008).                  Fault, and Raymond Fault (see Figure 6-4, Regional Faults).
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                     6-9

Figure 6-3 Seismic Hazards
                                                               SIERRA MEADOW DR
                                                                                       CARTER AVE                                                                               RD                                  ST
                                                                                                                                                                         L
                                                                                                                                                                    H URC
                                                                                                                                                                         H IL                                      O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ILL
                                                                                                              MIRA MONTE AVE                                         C                                     CA M
   MICHILLINDA AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ELKINS AVE
                        FAIRVIEW AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SANTA ANITA AVE
                                                                                                                                               MOUNTAIN TRAIL AVE
                                                                                                                             GRANDVIEW AVE
                                     SUNNYSIDE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                      AVE
                                                     LIMA ST                                    AUBURN AVE   BALDWIN AVE                                                              CANON
                                                                                                                            HIGHLAND AVE
                     MONTECITO AVE
                                                                                                                           SIERRA MADRE BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                     SANTA ANITA CT
                     RAMONA AVE
                                                                                                                           LOWELL AVE                                                                                    Seismic Hazards
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Potential Seismic Landslide Zone
                                                                                  HERMOSA AVE                                                                                                         RANCHO RD                Potential Seismic Liquefaction Zone
                     ORANGE GROVE AVE
6-10                                                                                                                         GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
The nearest active fault is the Sierra Madre Fault, which passes through the    Table 6-4 Southern California Region Earthquakes with a Magnitude 5.0 or Greater
northern part of the City along the base of the San Gabriel Mountains in
a west-northwesterly direction. This fault consists of several sub parallel                                                               List of Earthquakes
branches found at the base of the mountains and within the one-quarter
                                                                                                      1769 Los Angeles Basin                                    1937 San Jacinto Fault (Terwilliger Valley)
mile of slope above the mountain base. The Clamshell-Sawpit Fault, located
approximately 1.5 miles east of Sierra Madre is an off-shoot branch of the                            1800 San Diego Region                                                   1940 Imperial Valley
Sierra Madre Fault and is considered a potentially active fault. Another active                          1812 Wrightwood                                                         1942 Fish Creek
fault in proximity to the City is the Raymond Fault located approximately                          1812 Santa Barbara Channel                                               1948 Desert Hot Springs
1.5 miles to the south. The Raymond Fault is designated by the California                            1827 Los Angeles Region                                                    1952 Kern County
Geologic Survey as an Alquist-Priolo Special Study Fault Zone.                                       1855 Los Angeles Region                                               1954 W. of Wheeler Ridge
Although the Sierra Madre, Clamshell-Sawpit and Raymond Faults are the                                 1857 Great Fort Tejon                                                 1954 San Jacinto Fault
primary faults that pose a hazard to the City, earthquakes occurring on other                      1858 San Bernardino Region                                               1968 Borrego Mountain
regional faults could also cause considerable damage. Other notable faults                     1892 San Jacinto or Elsinore Fault                                         1971 San Fernando/Sylmar
in the region include the San Andreas, Newport-Inglewood, Palos Verdes,
                                                                                                         1893 Pico Canyon                                                       1980 White Wash
Whittier and Malibu Coast Faults, all of which are considered to be active.
An earthquake along any of these faults would represent a hazard in the                               1894 Lytle Creek Region                                              1986 North Palm Springs
region, potentially causing many deaths and injuries, along with extensive                              1894 E. of San Diego                                                 1987 Whittier Narrows
property damage.                                                                                      1899 Lytle Creek Region                                                  1987 Elmore Ranch
Earthquakes are caused by the violent and abrupt release of strain built up                               1899 San Jacinto                                                   1987 Superstition Hills
along faults. When a fault ruptures, energy spreads in the form of seismic                                  1899 Hemet                                                           1988 Pasadena
waves. Hazards associated with seismic waves include ground rupture,                               1907 San Bernardino Region                                                      1990 Upland
ground shaking, landsliding, flooding, liquefaction, tsunamis, and seiches.                          1910 Glen Ivy Hot Springs                                                 1991 Sierra Madre
The potential seismically induced hazards that Sierra Madre may face include
                                                                                                           1910 Elsinore                                                          1992 Landers
ground rupture and shaking, landslides, and liquefaction. The City has one
liquefaction zone as shown in Figure 6-3, Seismic Hazards. Of these hazards,                          1916 Tejon Pass Region                                                    1992 Joshua Tree
ground shaking presents the most significant risk in terms of potential                                   1918 San Jacinto                                                        1992 Big Bear
structural damage and loss of life. Intensity of ground shaking and the                            1923 San Bernardino Region                                                   1994 Northridge
resultant damages are determined by the magnitude of the earthquake, the                                1925 Santa Barbara                                                      1999 Hector Mine
distance from the epicenter, and characteristics of surface geology.
                                                                                                          1941 Carpinteria                                                      2003 Paso Robles
Since seismologists started recording and measuring earthquakes, there have                               1933 Long Beach                                                        2008 Chino Hills
been tens of thousands of recorded earthquakes in southern California, most
                                                                                Source: City of Sierra Madre 2008 Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan; Southern California Earthquake Data Center, 2011.
with a magnitude below three. Table 6-4 lists the historical earthquake events  http://www.data.scec.org/significant/index.html
that have affected southern California, including Sierra Madre, from 1769 to
the present.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                                                 6-11
Figure 6-4 Regional Faults
                                                                                                                      V
                                                                                                                      U2
                                                                                                                                                S a n     G a b r i e l          M o u n t a i n s
                                                                                                                                   Mount
                                                                                                                                   Wilson
                                                       La Canada Flintridge
                                                                                                              Sierra Madre Fault
                                                                      §
                                                                      ¨
                                                                      ¦
                                                                      210                                                                                                            Clamshell-Sawpit Section
                  Burbank
                                                                                                                                                                                    Duarte
                                         Glendale
                                                                                                                                                             Monrovia
                                                                           V
                                                                           U159
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Glendora
                                 V
                                 U
                                 134
                                                                                            Pasadena
V
U
170                                                                                                                                                                   Bradbury
                                                                                      V
                                                                                      U710
                                                                                                      Raymond Fault                                                                                 Azusa
                                                                                           V
                                                                                           U
                                                                                           110         San Marino                               Arcadia
                                                                                                                                                                           Irwindale
                                     §
                                     ¨
                                     ¦
                                     5                                          South Pasadena
                                                                                                                                 Temple City
 West Hollywood                                                                                                  San
                                     V
                                     U 2
                                         Los Angeles                                                                                                                                                      Covina
                                                                                             Alhambra          Gabriel
                                                                                                                                                                    Baldwin Park
                                                                                                                     Rosemead
                                                                                                                                  §
                                                                                                                                  ¨
                                                                                                                                  ¦10            El Monte
                                                                                                                                   South El Monte
                                                                                                                                                            §
                                                                                                                                                            ¨
                                                                                                                                                            ¦
                                                                                                                                                            605
                                                                                                                                                                                              West Covina
                                                                                             Monterey Park
Culver                                                                                                                            U
                                                                                                                                  V
                        §
                                                                                                                                   60
  City                  ¨
                        ¦ 10
                                                                                                                                                                               La Puente
                                                                                                                                                                                                               Walnut
    Newport-Inglewood                                                                                                                                               Industry
              Fault          §
                             ¨
                             ¦
                             110
                                                                                                        Montebello
                                                   Vernon
                                                                            §
                                                                            ¨
                                                                            ¦710
                                                                                                                    Pico Rivera
                                                              Maywood         Bell                                                                Whittier Fault
                                                                                      Commerce                                         Whittier
                                               Huntington
       Inglewood                                  Park                                                                   Santa Fe Springs
                                                                                  Bell Gardens      Downey                                                                   La Habra Heights
6-12                                                                             GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

WILDFIRE HAZARDS                                                                    Large fires have been part of southern California for many years. In April
                                                                                    and May 2008, a fire raged through the foothills above Sierra Madre, forcing
While Sierra Madre’s location at the base (southern foothills) of the San           the evacuation of all the residents who lived on Grand View Avenue north
Gabriel Mountains affords the City with stunning views and other natural            to the foothills. This fire resulted in over 500 acres being burned, but no
amenities, it also presents a significant wildfire hazard to people and structures. houses were destroyed. Table 6-5 outlines the large historic fires in southern
The natural, undeveloped slopes of the hillside areas within the City support       California in order of structures damaged.
open coastal sage scrub and chaparral habitats that are susceptible to wildfires
common to the San Gabriel Mountains. Additionally, development in the               Table 6-5 Large Historic Fires in California 1923-2003 (Continued on Page 6-15)
canyon areas is characterized by narrow roads with tree canopy coverage.
These tree canopies provide opportunities for hillside wildfires to spread,                  Fire Name        Date            County       Acres    Structures   Deaths
creating a potential fire hazard for residents of Sierra Madre.                       1        Tunnel     October 1991       Alameda      1,600       2,900        25
According to the Fire Hazard Severity Zone Map published by the County                2         Cedar     October 2003      San Diego    273,246      2,820        15
of Los Angeles Fire Department, the foothills within Sierra Madre are within          3         Witch     October 2007      San Diego    197,990      1,650         2
three fire hazard severity zones (see Figure 6-5, Fire Hazard Severity Zones):
                                                                                      4          Old      October 2003   San Bernardino  91,281       1,003         6
Moderate, High and Very High Fire Hazard Zones, with the very high being
the highest designation possible (LACFD).                                             5         Jones     October 1999        Shasta      26,200       954          1
                                                                                      6         Paint      June 1990      Santa Barbara   4,900        641          1
                                                                                      7       Fountain    August 1992         Shasta     63,960        636          0
                                                                                      8       Berkeley  September 1923       Alameda        131        584          0
                                                                                      9        Bel Air   November 1961     Los Angeles     6,090       484          0
                                                                                      10    Laguna Fire   October 1993        Orange      14,439       441          0
                                                                                      11      Paradise    October 2003      San Diego     56,700       415          2
                                                                                      12       Laguna   September 1970      San Diego    175,425       382          5
                                                                                      13     Panorama    November 1980   San Bernardino   23,600       325          4
                                                                                      14      Topanga    November 1993     Los Angeles    18,000       323          3
                                                                                      15         49er   September 1988       Nevada       33,700       312          0
                                                                                      16         Simi     October 2003       Ventura     108,204       300          0
                                                                                      17     Sycamore      July 1977      Santa Barbara     805        234          0
                                                                                      18       Canyon   September 1999        Shasta       2,280       230          0
                                                                                      19       Kanan      October 1978     Los Angeles    25,385       224          0
                                                                                      20      Kinneloa    October 1993     Los Angeles     5,485       196          1
Fire above Sierra Madre in May, 2008
Source: Gary Hood
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                           6-13

Figure 6-5 Fire Hazard Severity Zones
                                                                   SIERRA MEADOW DR
                                                                                           CARTER AVE                                                                               RD                                  ST
                                                                                                                                                                             L
                                                                                                                                                                        H URC
                                                                                                                                                                             H IL                                      O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ILL
                                                                                                                  MIRA MONTE AVE                                         C                                     CA M
       MICHILLINDA AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ELKINS AVE
                            FAIRVIEW AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SANTA ANITA AVE
                                                                                                                                                   MOUNTAIN TRAIL AVE
                                                                                                                                 GRANDVIEW AVE
                                         SUNNYSIDE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                          AVE
                                                         LIMA ST                                    AUBURN AVE   BALDWIN AVE                                                              CANON
                                                                                                                                HIGHLAND AVE
                         MONTECITO AVE
                                                                                                                               SIERRA MADRE BLVD
                                                                                                                                                                                         SANTA ANITA CT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Fire Hazard Severity Zones
                                                                                                                               LOWELL AVE
                         RAMONA AVE                                                                                                                                                                                                 Moderate Fire Hazard
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    High Fire Hazard
                                                                                      HERMOSA AVE                                                                                                         RANCHO RD                 Very High Fire Hazard
                         ORANGE GROVE AVE
Source: California Departmetn of Forestry and Fire Protection 2009.
6-14                                                                                                                            GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
Table 6-5 Large Historic Fires in California 1923-2003 (Continued from Page 6-13)                                                            WINDSTORM HAZARDS
             Fire Name                 Date                    County                 Acres             Structures               Deaths      Throughout most of the year, the southern California and Sierra Madre
  21         Grand Prix            October 2003          San Bernardino              59,448                  196                     0       climate is generally mild and does not produce enough airflow to generate a
  22          Old Gulch            August 1992               Calaveras               17,386                  170                     0
                                                                                                                                             windstorm. However, during the Fall, season shifts in weather patterns begin
                                                                                                                                             to arise and produce very high and unpredictable winds. These windstorm
  23         Station Fire          August 2009              Los Angeles             144,743                   91                     2
                                                                                                                                             conditions are known as the Santa Ana winds and often produce events such
  24           Clampitt          September 1970             Los Angeles             105,212                   86                     4       as trees and power lines falling down.
  25       Basin Complex            June 2008                Monterey               162,818                   58                     0
                                                                                                                                             Severe wind storms pose a significant risk to life and property in the region,
  26          Stanislaus           August 1987               Tuolumne               145,980                   28                     1
               Complex                                                                                                                       including Sierra Madre, by creating conditions that disrupt essential systems
              Campbell
                                                                                                                                             such as public utilities, telecommunications and transportation routes. High
  27           Complex             August 1990                Tehama                125,892                   27                     0       winds can and do occasionally cause tornado-like damage to local homes and
  28           Wheeler              July 1985                 Ventura               118,000                   26                     0       businesses. Severe windstorms can present a very destabilizing effect on the
  29           McNally              July 2002                  Tulare               150,696                   17                     0
                                                                                                                                             dry brush that covers Sierra Madre’s hillsides and urban wildland interface
                                                                                                                                             areas. High winds can have destructive impacts, especially to trees, power
  30            Hwy 58             August 1996           San Luis Obispo            106,668                   13                     0
                                                                                                                                             lines, and utility services. Perhaps the greatest danger from windstorm activity
  31           Day Fire          September 2006               Ventura               162,702                   11                     0       in the region comes from the combination of the Santa Ana winds and the
  32          Iron Alps             June 2008                  Trinity              105,805                    2                    10       major fires that occur every few years in the urban/wildland interface (City of
               Complex
                                                                                                                                             Sierra Madre 2008).
  33              Zaca              July 2007             Santa Barbara             240,207                    1                     0
  34        Bar Complex             July 2006                  Trinity              100,414                    0                     0
                                                                                                                                             Recently in December 2011, severe winds caused building damage to 34
                                                                                                                                             residences in Sierra Madre, including eight homes which reported major
  35           Big Bear            August 1999                 Trinity              140,948                    0                     0
               Complex                                                                                                                       structural damage and were forced to evacuate and seven homes and one
  36        Marble Cone             July 1977                Monterey               177,866                    0                     0
                                                                                                                                             business which had restricted access. The severe winds wiped out many trees
                                                                                                                                             as trees were uprooted or limbs snapped off, which attributed to the structure
  37            Matilija         September 1932               Ventura               220,000                   0                      0
                                                                                                                                             damage as described above. Downed electrical power lines significantly
Source: City of Sierra Madre 2008 Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan; California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CalFire), September impacted the City, which caused complete power outages for up to 7 days for
2009.                                                                                                                                        portions of the City. Preliminary cost estimates to repair damaged residential
                                                                                                                                             structures is 4.8 million and to repair City-owned facilities 1.6 million,
                                                                                                                                             which includes the costs for the extensive clean-up of vegetation debris which
                                                                                                                                             obstructed street access following the windstorm.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                                                             6-15

NATURAL DISASTER PREVENTION                                                    SEISMICALLY-INDUCED DAMAGE
& PREPAREDNESS                                                                 PREVENTION
                                                                               Although seismic activity is a natural process and cannot be prevented, the
FLOOD & LANDSLIDE PREVENTION                                                   City realizes that measures can be taken in order to minimize the damage
In an effort to prevent floods from occurring to the maximum extent possible,  caused by earthquakes. For this reason, the City has put into place siting
the City of Sierra Madre has adopted specific flood objectives and policies.   and building requirements that take Sierra Madre’s geologic tendencies into
For example, the City requires that all new development incorporate sufficient account. For example, the City requires that proposed critical, sensitive, and
measures to mitigate flood hazards. This can be done through the provision of  high-occupancy facilities come under careful standards of seismic review prior
onsite drainage systems, which link to the City-wide storm drain system. The   to approval. Such review includes detailed site investigations for faulting,
City also requires that landscaping of open space areas provide the maximum    and ground motion characteristics, and application of the most current
permeable surface area in order to reduce runoff.                              professional design standards for seismic design.
WILDFIRE PREVENTION                                                            DISASTER PREPAREDNESS
As Sierra Madre is particularly vulnerable to wildfires, the City has made     While mitigation measures may help to prevent excessive damage from natural
it an objective to assure that existing and new development address fire       hazards, the City recognizes that its unique location places it at risk regardless
protection in pro-active and preventative ways. Some of the policies the       of the precautionary steps it takes. Therefore, the City adopted a Multihazard
City has adopted include requiring all development to install and maintain     Functional Emergency Operations Plan (MFEOP) and a Natural Hazard
adequate smoke detection systems, requiring commercial and multi-unit          Mitigation Plan (NHMP) in order to facilitate timely and orderly responses
residential development to install fire protection systems, and mandating an   in disaster situations.
annual brush removal from April to June. The City also established a Hillside  The MFEOP, which was adopted in 1996, addresses the City’s planned
Management Zone (HMZ) in its Zoning Ordinance to limit development in          response to extraordinary emergency situations associated with natural
the hillsides, which are prone to wildfires. The HMZ outlines development      disasters, technological incidents, and national security emergencies. The
standards relative to fire hazards (including a Fire Prevention Plan), open    operational concepts reflected in the plan focus on potential large-scale
space, aesthetics, grading limits, height limits, density limits, and the      disasters, which can generate unique situations requiring unusual emergency
protection of natural habitat within the hillside areas.                       response. The MFEOP requires emergency planning, training of full-time,
                                                                               auxiliary and reserve personnel in all City departments, public awareness and
                                                                               education, and assuring the adequacy and availability of sufficient resources
                                                                               to cope with emergencies. Emphasis is also placed on mitigation measures to
                                                                               reduce losses from disasters, including the development and enforcement of
                                                                               appropriate land use, design and construction regulations.
6-16                                                              GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

The NHMP, which was adopted in 2008, includes resources and information            The City also utilizes a website, http://sierramadrepio.blogspot.com/, in
to assist City residents, public and private sector organizations, and others      an effort to make disaster information available to the community quickly.
interested in participating in planning for natural hazards. The NHMP              Through the website the City can post warnings and updates regarding fires,
provides a list of action items that may assist the City in reducing risk and      floods, landslides and other emergency situations. The City’s Emergency
preventing loss from future natural hazard events. The action items address        Community Radio (AM1630) is another source of disaster information for
multi-hazard issues, as well as activities for earthquakes, wildfires, landslides, the community. The City also works to maintain its close relationship with the
flooding, and wind storms.                                                         Sierra Madre Search and Rescue Team, a group of trained mountaineers who
                                                                                   volunteer their time to perform rescue missions in the San Gabriel Mountains.
The City supports a Community Emergency Response Team (CERT) that                  Although the organization is not supported by general fund monies, the City
is comprised of trained volunteers to assist the City’s Emergency Operations       realizes that the team plays a critical role in enabling quick response times
Center and key community locations in the event of an emergency or disaster.       in emergency situations and thus makes efforts to accommodate the team’s
Many of the CERT members have also received additional training in areas           needs for meeting places and building relationships with the Sierra Madre
such as traffic control and are used as vital additional resources when needed.    Police and Fire Departments. Additional hazard prevention and preparedness
                                                                                   measures are listed below:
                                                                                        • Local and State Building and Fire Codes
                                                                                        • Sierra Madre Zoning Ordinance
                                                                                        • Sierra Madre Municipal Code Noise Standards
                                                                                        • Volunteer Fire Department
                                                                                        • Fire Prevention Tree Trimming Program and Fund
                                                                                        • Interjurisdictional Cooperation
                                                                                        • Education Programs
                                                                                        • Weed Abatement
                                                                                        • Building and Construction Requirements
The 2010 graduating class from Sierra Madre’s Community Emergency                       • Earthquake Safety Brochure
Response Team (CERT)
Source: Gary Hood
                                                                                        • Flood Control Improvement Plan
                                                                                        • Wildfire Vegetation Management Plan
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                  6-17

NOISE                                                                               • Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL). The energy average of
                                                                                        the A-weighted sound levels occurring during a 24-hour period with
FUNDAMENTALS OF NOISE                                                                   5 dB added to the levels occurring from 7 PM to 10 PM and 10 dB
                                                                                        added to the sound levels occurring from 10 PM to 7 AM.
Noise is most often defined as unwanted sound. Although sound can be           Ldn and CNEL values rarely differ by more than 1 dB. As a matter of practice,
easily measured, the perception of noise and the physical response to sound    Ldn and CNEL values are considered to be equivalent and are treated as such
complicate the analysis of its impact on people. People judge the relative     in this assessment.
magnitude of sound sensation in subjective terms such as “noisiness” or
“loudness.”
                                                                               CHARACTERISTICS OF SOUND
The following are brief definitions of terminology used in this chapter:
                                                                               When an object vibrates, it radiates part of its energy as acoustical pressure
     • Sound. A disturbance created by a vibrating object, which, when         in the form of a sound wave. Sound can be described in terms of amplitude
        transmitted by pressure waves through a medium such as air, is capable (loudness), frequency (pitch), or duration (time). The human hearing
        of being detected by a receiving mechanism, such as the human ear or   system is not equally sensitive to sound at all frequencies. Sound waves
        a microphone.                                                          below 16 Hertz (Hz) are not heard at all and are “felt” more as a vibration.
                                                                               Similarly, while people with extremely sensitive hearing can hear sounds as
     • Noise. Sound that is loud, unpleasant, unexpected, or otherwise         high as 20,000 Hz, most people cannot hear above 15,000 Hz. In all cases,
        undesirable.                                                           hearing acuity falls off rapidly above approximately 10,000 Hz and below
     • Decibel (dB). A unitless measure of sound on a logarithmic scale.       approximately 200 Hz. Since the human ear is not equally sensitive to sound
                                                                               at all frequencies, a special frequency dependent rating scale is usually used
     • A-Weighted Decibel (dBA). An overall frequency-weighted sound           to relate noise to human sensitivity. The A-weighted decibel scale (dBA)
        level in decibels that approximates the frequency response of the      performs this compensation by discriminating against frequencies in a manner
        human ear.                                                             approximating the sensitivity of the human ear. That is, an A-weighted noise
     • Equivalent Continuos Noise Level (Leq). The mean of the noise           level deemphasizes low and very high frequencies of sound similar to the
        level averaged over the measurement period, regarded as an average     human ear’s de-emphasis of these frequencies. The normal range of human
        level.                                                                 hearing extends from approximately 0 dBA to 140 dBA.
     • Day-Night Level (Ldn). The energy average of the A-weighted sound
        levels occurring during a 24 hour period, with 10 dB added to the
        sound levels occurring during the period from 10 PM to 7 AM.
6-18                                                              GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

Unlike linear units such as inches or pounds, decibels (dB) are measured on                                When sound is measured for distinct time intervals, the statistical distribution
a logarithmic scale, representing points on a sharply rising curve. Because                                of the overall sound level during that period can be obtained. The energy-
of the physical characteristics of noise transmission and noise perception,                                equivalent sound level (Leq) is the most common parameter associated with
the relative loudness of sound does not closely match the actual amounts of                                such measurements. The Leq metric is a single-number noise descriptor that
sound energy. Changes of 1 to 3 dB are detectable under quiet, controlled                                  represents the average sound level over a given period of time. For example,
conditions and changes of less than 1 dBA are usually indiscernible. A 3 dB                                the L50 noise level represents the noise level that is exceeded 50 percent of the
change in noise levels is considered the minimum change that is detectable                                 time. This level is also representative of the level that is exceeded 30 minutes
with human hearing in outside environments. A change of 5 dB is readily                                    in an hour. Similarly, the L02, L08, and L25 values represent the noise levels
discernible to most people in an exterior environment, whereas a 10 dBA                                    that are exceeded 2, 8, and 25 percent of the time, or 1, 5, and 15 minutes
change is perceived as a doubling (or halving) of the sound. Table 6-6 presents                            per hour. Other values typically noted during a noise survey are the Lmin and
the subjective effect of changes in sound pressure levels.                                                 Lmax. These values represent the minimum and maximum root-mean-square
                                                                                                           noise levels obtained over the measurement period.
Sound dissipates exponentially with distance from the noise source. This
phenomenon is known as “spreading loss.” For a single point source, sound                                  Because community receptors are more sensitive to unwanted noise intrusion
levels decrease by approximately 6 dB for each doubling of distance from                                   during the evening and at night, state law requires that, for planning purposes,
the source. This drop-off rate is appropriate for noise generated by onsite                                an artificial dB increment be added to quiet-time noise levels in a 24-hour
operations from stationary equipment or activity at a project site. If noise                               noise descriptor called the Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) or
is produced by a line source, such as highway traffic, the sound decreases by                              Day-Night Noise Level (Ldn).
3 dB for each doubling of distance in a hard site environment. Line-source
noise in a relatively flat environment with absorptive vegetation decreases by
4.5 dB for each doubling of distance.
Table 6-6 Change in Sound Pressure Level
                                                                       Change in Apparent Loudness
              ± 3 dB                                                 Threshold of human perceptibility
              ± 5 dB                                              Clearly noticeable change in noise level
             ± 10 dB                                                        Half or twice as loud
             ± 20 dB                                                       Much quieter or louder
Source: California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). 2009, November. Technical Noise Supplement.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                            6-19

PSYCHOLOGICAL AND PHYSIOLOGICAL                                                 Table 6-7 Typical Noise Levels from Outdoor and Indoor Sources
EFFECTS OF NOISE                                                                          Common Outdoor Activities                         Noise Level (dBA)      Common Indoor Activities
Physical damage to human hearing begins at prolonged exposure to noise                                                                             110                     Rock Band
levels higher than 85 dBA. Exposure to high noise levels affects our entire                  Jet flyover at 1,000 feet
system, with prolonged noise exposure in excess of 75 dBA increasing body                                                                          100
tensions, and thereby affecting blood pressure, functions of the heart, and the          Gas lawn mower at three feet
nervous system. In comparison, extended periods of noise exposure above 90                                                                          90
dBA could result in permanent hearing damage. When the noise level reaches
                                                                                       Diesel truck at 50 feet, at 50 mph                                         Food blender at three feet
120 dBA, a tickling sensation occurs in the human ear even with short-term
exposure. This level of noise is called the threshold of feeling. As the sound                                                                      80           Garben disposal at three feet
reaches 140 dBA, the tickling sensation is replaced by the feeling of pain in              Noisy urban area, daytime
the ear. This is called the threshold of pain. A sound level of 160 to 165 dBA                                                                      70             Vacuum cleaner at 10 feet
will result in dizziness or loss of equilibrium. A sound level of 190 dBA will                    Commercial area                                                 Normal speech at three feet
rupture the eardrum and permanently damage the inner ear. Table 6-7 shows
                                                                                             Heavy traffic at 300 feet                              60
typical noise levels from various noise sources.
                                                                                                                                                                     Large business office
                                                                                               Quiet urban daytime                                  50              Dishwasher, next room
                                                                                              Quiet urban nighttime                                 40          Theater; large conference room
                                                                                                                                                                         (background)
                                                                                            Quiet suburban nighttime
                                                                                                                                                    30                      Library
                                                                                               Quiet rural nighttime                                            Bedroom at night; concert hall
                                                                                                                                                                         (background)
                                                                                                                                                    20
                                                                                                                                                                  Broadcast/recording studio
                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                      Lowest threshold of human hearing                              0        Lowest threshold of human hearing
                                                                                Source: California Department of Transportation, 1998, Table 9-2136.2.
6-20                                                                GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
NOISE AND LAND USE COMPATIBILITY                                                 Table 6-8 Land Use Compatibility for Community Noise Exposure1
                                                                                                                                                                             CNEL (dBA)
Certain land uses are particularly sensitive to noise and vibration, including
residential, school, and open space/recreation areas where quiet environments                         Land Uses                                    55           60         65                70                75                80
are necessary for enjoyment, public health, and safety. Commercial and            Residential - Low Density
industrial uses are not considered noise-sensitive uses.                          Single Family, Duplex, Mobile Homes
The purpose of the General Plan Noise Element is to minimize exposure of          Residential - Multiple Family
sensitive land uses from excessive noise through identification and appraisal
of existing and future noise sources. The City of Sierra Madre has identified     Transiet Lodging, Motels, Hotels
noise compatibility standards for siting new noise-sensitive land uses within
the City. The City’s noise compatibility standards provide planners with a        Schools, Libraries, Churches, Hospitals,
                                                                                  Nursing Homes
tool to gauge the compatibility of new land uses relative to existing and future
noise levels. Table 6-8 shows the noise compatibility criteria included in the    Auditoriums, Concert Halls,
State of California General Plan Guidelines.                                      Amphitheaters
                                                                                  Sports Arena, Outdoor Spectator Sports
                                                                                  Playgrounds, Neighborhood Parks
                                                                                  Golf Courses, Riding Stables, Water
                                                                                  Recreation, Cemeteries
                                                                                  Office Buildings, Businesses,
                                                                                  Commercial and Professional
                                                                                  Industrial, Manufacturing, Utilities,
                                                                                  Agricultural
                                                                                 Source: Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. 2003, October. State of California General Plan Guidelines.
                                                                                            Normally Acceptable:                                                     Normally Unacceptable:
                                                                                            Specified land use is satisfactory based upon the assumption             New construction or development should generally be discouraged.
                                                                                            that any buildings involved are of normal conventional                   If new construction does proceed, a detailed analysis of the noise
                                                                                            construction, without any special noise insulation requirements.         reduction requirements must be made and needed noise insulation
                                                                                                                                                                     features included in the design.
                                                                                            Conditionally Acceptable:                                                Clearly Unacceptable:
                                                                                            New construction or development should be undertaken only                New construction or development should generally not be
                                                                                            after a detailed analysis of the noise reduction requirements is         undertaken.
                                                                                            made and the needed noise insulation features included in the
                                                                                            design. Conventional construction, but with closed windows and
                                                                                            fresh air supply systems or air conditioning will normally suffice.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                                                                       6-21

NOISE-CONTROL OF NON-                                                                                                                                              Table 6-9 City of Sierra Madre Stationary (Non-Transportation) Noise Standards
TRANSPORTATION NOISE SOURCES                                                                                                                                                                                                             Exemption
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        to Maximum
                                                                                                                                                                       Land Use             Day of Week              Time of Day         Permissible               Maximum Permissible Noise Limits
The City of Sierra Madre regulates stationary (non-transportation) sources of                                                                                                                                                           Noise Levels
noise within Sierra Madre through their Noise Ordinance (Title 9, Chapter                                                                                                                                                              for Noise that
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          is Under:
9.32, of the City’s Municipal Code). The City’s Noise Ordinance is designed
to limit noise generated on a property from adversely affecting noise-sensitive                                                                                                            Mon. to Sat.:            7 AM to 9 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80 dBA at           • 6 dBA Above Ambient
land uses.                                                                                                                                                                                    Sun. and            10 AM to 6 PM             25 feet
                                                                                                                                                                                             Holidays:
                                                                                                                                                                      Residential
In residential areas, the City prohibits noise levels generated at residential                                                                                                             Mon. to Sat.:            9 PM to 7 AM
properties from exceeding existing ambient noise levels by more than 6 dBA                                                                                                                    Sun. and                                          -             • 6 dBA Above Ambient
and noise levels generated at commercial and industrial properties from                                                                                                                      Holidays:            6 PM to 10 AM
exceeding existing ambient noise levels by more than 8 dBA.1 When noise                                                                                                                    Mon. to Sat.:            7 AM to 9 PM
is generated on public property (e.g., parks, schools, etc), the City prohibits                                                                                                                                                           80 dBA at           • 8 dBA Above Ambient
                                                                                                                                                                                              Sun. and            10 AM to 6 PM             25 feet
noise from generating more than 15 dBA above the local ambient at a distance                                                                                         Commercial              Holidays:
of 25 feet or more, and the use of sound-amplifying equipment/special events                                                                                              and
                                                                                                                                                                       Industrial          Mon. to Sat.:            9 PM to 7 AM
are prohibited from exceeding 60 dBA as measured at 50 feet from the source                                                                                                                                                                     -             • 8 dBA Above Ambient
                                                                                                                                                                                              Sun. and            6 PM to 10 AM
without an exemption issued by the City Manager.2                                                                                                                                            Holidays:
However, the City also creates some exemptions for certain noise sources                                                                                                                   Mon. to Sat.:            7 AM to 9 PM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          80 dBA at           • 15 dBA Above Ambient at 25 Feet and
(e.g., construction, leaf blowers, and emergencies) and for noise generated                                                                                                                   Sun. and            10 AM to 6 PM             25 feet           • Amplified Equip: 60 dBA at 50 feet
                                                                                                                                                                         Public              Holidays:
during the daytime hours when people are generally less sensitive to noise.
                                                                                                                                                                      Properties           Mon. to Sat.:            9 PM to 7 AM
If noise occurs between the hours of 7:00 AM and 9:00 PM (7:00 PM for                                                                                                                                                                                         • 15 dBA Above Ambient at 25 Feet and
construction and leaf blowers) Monday through Saturday or 10:00 AM and                                                                                                                        Sun. and                                          -             • Amplified Equip: 60 dBA at 50 feet
                                                                                                                                                                                             Holidays:            6 PM to 10 AM
6:00 PM on Sundays and federal holidays, and does not produce noise levels
that exceed 80 dBA at a distance of 25 feet, then the noise is considered exempt                                                                                   Source: City of Sierra Madre. 2011. City of Sierra Madre Municipal Code. Title 9, Public Peace, Morals, and Welfare, Chapter 9.32, Noise.
from the maximum permissible noise levels (i.e., 6 dBA above ambient when
generated at residential properties and 8 dBA above ambient when generated
at commercial properties).
Table 6-9 outlines the City’s stationary noise standards as cited in Chapter
9.32 (Noise) of the Sierra Madre Municipal Code.
1
  City of Sierra Madre, Municipal Code, Section 9.32.030(a), Residential Property Noise Limits, and Section 9.32.040, Commercial and Industrial Property Noise, as
measured at the property line.
2
  City of Sierra Madre, Municipal Code, Section 9.32.050, Public Property Noise.
6-22                                                                                                                                     GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

EXISTING NOISE ENVIRONMENT                                                       A total of three long-term (24 hour) and four short-term (15 minute)
                                                                                 noise level measurements were collected. Ambient noise survey locations
The City of Sierra Madre is primarily a residential community nestled at         are shown in Figure 6-6, Noise Monitoring Locations. The average (Leq),
the foothills of the San Gabriel Mountains. As with most communities, the        maximum (Lmax), and minimum (Lmin) values taken at each ambient noise
primary source of noise is from passenger vehicles, trucks and buses traveling   measurement location are presented in Table 6-10. Table 6-11 describes each
along local roadways. However, there are no major transportation corridors       measurement location and the measurement results.
that traverse the City. Regional traffic on I-210 is audible through the daytime
and clearly audible at nighttime in the City regardless of the distance from the Table 6-10 Summary of Measured Ambient Noise Levels
freeway, with weather and geographic conditions causing some locations to
be affected more than others. The residential neighborhoods, schools, parks,      Measurement     Primary Noise    Start          Noise  Measurement Primary Start
                                                                                    Location          Source       Time  Duration Levels   Location   Noise  Time
and the downtown commercial district also generate noise from equipment                                                           (dBA)               Source
and other stationary sources of noise.
                                                                                              Background traffic
                                                                                        1     on Foothill Blvd.;   10:50 24 hours  —         —         —     58.6
An ambient noise survey was conducted on November 1 and 2, 2011 to                            background traffic    AM
document the existing noise environment at various representative locations                   on I-210.
in the City. These locations were chosen to characterize areas within the City          2     Traffic on Sierra    11:10 24 hours  —         —         —     62.1
                                                                                              Madre Boulevard.      AM
that are near the foothills, near the City center, in the southern portion of
the City (that may be influenced by noise from I-210 traffic), and in typical                 Traffic on
                                                                                        3     Highland Avenue;     11:30 24 hours  —         —         —     51.1
residential neighborhoods. Noise level measurements were taken using                          background traffic    AM
Larson Davis (LD) Laboratories Models 820 (LD 820) and 714 (LD 714)                           on I-210.
integrating sound level meters. The sound level meters and microphones were                   Local traffic;
                                                                                              landscaping          12:10
mounted on a tripod five feet above the ground and were equipped with a                 4     activities;                15 min.   42.6      32.3      62.7   —
                                                                                              helicopter over-      PM
windscreen during all measurements. The instruments were calibrated before
                                                                                              flights.
use with a Larson Davis Model CAL200 acoustical calibrator to ensure that
the measurements were accurate. The sound level meters were programmed                        Local traffic;
                                                                                        5     landscaping          12:30 15 min.   44.3      34.4      59.0   —
to record noise levels using the “slow” time constant and the A-weighting                     activities;           PM
                                                                                              barking dogs.
filter (i.e., dBA). Meteorological conditions during the measurement periods
were favorable and representative of the typical conditions, with clear skies                 Traffic on Sunnyside
                                                                                              Avenue; traffic on   2:30
and light winds.                                                                        6     Highland Avenue;      PM   15 min.   62.7      40.6      81.3   —
                                                                                              helicopter over-
                                                                                              flights.
                                                                                              Traffic on Sierra    2:55
                                                                                        7     Madre Boulevard:      PM   15 min.   59.1      44.9      73.9   —
                                                                                              kids at playground.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                    6-23

Figure 6-6 Noise Monitoring Locations
                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                       SIERRA MEADOW DR
                                                                                               CARTER AVE                                                                                RD                                   ST
                                                                                                                                                                                  L
                                                                                                                                                                             H URC
                                                                                                                                                                                  H IL                                      O
                                                                                                                                                                                                                           I LL
                                                                                                                      MIRA MONTE AVE                                          C                                     CA M
       MICHILLINDA AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ELKINS AVE
                            FAIRVIEW AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SANTA ANITA AVE
                                                                                                                                                        MOUNTAIN TRAIL AVE
                                                                                                                                      GRANDVIEW AVE
                                         SUNNYSIDE AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                                AVE
                                                         6   LIMA ST                                    AUBURN AVE   BALDW IN AVE
                                                                                                                                     HIGHLAND AVE
                                                                                                                                                                                    3           CANON
                                                                                                    7
                         MONTECITO AVE
                                                                                                                                    SIERRA MADRE BLVD
                                                                                                                                      2                                                       SANTA ANITA CT
                         RAMONA AVE
                                                                                                                                    LOWELL AVE                                                                                     Noise Monitoring
                                 1
                                                                                          HERMOSA AVE                                                                                                          RANCHO RD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Stations
                         ORANGE GROVE AVE
6-24                                                                                                                                 GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
Table 6-11 Summary of Noise Measurement Locations and Results                                                     Table 6-11 Summary of Noise Measurement Locations and Results (Continued)
  Location (Type)                     Fire Name                                  Selection Rationale1                Location (Type)                                 Fire Name                                               Selection Rationale1
                  At the building façade of The British House,                                                                                At the Sierra Madre Park near the
                  approximately 50 feet from the street curb.     This location was intended to be near the                                   playground area, approximately 100 feet                        This location was intended to be a ‘typical’
                  This measurement resulted in 58.6 dBA           southern border of the City limits and along a      7 (Short-term)          from the road. This measurement resulted                       location along a primary local roadway as
  1 (Long-term)   CNEL, with hourly noise levels ranging from     relatively untraveled and quiet roadway so as                               in 59.1 dBA Leq. The highest levels occurred                   well as to be indicative of a park use.
                  46.4 dBA Leq to 55.8 dBA Leq. An analysis       to capture influences from I-210 traffic (which                             due to local vehicular traffic and activities at
                  of the data suggests that the highest levels    is farther to the south).                                                   the playground area2.
                  resulted from local traffic on Manzanita Road
                  during the daytime.                                                                             Notes:
                                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                                    Considerable coordination was made with the city volunteer representatives for the selection of general areas to be surveyed during the noise
                  In the downtown commercial district, located    This location was intended to be near the
                  at the building facade at 33 E. Sierra Madre    intersection of the two major roadways in the   study, as well as with choosing particular individual measurement locations. Guidance for appropriate environments was provided during
                  Boulevard. This measurement resulted in         City, Sierra Madre Boulevard and Baldwin        this coordination, including restrictions on properties with pool equipment and discouraging the use of properties that housed dogs or other
                  62.1 dBA CNEL, with hourly noise levels         Avenue (i.e., to focus on local roadway traffic potentially noisy animals. See also note b.
  2 (Long-term)   ranging from 46.6 dBA Leq to 63.8 dBA Leq.      noise patterns as well as the downtown          2
                                                                                                                    The considerations of note a. notwithstanding, the presence of general urban noise sources, including dogs, aircraft, helicopters, landscaping
                  An analysis of the data suggests that the       commercial and retail districts). The actual    activities, children playing, and the like is simply an integral portion of the inherent soundscape of a city. As such, these sources are ‘threads’
                  highest levels resulted from traffic during the selected location had excellent line-of-sight   in any given city’s noise ‘fabric’ and are intended to be accounted for in a General Plan. Removing or discounting such ‘normal’ sources by
                  morning and afternoon traffic peak hour.        visual ‘contact’ to the intersection.           choosing atypical measurement locations or by artificially swaying the data acquisition would induce a bias to the measurements, thus skewing
                  At 273 Highland Boulevard. This                 This location was intended to be a ‘typical’    the true assessment of the normal sound environment.
                  measurement resulted in 51.1 dBA CNEL,          residential location; representative of the
                                                                                                                  3
                                                                                                                    Note that some up-slope locations east of Mountain Trail Avenue tend to have hilly, obstructed, and/or ‘pocketed’ exposures to noise from lower
                  with hourly noise levels ranging from 39.9      overall City and without undue influences       elevation sources, even though they are overlooking the city below and the freeway in the distance.
  3 (Long-term)   dBA Leq to 52.5 dBA Leq. An analysis of the     from freeway traffic, major local roadway
                  data suggests that the highest levels resulted  traffic, and/or special uses such as schools,
                  from traffic on Highland Avenue.                parks, or commercial/retail land uses.
                  At the front yard of 618 North Auburn
                                                                                                                  EXISTING NOISE SUMMARY
                  Avenue, approximately 20 feet from the          This location was intended to assess noise
                  road. This measurement resulted in 42.6 dBA     environments and sound propagation in           The ambient noise levels observed throughout the City are generally
  4 (Short-term)  Leq. The highest levels occurred due to local   the western up-slope and foothill areas of      characteristic of a low-density suburban area. The long-term measurements
                  vehicular traffic, landscaping activities and   the City.
                  helicopter fly-overs2.                                                                          at Locations 1 to 3 ranged from 51.1 to 62.1 dBA CNEL. During the survey,
                                                                  This was another up-slope/foothill              average daytime noise levels at Locations 4 to 7 ranged from 42.6 to 62.7
                  At the front yard of 450 Churchill Road,        measurement site; this one is east of           dBA Leq. The short-term and long-term noise monitoring results and charts
                  approximately 20 feet from the road. This       Mountain Trail Avenue. While farthest from
  5 (Short-term)  measurement resulted in 44.3 dBA Leq.           I-210 noise sources, up-slope locations such    showing the hourly noise levels recorded at locations 1 to 3 are included in
                  The highest levels occurred due to vehicular    as this one may experience freeway noise in
                  traffic, landscaping activities, and dogs                                                       Appendix D.
                  barking2.                                       the distance since they are elevated above the
                                                                  rest of the cityscape3.
                                                                                                                  The primary noise sources affecting the measured noise environments were
                  At the corner of Sunnyside Avenue and                                                           traffic from the adjacent roadways, background noise from I-210, and sporadic
                  Highland Avenue, approximately 20 feet          This location was intended to be a ‘typical’
  6 (Short-term)  from the road. This measurement resulted        residential location; representative of the     miscellaneous events such as landscaping, street sweeping and helicopter over-
                  in 44.3 dBA Leq. The highest levels occurred    western portion of the City and near a school   flights. The highest noise levels were primarily due to vehicular traffic and were
                  due to vehicular traffic and helicopter         facility.
                  fly-overs2.                                                                                     recorded along the roadway right-of-way, close to travel lanes. According to
                                                                                                                  the noise compatibility chart shown in Table 6-8, all measured ambient noise
                                                                                                                  levels for these representative locations are within “normally acceptable” and
                                                                                                                  “conditionally acceptable” levels for the development of residential uses.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                                                                                                      6-25

      6-26            GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
Source: Kim Herkewitz
                                Chapter 7
                            The Natural
                         Environment
                                              In this chapter    The natural environment plays a critical role in sustaining a desirable and
                                                                 livable community as cities throughout the region face the increasing demands
                              N AT U R A L R E S O U R C E S     of population and economic growth. Open space, biological resources,
                                                                 groundwater, and other natural systems serve as essential infrastructure for a
                                          AIR QUALITY            community. The health of these natural systems, often besieged by the process
                                                                 of urbanization, indicates the importance cities place on the provision of
                    GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS                     basic services—clean air, available potable water, and on-demand electricity.
                                                                 Protecting and enhancing these resources provides additional stability for
                   SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING                     communities that may be at risk to environmental hazards.
                                                                 This chapter describes Sierra Madre’s natural resources (its open space,
                                                 ENERGY
                                                                 vegetation, wildlife habitat, hillsides, viewsheds, geology and soils, air, water,
                                                                 solid waste, and energy), and how the City manages them to sustain the
                                                                 health and wellness of its citizens and contribute to the strength of the local
                                                                 economy.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                    7-1

NATURAL RESOURCES                                                                The hillside portions of the San Gabriel Mountains within the City’s northern
                                                                                 boundary consist of south-draining canyons, swales, mountainous terrain,
Natural resources are community assets that are relatively undisturbed           ridgelines, knolls, foothills, rock outcroppings, wildlife habitat, and a wide
by mankind. Sierra Madre retains a natural landscape that balances its           range of native and non-native vegetation. Because Sierra Madre realizes the
urbanized character. Various recreational and natural open spaces, mature        importance of the hillside resources and their visual quality, and the need
trees, undeveloped foothills, and ecologically significant habitats provide      to protect the possibility of the continued co-existence of wildlife, it has
opportunities for residents and visitors to enjoy the region’s Mediterranean     established a Hillside Management Zone (HMZ) in its Zoning Ordinance,
climate. Preserving and enhancing these amenities enriches Sierra Madre’s        which affects approximately 610 acres of the City’s hillsides. The stated
communities and demonstrates a commitment to sound asset management.             purpose of the HMZ is to “protect the natural environment of the hillside
Sierra Madre and its citizens recognize the value of the natural environment     areas from change by preserving and protecting the views to and from the
through various stewardship and conservation efforts. The City of Sierra         hillside areas in the City to maintain the identity, image and environmental
Madre has been designated a Wildlife Sanctuary since 1972, and co-existence      quality of the City.” It outlines development standards relative to fire hazards
with wildlife is integral to the community.                                      (including a Fire Prevention Plan), open space, aesthetics, grading limits,
                                                                                 height limits, density limits, and the protection of natural habitat within the
OPEN SPACE AND HILLSIDES                                                         hillside areas.
Sierra Madre residents are uniquely positioned to access vast natural open space The preservation of open space, which includes the hillsides, is not only a
resources in the Angeles National Forest to the north of and abutting the City.  critical component of maintaining the City’s visual quality and recreation
The City is situated at the base (southern foothills) of the rugged San Gabriel  opportunities, but also a feature of sustainability. Native habitat within the
Mountains of the Angeles National Forest. This prime location provides the       open space areas supports functions associated with atmospheric processes
City’s residents with exceptional views of the foothills, and the opportunity    that keep our air and water clean and biological processes that contribute to
to co-exist with wildlife, in addition to access to precious open space in an    the survival and reproduction of plant and animal life. Open space allows
ever-urbanizing southern California. Along the base of these foothills lies two  the recharge of groundwater basins, which in turn benefits Sierra Madre’s
of the City’s natural open space parks, Bailey Canyon Wilderness Park and        community with a clean source of water. It helps to provide abundant
Mount Wilson Trail Park (see Community Services and Facilities chapter for       opportunities for outdoor recreation activities such as hiking and camping. It
a detailed discussion of these parks). Additionally, access to the open space    provides areas of scientific and educational value while protecting views and
and recreation areas of the San Gabriel Mountains is provided via a number       aspects of Sierra Madre’s environmental and cultural history. Open space also
of trails and connections, including the historic Mount Wilson Trail, which      provides protection from natural hazards such as flooding and landslides.
is discussed in detail in Chapter 4, Community Services and Facilities. The
total open space acreage within the City (approximately 544 acres) makes up
approximately 33 percent of the total land area in the City.
7-2                                                                 GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

TREE PRESERVATION                                                                WILDLIFE HABITAT AND VEGETATION
Native oak and other native and ornamental trees are dominant features of        The 610 acres of the Hillside Management Zone (HMZ), largely open space,
Sierra Madre’s landscape, which includes tree-lined streets, public and private  comprises approximately 37 percent of the City’s land area. Vegetation types
spaces and properties, and parks and open space. Not only do the City’s          in the HMZ include grassland, coastal sage scrub, chaparral, southern oak
abundance of trees significantly enhance the visual quality of the community     woodland, and riparian forest/woodland. The HMZ is zoned for development
and promote a welcoming environment, but they also help to improve air           with detached single-family residences; permitted density ranges from 2.9
quality; reduce greenhouse gas emissions; provide shade and cooling; support     residential units per acre to one unit per 100 acres, depending on the grades
wildlife; act as visual and physical buffers; control soil erosion; create sound of natural slopes.
barriers; increase property value; and improve the health and welfare of the
community.                                                                       Coastal sage scrub is characterized by small aromatic drought-deciduous
                                                                                 shrubs; that is, shrubs that either drop their leaves or grow small secondary
The City is committed to preserving and protecting several species of existing   leaves during the long dry season. Coastal sage scrub occurs on slopes of
trees through its Tree Preservation and Protection Ordinance. The ordinance      mountains and hills in coastal southern California, mostly below 3000 feet
establishes basic standards and measures for preserving and protecting the       (RCIP 2002). Common plant species in coastal sage scrub include California
City’s public trees and specified protected trees located on undeveloped private sagebrush (Artemisia californica), flat-topped buckwheat (Eriogonum
property. The ordinance also specifies the requirements for planting trees on    fasciculatum), black sage (Salvia mellifera), chaparral yucca (Yucca whipplei),
public property in or adjacent to newly planned or renovated commercial and      saw-tooth goldenbush (Hazardia squarrosa), chaparral bedstraw (Galium
residential developments.                                                        angustifolium), laurel sumac (Malosma laurina), white sage (Salvia apiana),
                                                                                 deerweed (Lotus scoparius), California bush sunflower (Encelia californica),
The City has also established a Tree Preservation Commission charged             and sand wash butterweed (Senecio flaccidus) (Bramlet 2004).
with carrying out the measures in the Tree Preservation and Protection
Ordinance, and with preparing a street landscaping plan. The Tree                Chaparral consists of dense thickets of woody shrubs from four to eight
Preservation Commission reviews development proposals in order to preserve       feet or higher, and dominates much of the foothills of mountains in coastal
significant trees on property targeted for development. The Commission also      southern California. Common plants in chaparral in the region include
recommends mitigation measures to lessen the impacts on trees as a result of     chamise (Adenostoma fasciculatum), black sage (Salvia mellifera), thick-leaved
construction activity. In addition, the Commission surveys the types of trees    lilac (Ceanothus crassifolius), sugar bush (Rhus ovata), California sagebrush,
suitable for planting along City streets, and recommends native species where    laurel sumac, mountain mahogany (Cercocarpus betuloides), Mexican
possible.                                                                        elderberry (Sambucus mexicana), laurel sumac (Malosma laurina), coast live
                                                                                 oak (Quercus agrifolia), holly-leaved redberry (Rhamnus ilicifolia), toyon
                                                                                 (Heteromeles arbutifolia), poison oak (Toxicodendron diversilobum), chaparral
                                                                                 honeysuckle (Lonicera subspicata), and bush lantanta (Lantana camara)
                                                                                 (Bramlet 2004).
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                 7-3

Southern Oak Woodland consists of woody vegetation generally over 15             Wetlands are land that is flooded or saturated by surface water or groundwater
feet tall and typically occupies north-facing slopes, shaded canyon ravines      at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that normally does
and sheltered interior valleys below approximately 5000 feet. Dominant tree      support, a prevalence of vegetation adapted to life in saturated soils. Wetlands
species include coast live oak (Quercus agrifolia), valley oak (Quercus lobata), include areas such as swamps, marshes, and bogs. There are many ephemeral
Engelmann oak (Quercus engelmannii), California sycamore (Platanus               streams in canyons and gullies, as well as several intermittent blue-line streams,
racemosa), and California black walnut (Juglans californica). Other species      in the HMZ. Many of the streams and drainages, as well as debris basins, are
in southern oak woodland include Mexican elderberry, and toyon, poison           mapped as Wetlands on the National Wetlands Mapper (USFWS 2012a).
oak, and heart-leaved penstemon (Keckiella cordifolia), California pellitory
(Parietaria floridana), smilo grass (Piptatherum miliaceum), lantana, common     Ornamental trees and shrubs occur throughout the City, and contain a mix
eucrypta (Eucrypta chrysanthemifolia), Douglas’ nightshade (Solanum              of introduced species and native plant species. Development in parts of the
douglasii) and coastal wood fern (Dryopteris arguta) (Bramlet 2004).             City occurred in and around the existing oak trees, and these urban forests
                                                                                 still provide habitat for birds and other tree-dwelling animals such as squirrels.
Annual Grassland is characterized by a variety of annual grass species
including red brome (Bromus madriensis), slender wild oat (Avena barbata),       SPECIAL STATUS BIOLOGICAL RESOURCES
foxtail fescue (Vulpia myuros), ripgut brome (Bromus diandrus), Bermuda
grass (Cynodon dactylon), schismus (Schismus barbatus), and foxtail barley       The following discussion addresses special status biological resources that
(Hordeum murinum). Other common plants include red-stemmed filaree               have the potential to occur within the natural hillside areas of the City of
(Erodium cicutarium), bur clover (Medicago polymorpha), summer mustard           Sierra Madre. These resources include plant and wildlife species that have
(Hirschfeldia incana), tocalote (Centaurea melitensis), white-stemmed filaree    been afforded special status and/or recognition by federal and state resource
(Erodium moschatum), common sow thistle (Sonchus oleraceus), miniature           agencies (i.e., threatened or endangered species), as well as private conservation
lupine (Lupinus bicolor), and cheeseweed (Malva parviflora) (Bramlet 2004).      organizations.
Riparian habitats are those along banks of rivers or streams. Riparian forest    Special Status Vegetation Types
habitat is mapped within the HMZ on the National Wetlands Mapper in              There are three sensitive plant communities documented in the City on the
several locations, including Bailey Canyon and Little Santa Anita Canyon;        California Natural Diversity Database (CNDDB; CDFG 2012).
riparian scrub/shrub vegetation is also mapped in a few scattered areas in
the HMZ (USFWS 2012a). Two riparian vegetation types known in the                Southern Coast Live Oak Riparian Forest consists of open to locally dense
region, Southern Coast Live Oak Riparian Forest and Southern Sycamore            riparian woodlands dominated by coast live oak (Quercus agrifolia); and
Alder Riparian Woodland, are described below under Special Status Biological     occurs in bottomlands and outer floodplains, in canyons and valleys of coastal
Resources.                                                                       southern California (CGAP 1986a).
7-4                                                                GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

Riversidian Alluvial Fan Sage Scrub is an open to moderately dense,           Special Status Wildlife
broadleaved evergreen scrub. Typical plants of this vegetation type include
scalebroom (Lepidospartum squamatum), white sage (Salvia apiana), redberry    Special status species with occurrences in the City documented in the
(Rhamnus crocea), flat-top buckwheat (Eriogonum fasciculatum), our lord’s     CNDDB are listed in Tables 7-1 and 7-2. Also listed in the table are special
candle (Yucca whipplei), California croton (Croton californicus), cholla      status species with documented occurrences immediately north of the City in
(Opuntia spp.), tarragon (Artemisia dracunculus), yerba santa (Eriodictyon    the Angeles National Forest, or within approximately two miles east or west
spp.), mule fat (Baccharis salicifolia), and mountain-mahogany (Cercocarpus   of the City in open space at the foot of the San Gabriel Mountains at similar
betuloides). This vegetation type is mostly restricted to floodplain habitats elevations and similar habitat types to those occurring in the City, as there is
that flood once or twice per decade, and depends on occasional flooding and   some potential that those species could occur in the City. Known locations of
resulting sediment reworking (CGAP 1986b).                                    occurrences of sensitive species in and near the City are shown on Figure 7-1,
                                                                              Sensitive Species Occurrences in and Near Sierra Madre.
Coastal sage scrub is described in the preceding section.
Two additional sensitive plant communities are documented as occurring
near the City boundaries on the CNDDB; thus, there is some possibility that
these communities also occur in the City.
Southern Sycamore Alder Riparian Woodland is a tall, open, broadleafed,
winter-deciduous streamside woodland dominated by California sycamore
(Platanus racemosa), and often also by white alder (Alnus rhombifolia). It
occurs in rocky streambeds, subject to flooding, in mountains of southwestern
California and northern Baja California (CGAP 1986c).
Open Engelmann Oak Woodland is an evergreen woodland dominated by
Engelmann oak (Quercus engelmannii) that occurs on relatively moist sites on
gentle slopes and valley bottoms; mostly in San Diego and Riverside counties
(CGAP 1986d). There are remnants of this woodland in several parts of the
City that were earlier developed with residential land use.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                               7-5

Figure 7-1 Sensitive Species Occurrences In and Near Sierra Madre
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Habitat areas mapped in Aspen
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Environmental Group Map (2009)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Areas designating occurrences of sensitve
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Plummer’s mariposa lily                                           species where locations are uncertain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (plants)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Areas designating occurrences of sensitive
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           species where locations are uncertain
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (animals)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Occurrence location listed on CNDDB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (2012) as mapped by The Planning
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Center|DC&E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Occurrence location listed on Aspen
                                                                                                             hoary bat                                                                                                                                                                     Environmental Map (2009)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           City Boundary
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Approximate location or general area, as
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           mapped by Aspen Environmental (2009)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (names without a circle or square)
Notes: The Open Englemann Oak Woodland habitat shown in this figure has been urbanized. Some of the orginal oak trees are still present; however, the land is no longer natural habitat. Some of the animals that inhabit Open Englemann Oak Woodland, including birds and squirrels, may still inhabit these areas.
The Riversidian Alluvial Fan Sage Scrub habitat shown in this figure in and next to Sierra Madre has been displaced by urbanization.
Sources: Aspen Environmental Group 2009 and CDFG 2012.
7-6                                                                                                                                             GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

Table 7-1 Special Status Plant Species Known From the Project Region                                        Table 7-1 Special Status Plant Species Known From the Project Region (Continued)
                                                 Status                                                                                                   Status
               Species              Federal/State       CNPS/Local            Habitat Preference                          Species            Federal/State       CNPS/Local            Habitat Preference
                                                                   Found in openings of coastal sage                                                                        Openings in coastal sage scrub and
 Astragalus brauntonii                                             scrub and chaparral, or in grasslands,                                                                   grasslands; often sandy. Historically
                                         FE             CNPS 1B.1  often on carbonate soils. Recorded        Chorizanthe parryi var.                                        recorded from the Tujunga Wash.
 Braunton’s milkvetch                                              from hills above Monrovia, south          fernandina
                                                                                                             San Fernando Valley spineflower    FC, SE           CNPS 1B.1  Occurs on open terraces, or in alluvial
                                                                   Clamshell Canyon.                                                                                        fans. Currently only two localities are
                                                                                                                                                                            known: Laskey Mesa, and the Newhall
                                                                   Found in alluvial fan sage scrub,                                                                        Ranch.
                                                                   coastal sage scrub and chaparral
 Berberis nevinii                                                  habitats in sandy, gravelly areas.                                                                       Found in openings of coastal sage
 Nevin’s barberry                      FE, SE           CNPS 1B.1  Known to occur in San Francisquito        Chorizanthe parryi var. parryi                                 scrub or chaparral, including alluvial
                                                                   Canyon, was historically recorded for     Parry’s spineflower                 —               CNPS 1B.1  fan areas. Recorded from Mt. Lowe,
                                                                   Big Tujunga Canyon and occurs in a                                                                       Upland, Claremont, San Gabriel wash,
                                                                   canyon above Claremont.                                                                                  Lytle Creek, and Texas Canyon.
                                                                   Found on xeric rock faces in coastal                                                                     Chaparral, coastal scrub, alluvial fan
 Brickellia nevinii                                                sage scrub or chaparral. Known to         Dodecahema leptoceras                                          sage scrub, often on alluvial terraces.
 Nevin’s brickellbush                   —                  LC      occur in upper Little Tujunga Canyon      Slender-horned spineflower         FE, SE           CNPS 1B.1  Known to occur in the Tujunga Wash.
                                                                   and other localities in the West end of                                                                  Historically known from the Rubio
                                                                   the San Gabriel Mountains.                                                                               Wash, Santa Anita Canyon.
                                                                   Moist grasslands and the periphery                                                                       Found in chaparral, oak woodland,
                                                                   of vernal pools, playas, cismontane       Galium grande                                                  coniferous forest. Recorded from Little
                                                                   woodland, valley and foothill             San Gabriel bedstraw                —               CNPS 1B.2  Santa Anita Canyon, Sawpit Canyon,
 Brodiaea filifolia                    FE, SE           CNPS 1B.1  grasslands, and coastal scrub on clay
 Thread-leaved brodiaea                                                                                                                                                     Chantry flat, and Mt. Wilson.
                                                                   or alkaline, silty-clay soils. Found
                                                                   in annual or perennial grasslands.        Horkelia cuneata sp. puberula
                                                                   Recorded from Glendora.                   Mesa horkelia                       —               CNPS 1B.1  Chaparral and coastal sage scrub.
 Calochortus catalinae                                             Perennial & annual grasslands and
 Catalina mariposa lily                 —                CNPS 4.2  coastal sage scrub in lower elevational
                                                                   areas of the San Gabriel Mountains                                                                       Occurs in grasslands, floodplains, oak
                                                                                                             Juglans californica var.                                       woodland and sage scrub/chaparral
                                                                   Found in openings of coastal sage         californica                                                    habitats. Known to occur in the lower
 Calochortus clavatus var. gracilis                                scrub and chaparral. Recorded from        Southern California walnut          —                CNPS 4.2  elevations of the west end of the San
 Slender mariposa lily                  —                CNPS 2.2  San Francisquito, Evey, and Mint                                                                         Gabriel Mountains and associated
                                                                   Canyons.                                                                                                 floodplains.
                                                                   Found in coastal sage scrub or                                                                           Found in chaparral from the
                                                                   chaparral on granitic or alluvial soils,                                                                 San Gabriel to the Santa Monica
 Calochortus plummerae                                             including alluvial fan areas. Recorded    Lepechinia fragrans                                            Mountains. Recorded from Maple
 Plummer’s mariposa lily                —               CNPS 1B.2  from Monrovia, Arroyo Seco, San           Fragrant pitcher sage               —                 CNPS 4   Canyon (Tujunga Canyon Drainage),
                                                                   Gabriel River, Little Tujunga Canyon,                                                                    and many other localities in the San
                                                                   and Pacoima Wash.                                                                                        Gabriel Canyon.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                                                       7-7

Table 7-1 Special Status Plant Species Known From the Project Region (Continued)                                                           Table 7-2 Special Status Animal Species From the Project Region
                                                                Status                                                                                  Species           Status*                           Habitat Preference
                  Species                         Federal/State        CNPS/Local                         Habitat Preference                Insects
                                                                                             Found in shaded canyons in oak and             San Gabriel Mountains Elfin           Found on steep slopes w/ Sedum. Reported from Tujunga Canyon,
 Lilium humboldtii ssp. ocellatum                        S                CNPS 4             riparian woodlands Recorded for                butterfly                       SA    Stoddard Canyon, and San Antonio wash.
 Ocellated Humboldt lily                                                                     drainages in the west end of the San           Incisalia mossii hidakupa
                                                                                             Gabriel Mountains.
                                                                                                                                            Human folly blue                 LC   Found on steep slopes associated with Dudleya. Found in Azusa
 Linanthus concinnus                                                                         Found in lower montane coniferous              Philotes sonorensis extinctis         Canyon, currently considered extinct.
 San Gabriel linanthus                                   S               CNPS 1B             forest. Recorded from Mount Markham,
                                                                                             Mt. Lowe.                                      San Gabriel Mountains blue
                                                                                                                                            butterfly                       SA    Found in wet meadows. Reported from Big Pines.
 Linanthus orcuttii                                                                          Found in gravelly openings in                  Plebejus saepiolus aureolus
 Orcutt’s linanthus                                     —                CNPS 1B             chaparral. Historically recorded from
                                                                                             Pasadena.                                      Amphibians and Reptiles
                                                                                             Occurs in coastal sage scrub, chaparral                                              Open areas with sandy or gravelly soils, in a variety of habitats
 Malacothamnus davidsonii                               —               CNPS 1B.2            and riparian habitats. Known to occur                                                including grasslands, chaparral, and sandy washes. Shallow pools
 Davidson’s bush mallow                                                                      in the Verdugo Hills, and Little Tujunga       Western spadefoot               CSC   in these habitats are necessary for reproduction. Breeds in ponds,
                                                                                             Canyon.                                        Spea hammondii                        streams, and rain pools that do not contain bullfrogs and fish, which
                                                                                                                                                                                  prey on tadpoles. Historically recorded from Sierra Madre.
                                                                                             Occurs in chaparral on the south slope
 Quercus durata ssp. gabrielensis                                                            of the San Gabriel Mountains. Known            Coast range newt (California
                                                        —                 CNPS 4             localities include Pacoima Canyon,             newt)                           CSC   Found in pools & ponds of perennial streams. Recorded from Little
 San Gabriel Mtns. Leather oak                                                               Eton Canyon, Mt. Lowe trail, Stoddard                                                Santa Anita Canyon, (Big) Santa Anita Canyon, Eaton Canyon.
                                                                                                                                            Taricha torosa torosa
                                                                                             Canyon and Evey Canyon.
                                                                                                                                            California red-legged frog    ST, CSC Dense, shrubby riparian vegetation associated with deep, still or
                                                                                             Found in savannas, and oak                     Rana draytoni                         slow-moving water.
 Quercus engelmannii                                                                         woodlands. In the San Gabriel
 Engelmann’s Oak                                        —                 CNPS 4             Mountain. This species has been                Sierra Madre yellow-legged            Found in permanent, fast running streams. Historically recorded
                                                                                             recorded from Claremont and                    frog                          FE, CSC from Little Santa Anita Canyon, (Big) Santa Anita Canyon, Eaton
                                                                                             Pasadena.                                      Rana mucosa                           Canyon.
 Quercus durata ssp. gabrielensis                                                            Found in mesic canyons in chaparral.                                                 Moist loose soils and leaf litter in diverse plant communities,
 X Q. engelmannii                                       —                    LC              Recorded from Monrovia, Glendora,              Anniella pulchra pulchra        CSC   including chaparral, pine-oak and riparian woodlands, desert scrub,
 San Gabriel oak                                                                             and Sierra Madre.                              Silvery legless lizard                and sandy washes.
 Thelypteris puberula var.                                                                   Found along streams and seeps.                 San Diego horned lizard               Occurs in variety of habitats including coastal sage, grassland,
 sonoriensis                                            —                 CNPS 2             Recorded from Santa Anita Canyon,              Phrynosoma coronatum            CSC   chaparral, oak woodland, and riparian woodland with loose sandy
 Sonoran maiden fern                                                                         Monrovia Canyon and Roberts Canyon.            blainvillei                           soils and abundant native ants or other insects.
 FED: Federal Classifications                                       California Native Plant Society (CNPS)                                  Southwestern pond turtle              Slow-water aquatic habitats with available basking sites (e.g.,
 FE - Listed by the Federal government as an endangered species.    CNPS 1A - Plants presumed extinct in California.                        Actinemys marmorata             CSC   submerged logs, open mud banks).
 FT - Listed by the Federal government as a threatened species.     CNPS 1B - Plants considered rare, threatened, or endangered in          marmorata
 S - Forest Service Sensitive Plant Species                         California and elsewhere.
                                                                                                                                            San Bernardino ringneck               Moist habitats, including wet meadows, rocky hillsides, gardens,
 STATE: State Classifications                                       CNPS 2 - Plants rare, threatened, or endangered in California but more  snake
 CE - Listed as endangered by the State of California               common elsewhere.                                                       Diadophis punctatus              S    farmland, grassland, chaparral, mixed coniferous forests,
 CT - Listed by the State of California as a threatened species     CNPS 3 - Plants about which we need more information: A review list.    modestus                              woodlands. Recorded from Sierra Madre, Santa Anita Canyon.
 SP - Listed as a Special Plant by the CNDDB (2007)                 CNPS 4 - Plants of limited distribution - A watch list.
 Other                                                              CNPS Threat Extensions                                                  Coastal Rosy Boa                      Rocky areas in coastal sage scrub and chaparral. Recorded from
 LC - Local concern                                                 0.1 - Seriously endangered in California                                Lichanura trivergata             S    Eaton Canyon, Sierra Madre, Mt. Wilson.
                                                                    0.2 - Fairly endangered in California
                                                                                                                                            roseofusca charina
                                                                    0.3 - Not very endangered in California
7-8                                                                                                                         GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

Table 7-2 Special Status Animal Species From the Project Region (Continued)                                        Table 7-2 Special Status Animal Species From the Project Region (Continued)
             Species              Status*                            Habitat Preference                                           Species         Status*                                     Habitat Preference
 Amphibians and Reptiles (Continued)                                                                                Mammals (Continued)
 Coast patch-nosed snake                   Semi-arid brushy areas and chaparral in canyons, rocky hillsides,                                                     Variety of habitats, from desert scrub and chaparral to oak
 Salvadora hexalepis virgultea      CSC    and plains. Recorded from Sierra Madre, Santa Anita Canyon.                                                           woodland and ponderosa pine, but only where there are significant
                                                                                                                    Western mastiff bat             CSC          rock features for roosting. Natural roosts are often found under
                                                                                                                    Eumops perotis californicus                  large exfoliating slabs of granite, sandstone slabs, or in columnar
 Birds                                                                                                                                                           basalt, on cliff faces, or in large boulders. Some roosts have been
                                                                                                                                                                 found in buildings.
 Black swift                        CSC    Mountain foothill Canyons. Known to nest in Santa Anita Canyon.
 Cypseloides niger (nesting)                                                                                                                                     Occurs in variety of habitats, from lower elevation mixed coniferous/
                                                                                                                    Hoary bat                                    hardwood forest to higher elevation conifers. Known also from
 California spotted owl             CSC    Montane hardwood-conifer forests, and oak woodland and valley            Lasiurus cinereus               CSC          orchards. Migratory, spending winters in the northern part of state
 Strix occidentalis occidentalis           foothill riparian at lower elevations.                                                                                and summers along the coast. Solitary species that roosts primarily
                                                                                                                                                                 in coniferous and deciduous trees.
 Willow flycatcher                   CE    Riparian woodland and scrub habitats.
 Empidonax traillii                                                                                                 Los Angeles pocket mouse
                                                                                                                    Perognathus longimembris        CSC          Inhabits coastal sage scrub and alluvial fan sage scrub habitats.
 Loggerhead shrike                  CSC    Occurs in grassland, open sage scrub, chaparral, and desert scrub.       brevinasus
 Lanius ludovicianus             (nesting) Species apparently has declined dramatically in coastal southern
                                           California in recent years.
 Coastal cactus wren                       Occurs in coastal sage scrub and chaparral plant communities with        San Diego desert woodrat        CSC          Occurs in scrub and desert habitats, usually in association with rock
 Campylorhynchus                    CSC    substantial cacti (Opuntia sp.) stands. Recorded from the S. end of      Neotoma bryanti intermedia                   outcroppings, boulders, cacti, or areas of dense undergrowth.
 brunneicapillus cousei                    Christy Ave, near the eastern edge of Hansen Dam Park.
                                                                                                                    Federal                     State
                                           Occurs primarily in coastal sage scrub habitat, but also use             FE - Federally Endangered   SE - State Endangered
 Coastal California                        chaparral, grassland, and riparian habitats where they occur in          FT - Federally Threatened   ST - State Threatened
 gnatcatcher                      FT, CSC  proximity to sage scrub. Although historically found (Monrovia)                                      State Department of Fish and Game (CDFG)
 Polioptila californica                    within sage scrub in the region of the project, this species has not                                 CSC - California Species of Concern
 californica                               been observed in the central portion of the lower San Gabriel
                                           Mountains in recent years                                                                            CFP - California Fully-Protected Species
                                                                                                                                                SA - Special Animal
 Yellow-breasted chat               CSC    Occurs in dense riparian woodlands, willows thickets, and dense
 Icteria virens                            brush along flowing streams.
 Mammals
 San Diego black-tailed                    Occurs in a variety of habitats, including sage scrubs, chaparral,
 jackrabbit                         CSC    agricultural lands and other disturbed habitats, but prefers open
 Lepus californicus bennetti               grassland.
 Pallid bat                                Occurs in a variety of habitats, including woodlands, scrub, rocky
 Antrozous pallidus                 CSC    canyons, farm land, and desert. Roosts in rock crevices, old
                                           buildings, bridges, caves, mines, and tree cavities. In the region this
                                           species is generally associated with sycamore and oak woodlands.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                                                                          7-9
WILDLIFE MOVEMENT                                                               There is an area of critical habitat for Braunton’s milk-vetch (Astragalus
                                                                                brauntonii) approximately 0.75 mile east of the City boundary, spanning
A wildlife movement corridor is a linear habitat that connects two or more      approximately 285 acres (USFWS 2012b). Critical habitat, designated by the
significant wildlife habitat areas. Wildlife corridors allow wide-ranging       US Department of the Interior, is habitat essential for the conservation, that
animals to travel so that populations can move in response to environmental     is, the survival and recovery, of a species listed under the federal Endangered
changes and natural disasters, threatened species can be replenished from       Species Act (FESA). Critical habitat includes areas occupied by the target
other areas, and genetic interchange can occur.                                 species, and unoccupied areas. For activities conducted or funded by federal
                                                                                agencies, or requiring a federal permit, federal agencies must ensure that
The General Plan areas consist of an urbanized area at lower elevations and
                                                                                the action will not likely jeopardize the survival of the species, or destroy
the foothills of the San Gabriel Mountains along the northern boundary of
                                                                                or adversely modify critical habitat. If the action would likely jeopardize a
the City. Wildlife movement in the General Plan area would be greatest in the
                                                                                species, or adversely modify critical habitat, the agency must consult with
foothills, where species such as mule deer, bobcat, and coyote would generally
                                                                                either the Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) or National Marine Fisheries
move along ridgelines, drainage bottoms, and unpaved roads. Two important
                                                                                Service (CRS 2005).
aspects of this movement would be east-west movement that connects
habitats along the San Gabriel Mountains on either side of Sierra Madre, and    Most of the wildlife species that occur in the hillsides were once common
north-to-south movement that brings animals to lower elevations, leading        but are now increasingly rare to the San Gabriel Mountains and the urban
potentially to mortality (e.g., roadkills) and conflicts with people.           interface. The types of wildlife species include a wide variety of mammals,
                                                                                birds, amphibians and reptiles. Many of these species are present in the scrub
CONSERVATION PLANS                                                              and riparian habitats and frequently use the urban interface for foraging. As
                                                                                people have expanded more and more into wildlife habitat, displaced wildlife
Habitat Conservation Plans (HCP) and Natural Conservation Community             is fighting for survival.
Plans (NCCP) are administered by federal and state resource agencies and
protect and preserve biological habitat in California. The City, including the
natural hillside areas, is not within an established HCP or NCCP. Additionally,
                                                                                VIEWSHEDS
the City does not lie within a Significant Ecological Area (SEA), as designated The City of Sierra Madre is known for its scenic backdrop of the southern
by Los Angeles County (City of Sierra Madre 2007). The Altadena SEA             foothills of the rugged San Gabriel Mountains, with elevations ranging from
almost reaches the City’s northwest corner, and extends from there northwest    1,000 to 2,100 feet above mean sea level. Generally, the terrain north of the
through the foothills of the San Gabriel Mountains eight miles to the City of   foothills within the City’s boundary is very steep and rugged, while the terrain
La Canada Flintridge (DRP 2007). SEAs are ecologically important land and       to the south is gently sloping. The foothills possess a high degree of aesthetic
water areas that are valuable as plant and/or animal communities. SEAs are      value, with the hillsides and ridgelines being the most prominent visual
not preserves; however, development projects proposed in SEAs are subject       features. Additionally, other significant features of the natural vegetation and
to increased environmental and design review with the aim of balancing          topography, such as swales, knolls and rock outcroppings, contribute to the
development with ecological resources.                                          aesthetic quality of the foothills. Views of these features are afforded from
                                                                                various view points throughout the City and outside the City’s boundaries.
7-10                                                                GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

As stated earlier, the City established the HMZ to protect the hillside resources GEOLOGICAL AND SOIL CONDITIONS
and their visual quality. One of the objectives of the HMZ is the preservation
and protection of views to and from the hillside areas in the City. The           Geologic Setting
ordinance outlines development standards, such as height and density limits,
                                                                                  California is divided into geomorphic provinces, which are distinctive,
to restrict development to that which is sensitive to the unique characteristics
                                                                                  generally easy-to-recognize natural regions in which the geologic record,
found in the hillside areas. The City has also identified prominent ridgelines
                                                                                  types of landforms, pattern of landscape features, and climate are similar. The
within the City and delineated a Hillside View Line as a part of the HMZ.
                                                                                  City is within the boundaries of two geomorphic provinces. The southern
Measures to protect and preserve these ridgelines are also outlined in the
                                                                                  urbanized area is within the Peninsular Ranges Geomorphic Province and the
HMZ.
                                                                                  northern foothill area is within the Transverse Ranges Geomorphic Province.
                                                                                  The Peninsular Ranges Geomorphic Province is a series of mountain ranges
                                                                                  separated by northwest-trending valleys, which characterizes the southwest
                                                                                  portion of California. The trend of topography in this province is similar
                                                                                  to the Coast Ranges, but the geology is more like the Sierra Nevada, with
                                                                                  granitic rock intruding the older metamorphic rocks. Regional faults within
                                                                                  the Peninsular Ranges province are oriented southeast to northwest. The
                                                                                  Peninsular Ranges extend from lower California to the Mexican border
                                                                                  and are bounded on the east by the Colorado Desert, on the north by the
                                                                                  Transverse Ranges, on the west by the Pacific Ocean, and on the south by the
                                                                                  Mexican peninsula of lower Baja California. The chief Peninsular Ranges are
                                                                                  the Santa Ana, San Jacinto, and Santa Rosa. In the north is the low basin that
                                                                                  includes Los Angeles.
                                                                                  The Transverse Ranges Geomorphic Province is an east-west trending series of
                                                                                  steep mountain ranges and valleys. The east-west structure of the Transverse
                                                                                  Ranges is oblique to the normal northwest trend of coastal California, hence
                                                                                  the name “Transverse.” The Transverse Ranges are bounded on the east by the
                                                                                  San Bernardino Mountains, on the north by the Coast Ranges, on the west
                                                                                  by the Pacific Ocean, and on the south by the Peninsular Ranges. The Sierra
                                                                                  Madre Fault Zone forms the range’s southern boundary. The province also
                                                                                  extends offshore to include San Miguel, Santa Rosa, and Santa Cruz islands.
View of the San Gabriel Mountains from Vista Circle Drive
Source: Caroline Brown                                                            More specifically, Sierra Madre is located on the alluvial plain in the
                                                                                  northwestern portion of the San Gabriel Valley. An alluvial plain is a deposit
                                                                                  of sediment that gathers over time as it is deposited by a river or stream.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                  7-11

Figure 7-2 Local Geology
7-12                     GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
The City’s topography is characterized by broad, gentle foothill slopes within      WATER RESOURCES
the southern portions of the City and steep hillsides and ridgeline-canyon
terrain along the northern portions adjacent to the San Gabriel Mountains           Water Supply and Storage
of the Angeles National Forest. The northern portion of the City is situated
                                                                                    Water is an essential, life-sustaining resource. In a populated and semi-arid
in an area where the alluvial plain meets the southern foothills of the San
                                                                                    region like southern California, especially, maintaining a sufficient water
Gabriel Mountains. The majority of Sierra Madre’s urban development is
                                                                                    supply is critically important. Sierra Madre residents, like all Californians,
located within the gentler sloping foothill areas of the City. Elevations in the
                                                                                    use water to meet a wide variety of needs. Activities ranging from washing
City range from a high of 1500 feet to a low of 600 feet. The terrain of the
                                                                                    and cooking to irrigation and swimming on hot summer days depend upon
City is primarily flat with a consistent downgrade slope of 7.5 percent (City
                                                                                    a clean and reliable water supply. Knowing this, the City of Sierra Madre
of Sierra Madre 2008).
                                                                                    strives to preserve its water resources. This is especially important because
Faulting and seismicity are discussed in the Safety chapter of this document.       Sierra Madre pumps, treats, and distributes its own water. While most cities
                                                                                    in the region purchase water from wholesale distributors who import it from
Geologic Units                                                                      elsewhere, Sierra Madre continues to meet the majority of its residents’ water
The geologic units existing within the City of Sierra Madre are of two distinct     needs with water from its own local source, just as it has since the 1800s.
types. The southern portion of the City consists of Pleistocene deposits
(deposits of the first epoch of the quaternary period, between approximately
2.5 million to 12,000 years ago). The hillsides located in the northern portion
of the City, however, are characterized by Mesozoic plutonic rocks. These
deposits are older than the Pleistocene deposits in the rest of the City (i.e., the
Mesozoic era extends from approximately 250-65 million years ago) (CDC
2010). Identified geologic units mapped within the southern portion of the
City include older and younger alluvial fan deposits, which are derived from
the San Gabriel Mountains to the north. A majority of the developed areas
within the City have been built atop these soils. The northern foothill areas
of the City consist mostly of granitic rocks and metamorphic rocks. These
rocks are typically very hard and exhibit high amounts of fracturing in areas
close to active faults.
Figure 7-2, Local Geology, shows the geologic unit and soil types identified
within the City’s boundaries.
                                                                                    Auburn Reservoir
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                   7-13

The City’s water quality and supply is maintained by the Water Division, a       The City’s secondary source of water is through its membership in the San
water retail agency and a department within the Sierra Madre Public Works        Gabriel Valley Municipal Water District (SGVMWD). The other members
Department. The Water Division has two sources from which it pumps, treats       of the District are the cities of Alhambra, Monterey Park and Azusa.
and distributes water—four wells drawing from the Raymond Groundwater            SGVMWD’s UWMP states that its supplies of imported State Water Project
Basin, and two natural spring tunnels located in the City’s foothills (City of   water will be adequate to serve member agencies for the next 20 years. Water
Sierra Madre 2011d). Water pumped by the City is held in five reservoir sites    imported by SGVMWD is placed in the Main San Gabriel Groundwater
and distributed to residential, commercial, industrial, and landscape irrigation Basin (Main Basin) via percolation.
connectors within the City. The five reservoirs provide a total storage volume
                                                                                 The City of Sierra Madre has no physical connection of its own to the Main
of 6.7 million gallons. Currently, the City has 3,868 connections serving a
                                                                                 Basin. In order to access its SGVMWD water in the Main Basin, Sierra Madre
population of approximately 10,927 people. The City does not provide water
                                                                                 has to rely on the water system capacity of its neighboring city, Arcadia. In
sales to other agencies on a regular basis, nor does it have additional water
                                                                                 normal operations, Arcadia has system capacity to serve Sierra Madre and has
users. Emergency connections to the City of Arcadia and City of Pasadena
                                                                                 historically done so via Sierra Madre’s system interconnection with that city.
water supplies are in place should contamination or shortages in supply
                                                                                 However, Arcadia has indicated that under certain circumstances, its system
require Sierra Madre to draw from outside sources quickly.
                                                                                 may not have capacity to deliver adequate water to Sierra Madre. Therefore,
Groundwater pumped from the Santa Anita Subarea (Eastern Unit) of                the Sierra Madre source of water in the Main Basin is not completely reliable.
the Raymond Groundwater Basin (via the aforementioned wells) is the
                                                                                 Due to potentially unreliable groundwater supplies from the Raymond
primary water supply for the City. As stated in the City’s 2010 Urban Water
                                                                                 Groundwater Basin and the unreliability of the emergency connection with
Management Plan (UWMP), through adjudication the City has the right to
                                                                                 the City of Arcadia, SGVMWD is coordinating with Metropolitan Water
draw 1,764 acre feet of water per year from the aquifer (City of Sierra Madre
                                                                                 District (MWD) to construct an emergency interconnection with the MWD
2010). However, the 2010 UWMP notes that water from this source is not a
                                                                                 Foothill Feeder, which runs through Sierra Madre. This would allow the City
reliable source of water in dry years or multiple dry years due to fluctuations
                                                                                 of Sierra Madre to access treated imported water directly from MWD. The
in water level and the overall trend towards a decrease in water levels in the
                                                                                 proposed emergency connection would have a capacity of up to five cubic
Eastern Unit.
                                                                                 feet per second (cfs). Such water would be available only under emergency
The City’s other normal source of water is its horizontal wells (tunnels) in     conditions when the City’s wells cannot produce sufficient groundwater from
Little Santa Anita Canyon. Although the City has the right to operate these      the Raymond Groundwater Basin and emergency supplies are not available
two spring tunnels, currently only the West Tunnel is in operation. This         from the City of Arcadia. This water source cannot be used to facilitate
tunnel has a capacity of approximately 500 gallons per minute and is able        additional development in Sierra Madre (see Service Provider Correspondence
to take advantage of gravity flows from higher elevations for distribution       in Appendix C).
purposes. However, as noted in the 2010 UWMP, because production in the
spring tunnels is dependent upon the hydrologic cycle, during dry years less
water is available. If multiple dry years were to be experienced the tunnels
would not provide a significant source of water supply.
7-14                                                                GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

                                                                 Water Infrastructure
                                                                 While significant strides have been made to upgrade the City’s water system,
                                                                 multiple components of the water infrastructure system have reached the end
                                                                 of their service lives. Each of the City’s four production wells, several of the
                                                                 system’s booster pumps, one water storage reservoir and a large number of
                                                                 water main segments are in need of replacement. There are neighborhoods
                                                                 throughout Sierra Madre that are served by water mains that are of inadequate
                                                                 size to properly serve existing development and land uses. Some of these are
                                                                 old infrastructure that is in need of replacement simply because of age and
                                                                 deterioration. In addition, one reservoir is in need of seismic upgrades and
                                                                 the City should construct a production well in the Main Basin to increase
                                                                 water supply reliability. The majority of planned water system improvements
                                                                 are needed in order to improve water supply reliability, rather than system
                                                                 capacity.
                                                                 The City’s Water Division has historically used several sources of funding for
                                                                 water system improvements. Federal funding in the form of Congressional
                                                                 grants through the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA)
                                                                 have paid for portions of several projects in Sierra Madre. Each federal grant
                                                                 must be “matched” with local funds. Sierra Madre’s local match has been
                                                                 provided from local water revenue, loans and grants from SGVMWD, and
                                                                 from the proceeds of the City’s water revenue bonds. Recently, the Sierra
                                                                 Madre Community Redevelopment Agency funded a major water main
                                                                 replacement project (see Service Provider Correspondence in Appendix C).
Sierra Madre Boulevard Water Main
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                  7-15

Water Conservation
Since the City is primarily built out, only limited increases in population
and service connections are anticipated over the life of the General Plan
Update. However, while Sierra Madre does not anticipate great increases in
water demand, nevertheless the City has prepared for the possibility of future
water stress, in which case conservation measures would be needed to ensure
adequate supply to all water customers. For this reason the City adopted a
Mandatory Water Conservation Plan (Chapter 13.24 of the City’s Municipal
Code), which restricts the use of water under circumstances determined to
be “urgent” by the City Council. With shortage restrictions already adopted,
Sierra Madre will be able to respond quickly and efficiently to water shortages
that may arise in its future.
Additionally, future development projects would be required to comply with
the provisions of the 2010 Green Building Standards Code, which contains
requirements for indoor water use reduction and site irrigation conservation.
                                                                                Drought-tolerant landscaping
                                                                                Source: Deb Sheridan
7-16                                                               GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

STORMWATER                                                                      In addition to the City’s requirements outlined in the NPDES permit, there
                                                                                are specific regulations that are attributed to sites identified as exceeding
The City of Sierra Madre is in the Rio Hondo sub-watershed of the main          pollutant levels by the Environmental Protection Agency. These are knows as
Los Angeles River Watershed, which is approximately 834 square miles in         Total Maximum Daily Loads (TMDL). TMDLs are the maximum amount
area. The City discharges all stormwater and other discharges via three outlets of a pollutant a water body can handle in relation to its dependent ecosystem
at the City’s southern border. The only above-ground (visible) outlet is the    and the designated beneficial uses (recreational, commercial fishing, wildlife
Santa Anita Wash, which meanders through the lower canyon and is also           habitat, etc.). TMDLs also include very specific pollution-reduction
seen at E. Sierra Madre Boulevard, near the Community Nursery School.           requirements, and also list the jurisdictions that are required to meet these
The two underground outlets are located at W. Orange Grove Boulevard at         limits. The extent to which TMDLs are required varies depending on the
Lima Street and E. Orange Grove Boulevard at the City boundary. They are        degree of progress still needed to achieve local and regional water quality
part of the Arcadia Wash and join together near the Santa Anita Race Track.     standards and/or identification of additional impairments. Violation of these
The Santa Anita Wash discharges enter Peck Road Park Lake and continue          TMDLs can result in exposing the City to both civil and criminal liabilities
to the Rio Hondo sub-watershed. The Arcadia Wash discharges enter the Rio       (see Memo from James Carlson, the City’s Management Analyst in Appendix
Hondo below the Peck Road Park Lake. The Rio Hondo sub-watershed joins          C).
the Los Angeles River in the City of Lynwood (right where I-710 crosses
Imperial Highway), and then finally discharges into the Long Beach Harbor.
All stormwater and associated discharges are regulated under the Federal
Clean Water Act’s National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) program regulations. The State of California, under the Porter-
Cologne Water Quality Control Act of 1969, established the State Water
Resources Control Board and then the Los Angeles Regional Water Quality
Control Board to issue the cities an NPDES permit. It should be noted that
a new NPDES permit is expected to be adopted by the Regional and State
Boards by June 30, 2012.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                               7-17

CONDITION OF THE WATERSHED                                                           o The Rio Hondo is (2004) designated an impaired water body
                                                                                        on the State’s 303 (d) list because of trash, copper, lead, zinc,
While regulatory responsibility of the City for water quality standards                 ammonia, pH, and coliform bacteria.
often extends to the ocean, a detailed description of the local watershed has
been documented in the 2004 Rio Hondo Watershed Management Plan                   • The Los Angeles County Drainage Area Project provides flood
(RHWMP). This document was created with funds from the State Water                  protection for one-half million people in 14 communities.
Resources Control Board and executed with the assistance of the San Gabriel       • The Rio Hondo sub-watershed plays a critically important water
Valley Council of Governments and the San Gabriel and Lower Los Angeles             storage function in the region; its spreading grounds are among the
Rivers and Mountains Conservancy and inserted into the regional Basin Plan.         most productive in Los Angeles County.
The 2004 RHWMP contains an overview of existing conditions within the                o This water supply function will continue to grow in importance
watershed, discusses how these conditions should shape the selection and                as the population increases and the supply of imported water
design of watershed improvement strategies, and presents recommended                    declines.
projects, programs and other opportunities necessary to manage the overall
watershed as a healthy, life-giving natural system. The following is a brief      • The watershed is largely built out, with very little new development
overview of some of the principal findings from the RHWMP that emerged              taking place;
from the existing conditions assessment of the sub-watershed (RHWQCP                 o Competing land uses – housing, economic, habitat, etc – are not
2004):                                                                                  well integrated.
    • The essential functions of the Rio Hondo sub-watershed, including              o There is a scarcity of open space in the developed portions of the
        groundwater storage and habitat support, were severely impacted by              watershed.
        extensive urbanization.
                                                                                     o In terms of acreage and accessibility, there are an insufficient
         o Impervious surfaces throughout the watershed have significantly              number of parks to serve the existing population within the
            reduced percolation into the groundwater table.                             watershed.
         o The present state of impermeability in the watershed also              •  Most native habitat has been converted to urban uses;
            increases flood hazards.
                                                                                     o The small patches of remaining habitat may not be adequate to
         o Water quality is threatened by non-point source pollution                    support native species.
            (stormwater runoff) from multiple land uses within the
            watershed.                                                               o Native species have also been negatively impacted by an invasion
                                                                                        of nonnative species.
         o Beneficial uses of the Rio Hondo have been negatively impacted
            by this polluted runoff.
7-18                                                              GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

WASTEWATER                                                                       AIR QUALITY
Sierra Madre has no wastewater treatment capacity or facilities, only a          Air quality issues are addressed through the efforts of federal, state, regional,
wastewater collection system. The City’s Sewer Division, a department            and local government agencies. The residents of southern California bare
within the Sierra Madre Public Works Department, manages, operates and           the cost of air pollution. Effects of poor air quality on southern California
maintains the City’s wastewater collection system. The wastewater collection     residents include reduced visibility; increased episodes of respiratory
system is connected and discharged to sewer mains in the City of Arcadia         infections and other illnesses; increased number of days of discomfort; absent
and to Los Angeles County trunk mains in Baldwin Avenue, Sierra Madre            days from work and school; increased symptoms related to respiratory disease
Boulevard and East Orange Grove Avenue. Under contract with the City, the        (including asthma); slowed lung function growth and increased asthma risk
Sanitation Districts provides treatment and disposal of wastewater generated     in children; heart disease; and shortened life spans. Polluted air also damages
in the City. The wastewater from the City’s service area, which is estimated     agriculture, the natural environment, and human-made materials.3
at approximately one million gallons per day (MGD) or 365 million gallons
annually, primarily flows to the Whittier Narrows Water Reclamation Plant        The South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) manages
located in South El Monte (City of Sierra Madre 2010).                           a 10,743 square mile area that includes the four-county South Coast Air
                                                                                 Basin (SoCAB) and the Riverside County portions of the Salton Sea Air
The City’s 2009 Sewer Master Plan identified multiple minor deficiencies         Basin (SSAB) and Mojave Desert Air Basin (MDAB). The City of Sierra
in the City’s wastewater collection system. Currently, there are no plans to     Madre is within the South Coast Air Basin (SoCAB). Areas of the country
expand the City’s wastewater collection facilities. However, it is anticipated   where criteria air pollutant levels persistently exceed the ambient air quality
that all existing deficiencies will be corrected during the life of the proposed standards (AAQS) may be designated as a “nonattainment” area. The SoCAB
General Plan Update. None are expected to be worsened by the General Plan        is designated as nonattainment of the California and/or National AAQS for
Update.                                                                          ozone, particulate matter (PM10 and PM2.5), nitrogen dioxide, and lead
                                                                                 (Los Angeles County only).4 To ensure that progress toward improving air
Sewer system expansions in Sierra Madre have historically been funded either
                                                                                 quality in southern California is achieved, SCAQMD in conjunction with the
by developers of housing tracts or by the formation of assessment districts.
                                                                                 Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) and California Air
The City’s Sewer Division does not fund construction of new infrastructure
                                                                                 Resources Board (CARB) prepare and implement the air quality management
(see Service Provider Correspondence in Appendix C).
                                                                                 plan (AQMP). The 2007 AQMP provides a comprehensive strategy for
                                                                                 controlling air pollution from stationary and mobile sources.
                                                                                 3
                                                                                   SCAQMD. 2005. Guidance Document for Addressing Air Quality Issues in General plans and Local Planning.
                                                                                 4
                                                                                   California Air Resources Board (CARB). 2010a, March. Area Designations: Activities and Maps. http://www.arb.ca.gov/desig/adm/adm.htm.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                                                              7-19

Air quality in the southern California region has continuously improved since                               Table 7-3 Local Air Quality
the 1970s as a direct result of air pollution control strategies implemented by
SCAQMD.5 However, air quality in southern California is far from meeting                                     Criteria Air Pollutant Standards            2006  2007  2008  2009  2010
all federal and state AAQS outlined in the national and California Clean                                     Ozone (O3)1
Air Act. The southern California region’s severe air pollution problem is a
consequence of the combination of emissions from the nation’s second-largest                                 Days Exceeded 1-Hour ≥ CAAQS (0.09 ppm)       26    13    16   12     1
urban area and meteorological conditions which are adverse to the dispersion                                 Days Exceeded 8-Hour > CAAQS (0.070 ppm)      35    21    26    19    6
of those emissions.6
                                                                                                             Days Exceeded 8-Hour > NAAQS (0.075 ppm)      23    11    16    12    3
Table 7-3 shows air quality trends in the local vicinity of the City of Sierra                               Maximum Concentration 1-Hour Standard (ppm) 0.151 0.149 0.122 0.176 0.101
Madre. What this means for Sierra Madre residents is that they are exposed
to unhealthful concentrations of ozone and particulate matter (PM10 and                                      Maximum Concentration 8-Hour Standard (ppm) 0.117 0.101 0.100 0.114 0.082
PM2.5, respectfully), as a result of cumulative air quality problems in the                                  Carbon Monoxide (CO)1
SoCAB.
                                                                                                             Days Exceeded 8-Hour > CAAQS (9.0 ppm)         0     0     0    0     0
The City’s General Plan articulates the City’s air quality-related goals,
                                                                                                             Days Exceeded 8-Hour ≥ NAAQS (9.0 ppm)        0     0     0     0     0
objectives, and policies. Land uses that are considered sensitive to the effects
of air quality include:                                                                                      Maximum Concentration (ppm)                 2.80  2.28  2.30  2.53  1.94
                • school, playgrounds, childcare centers                                                     Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2)(1-Hour)1
                • long-term health care facilities                                                           Days Exceeded 1-Hour ≥ CAAQS (0.18 ppm)        0    0     0      -    0
                • rehabilitation centers                                                                     Maximum concentration (ppm)                 0.120 0.092 0.105 0.080 0.071
                • hospitals
                • retirement homes
                • residences
Local air pollution sources in the City of Sierra Madre include both mobile
(roadways) and stationary (commercial and residential land uses).
5
  South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD). 2007. 2007 Air Quality Management Plan.
6
  SCAQMD 2007.
7-20                                                                                            GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

Table 7-3 Local Air Quality (Continued)                                                                            GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
  Criteria Air Pollutant Standards                                 2006             2007         2008  2009  2010  For approximately 1,000 years before the Industrial Revolution, the amount
  Sulfur Dioxide (SO2)      2                                                                                      of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions in the atmosphere remained relatively
                                                                                                                   constant. During the 20th century, however, scientists observed a rapid
  Days Exceeded 24-Hour ≥ CAAQS (0.04 ppm)                            0               0            0     0     0   change in the climate and climate change pollutants that are attributable to
  Days Exceeded 24-Hour ≥ NAAQS (0.14 ppm)                            0               0            0     0     0   human activities. These recent changes in climate change pollutants far exceed
                                                                                                                   the extremes of the ice ages, and the global mean temperature is warming at
  Maximum Concentration (ppm)                                      0.003           0.003         0.003 0.003 0.004
                                                                                                                   a rate that cannot be explained by natural causes alone. Human activities are
  Coarse Inhalable Particulates (PM10)2                                                                            directly altering the chemical composition of the atmosphere through the
  Days Exceeded 24-Hour > CAAQS (50 μg/m3)                           10               5            5    10    NA
                                                                                                                   buildup of GHGs.7
  Days Exceeded 24-Hour > NAAQS (150 μg/m3)                           0               0            0     0     0   The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s (IPCC) 2007 IPCC
                                                                                                                   Fourth Assessment Report projects that the range of global mean temperature
  Maximum Concentration (μg/m)                                      71.0           109.0          66.0 80.0  51.0  increase from 1990 to 2100, under different climate-change scenarios, will
  Fine Inhalable Particulates (PM2.5)1                                                                             range from 1.4 to 5.8°C (2.5 to 10.4°F). In the past, gradual changes in
                                                                                                                   the earth’s temperature changed the distribution of species, availability of
  Days Exceeded 24-Hour > NAAQS 35 μg/m3                             1                3            2     3     0
                                                                                                                   water, etc. However, human activities are accelerating this process so that
  Maximum Concentration (μg/m3)                                     45.8            68.8          66.0 51.9  35.2  environmental impacts associated with climate change no longer occur in
                                                                                                                   a geologic time frame but within a human lifetime. GHG emissions within
Source: California Air Resources Board (CARB). Accessed 2011. Ambient Air Quality Monitoring Data.
http://www.arb.ca.gov/adam/welcome.html.                                                                           the City are generated directly by transportation sources and natural gas used
Notes: ppm: parts per million; μg/m3: micrograms per cubic meter; NA: not available                                onsite for heating and cooking, and indirectly through emissions generated
CAAQS: California ambient air quality standards; NAAQS: National ambient air quality standards                     by electricity demand, water use, and waste disposal.
1
  Data obtained from the Pasadena South Wilson Avenue Monitoring Station.
2
  Data obtained from the Burbank West Palm Avenue Monitoring Station
                                                                                                                   7
                                                                                                                     International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2007. Fourth Assessment Report: Climate Change 2007. New York: Cambridge University Press.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                                                                                                   7-21

Like the variability in the projections of the expected increase in global surface                                       SB 375
temperatures, the environmental consequences of gradual changes in the
Earth’s temperature are also hard to predict. In California and western North                                            In 2008, Senate Bill 375 (SB 375) was adopted to connect the GHG emissions
America, 1) observations of the climate have shown a trend toward warmer                                                 reductions targets established in the Scoping Plan for the transportation
winter and spring temperatures, 2) a smaller fraction of precipitation is falling                                        sector to local land use decisions that affect travel behavior. Its intent is to
as snow, 3) there is a decrease in the amount of spring snow accumulation                                                reduce GHG emissions from light-duty trucks and automobiles (excludes
in the lower and middle elevation mountain zones, 4) there is an advance                                                 emissions associated with goods movement) by aligning regional long-range
snowmelt of 5 to 30 days earlier in the spring, and 5) there is a similar shift                                          transportation plans, investments, and housing allocations to local land use
(5 to 30 days earlier) in the timing of spring flower blooms. According to                                               planning to reduce vehicle miles traveled and vehicle trips. SCAG’s targets
the California Climate Action Team (CAT), even if actions could be taken                                                 are 8 percent reduction from 2005 by 2020 and 13 percent reduction from
to immediately curtail climate change emissions, some impacts from climate                                               2005 by 2035. The 2020 targets are smaller than the 2035 targets because
change are now considered unavoidable.                                                                                   a significant portion of the built environment in 2020 has been defined by
                                                                                                                         decisions that have already been made. In general, the 2020 scenarios reflect
AB 32                                                                                                                    that more time is needed for large land use and transportation infrastructure
                                                                                                                         changes. Most of the reductions in the interim are anticipated to come from
Acknowledging the potential impact on California’s resources, the state                                                  improving the efficiency of the region’s existing transportation network. SB
legislature passed Assembly Bill 32 (AB 32) on August 31, 2006, to place the                                             375 requires that SCAG prepare a Sustainable Communities Strategy (SCS)
state on a course toward reducing its contribution of GHG emissions. AB 32                                               in their regional transportation plan. SCAG’s first SCS is anticipated by May
sets a 2020 target for emissions levels equivalent to what was generated in the                                          2012.
state in the year 1990. It is projected that GHG emissions in California by
2020 will be 596 million metric tons (MMTons). In December 2007, CARB                                                    The SCS sets forth a suggested development pattern for the region, which,
approved a 2020 emissions limit of 427 MMTons (471 million tons). The                                                    when integrated with the transportation network and other transportation
2020 target requires emissions reductions of 169 MMTons, 28.5 percent of                                                 measures and policies, would reduce GHG emissions from transportation
the projected emissions compared to business as usual (BAU) in year 2020                                                 (excluding goods movement). The SCS is meant to provide individual
(i.e., 28.5 percent of 596 MMTons). CARB’s Scoping Plan outlines the state’s                                             jurisdictions with growth strategies that, when taken together, achieve the
GHG reduction strategies to meet the reduction targets of AB 32.8                                                        regional GHG emissions reduction targets.
                                                                                                                         While the SCS may inform local General Plans, SB 375 does not require that
                                                                                                                         local general plans, specific plans, or zoning be consistent with the SCS.9
                                                                                                                         9
                                                                                                                           California Air Resources Board (CARB). 2010b, August. Staff Report Proposed Regional Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction Targets for Automobiles and Light Trucks
8
  California Air Resources Board (CARB). 2008. Climate Change Proposed Scoping Plan, a Framework for Change.             Pursuant to Senate Bill 375.
7-22                                                                                                         GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING                                                        In fact, the Sanitation Districts are already starting to see a shift in the
                                                                                 amount of solid waste being taken to the Puente Hills Landfill. For example,
Assembly Bill (AB) 939 (Chapter 1095, Statutes of 1989), the Integrated          in reviewing the 2010 calendar year, Athens took less processed solid waste
Waste Management Act, requires, among other things, that every California        to the Puente Hills Landfill. For that year, a total of 1,231 tons were taken to
city and county divert 50 percent of its waste from landfills starting in the    Puente Hills, with 4,832 tons going to United Waste and 4,911 tons going
year 2000. In addition, AB 939 requires a Countywide Integrated Waste            to Scholl Landfill. Sierra Madre is one of only a few jurisdictions that are
Management Plan (CIWMP) for each county. The CIWMP must contain                  allowed to use Scholl Landfill due to a Glendale ordinance. Use of this landfill
a Source Reduction and Recycling Element (SRRE) for the county and each          is necessary to support its viability (see Service Provider Correspondence in
city within the county, identifying waste characterization, source reduction,    Appendix C).
recycling, composting, solid waste facility capacity, education and public
                                                                                 The City of Sierra Madre uses Athens Services as its exclusive franchise
information, funding, special waste (asbestos, sewage sludge, etc.), and
                                                                                 residential and commercial waste and recycling hauler. Athens Services’
household hazardous waste. Additionally, the CIWMP must also incorporate
                                                                                 MRF is located at 14048 Valley Boulevard in unincorporated Basset near the
a countywide siting element, specifying areas for transformation or disposal
                                                                                 City of Industry. The facility is a computer-controlled, state-of-the-art plant
sites to provide capacity for solid waste generated in the jurisdiction that
                                                                                 designed specifically for the processing of municipal solid waste. Construction
cannot be reduced or recycled for a 15-year period.
                                                                                 and demolition debris is also processed at the facility, though in a separate
The Sanitation Districts of Los Angeles County (Sanitation Districts) are        building. At the facility, waste is sorted and recyclable materials are removed.
responsible for implementation of the CIWMP and managing solid waste             Many materials are baled and shipped to both foreign and domestic markets.
on a regional basis. The City of Sierra Madre is within the service boundary     For household hazardous waste collection, the City uses programs provided
of District 15 (SDLAC). The Sanitation Districts operate three sanitary          by Los Angeles County.
landfills, four landfill energy recovery facilities, two recycle centers, three
                                                                                 Residents of Sierra Madre are provided automated containers from Athens
materials recovery/transfer facilities, and participate in the operation of two
                                                                                 Services for dispensing organic waste, green waste, and recyclables. Athens
refuse-to-energy facilities. Since the primary landfill for Los Angeles County
                                                                                 Services also offers other services, including the pick-up of bulky and hard-
(Puente Hills) is nearing capacity and opening new local landfills is difficult,
                                                                                 to-handle items (e.g., water heaters, furnaces, and dryers) and the provision
the Sanitation Districts have chosen to open remote disposal sites using waste-
                                                                                 of large containers that can handle large volumes of material. In meeting the
by-rail transport. The intermodal facility for the waste-by rail operation will
                                                                                 waste diversion and recycling requirements of AB 939, the City is involved
also be located next to the Puente Hills Materials Recovery Facility (MRF)
                                                                                 in curbside recycling with the assistance of Athens Services. Approximately
in the City of Industry at 2808 Workman Mill Road, which is owned and
                                                                                 57.2 percent of the waste generated by Sierra Madre in 2010 was diverted
operated by the Sanitation Districts. This facility will be operational in 2012
                                                                                 as a result of the curbside recycling program and other recycling means.
and has an expected closure date of 2013.
                                                                                 The City will also be implementing commercial recycling on July 1, 2012.
                                                                                 Additionally, the City’s Green Committee has set a goal of diverting 66
                                                                                 percent of total waste by 2015 to work towards the statewide goal of 75
                                                                                 percent by 2020, which is tied into the mandatory commercial recycling
                                                                                 program (see Memo from James Carlson, the City’s Management Analyst in
                                                                                 Appendix C). Furthermore, a drop-off recycling center is located in the City.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                  7-23

ENERGY                                                                           ELECTRICITY
Energy is a necessary resource. From appliances that run on electricity, to      The City of Sierra Madre’s electrical needs are provided by Southern California
water heaters utilizing gas, daily life activities require energy. However,      Edison (SCE). The majority of SCE facilities in Sierra Madre are overhead,
excessive energy consumption can have many negative impacts. In order to         consisting of wood power poles, overhead conductors, transformers, and
facilitate energy efficiency, the State of California has standards regulating   various other types of pole-mounted equipment. Some customers have
energy usage. The City of Sierra Madre, like all California cities, must comply  individual underground-fed services, such as a customer being served from
with California’s 2008 Building Energy Efficiency Standards for Residential      a padmounted transformer, or a residential customer who has opted to have
and Nonresidential Buildings, Title 24, Part 6, of the California Code of        their service installed underground (see Service Provider Correspondence in
Regulations. These standards were established in 1978 in response to a           Appendix C).
legislative mandate to reduce California’s energy consumption. The standards
                                                                                 Table 7-4 shows the total electrical usage by rate group within Sierra Madre.
are updated periodically to allow consideration and possible incorporation
                                                                                 The summaries are based on 12 months usage data from January 2010 to
of new energy efficiency technologies and methods. The 2008 Building
                                                                                 December 2010. As shown in Table 7-1, SCE served over 5,400 accounts in
Energy Efficiency Standards, which establish energy efficiency requirements
                                                                                 2010 and the total annual electrical usage of these accounts was 47,665,323
for new construction, went into effect January 1, 2010, and supersede the
                                                                                 kilowatt hours (kWh).
2005 Standards. Projects that apply for a building permit on or after this date
must comply with the 2008 Building Energy Efficiency Standards, which are        According to SCE, no deficiencies or inefficiencies currently exist and there
enforced through the local building permit process.                              are no plans by SCE to expand electrical facilities at this time. SCE regularly
                                                                                 reviews its grid system and infrastructure for reliability of service to its
In addition to the Building Energy Efficiency Standards, California’s 2008
                                                                                 customers.
Green Building Standards Code, Title 24, Part 11, of the California Code of
Regulations, went into effect on August 1, 2009. The 2008 Green Building         Capital improvements by SCE are funded from SCE’s General Rate Case
Standards Code, which is the first edition, is currently voluntary unless        (GRC) approved by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) for
otherwise adopted by local jurisdictions as mandatory. The 2010 Green            expansion and improvement projects within SCE’s power grid. The GRC
Building Standards Code is mandatory and went into effect on January 1,          is SCE’s proposal to CPUC for what it needs to continue to provide high-
2011. The 2010 Green Building Standards Code requires all new buildings          level service to its customers. It is a mandated regulatory proceeding that
in the State to be more energy efficient and environmentally responsible. It     SCE goes through every three years, in which SCE requests funds for its
was established to reduce construction waste, make buildings more efficient      infrastructure, maintenance and upgrade investments. The funding that is
in the use of materials and energy, and reduce environmental impact during       allocated to SCE is used to inspect, repair, and when appropriate, upgrade its
and after construction.                                                          electrical infrastructure within its 50,000 square-mile service territory, which
                                                                                 includes Sierra Madre.
7-24                                                                 GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

Table 7-4 Year 2010 Electricity Demand for Sierra Madre                                                                                         NATURAL GAS
        Rate Group                   Annual kWh                     % of Total            Number of Accounts                % of Total          The City of Sierra Madre’s natural gas needs are provided by Southern
  Domestic                            34,456,564                       72.3                       4,892                         90.4            California Gas Company (SoCalGas). SoCalGas does not have any natural
                                                                                                                                                gas building facilities within the City’s boundaries and no deficiencies or
  GS-1                                 3,472,064                        7.3                        440                           8.1            inefficiencies currently exist. Additionally, there are no plans by SoCalGas
  GS-2                                 9,254,374                       19.4                         65                           1.2            to expand natural gas facilities at this time. Capital improvement projects
                                                                                                                                                are generally underwritten by SoCalGas ratepayers. Natural gas demand is
  Street Lighting                       482,321                         1.0                         15                           0.3            measured in therms by facility type (e.g., residential, commercial, industrial).
  Total                               47,665,323                        100                       5,412                          100            According to SoCalGas, the total usage for active Sierra Madre customers
                                                                                                                                                from January-August 2011 was 1,770,676 therms (see Service Provider
Source: SCE (see service provider correspondence in Appendix C)
Notes:
                                                                                                                                                Correspondence in Appendix C).
Domestic = For all residential service including lighting, heating, cooking, and power or combination thereof in a single-family accommodation;
also to domestic farm service when supplied through the farm operator’s domestic meter.
GS-1 = Includes single- and three-phase general service including lighting and power, except that the customer whose monthly maximum
demand, in the opinion of SCE, is expected to exceed 20 kW in any three months during the preceding 12 months.
GS-2 = Includes single- and three-phase general service including lighting and power customers whose monthly maximum demand registers,
or in the opinion of SCE is expected to register, above 20 kW and below 200 kW.
Street Lighting = Includes service for the lighting of streets, highways, and publicly-owned and operated automobile parking lots, which are
open to the general public where SCE owns and maintains the street lighting equipment and associated facilities included under this schedule.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                                                                                                7-25

      7-26            GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
Source: Kim Herkewitz
                                                                 PRINTED REFERENCES
                                                                 “Among the Craftsmen.” The Craftsman. 1908, March. 682-88. Print.
                                                                 Blumenson, J. J. G. 1995. Identifying American Architecture: A Pictorial Guide
                                   Chapter 8                     to Styles and Terms 1600-1945. Walnut Creek, CA: Alta Mira. Print.
                                                                 Bowen, Edith Blumer. 1950. Annals of Early Sierra Madre. [Sierra Madre,
                             Bibliography                        Calif.]: Sierra Madre Historical Society, 1950. Print.
                                                                 California Air Resources Board (CARB). 2008. Climate Change Proposed
                                                                 Scoping Plan, a Framework for Change.
                                                                 California Air Resources Board (CARB). 2010b, August. Staff Report Proposed
                                                                 Regional Greenhouse Gas Emission Reduction Targets for Automobiles and
                                                                 Light Trucks Pursuant to Senate Bill 375.
                                                                 California Department of Finance, Demographic Research Unit (DOF).
                                                                 2010. Table E-5 City/County Population and Housing Estimates, 1/1/2010.
                                                                 Bramlet, David. 2004, July. Biological Assessment for Parcel 15, Tract No.
                                                                 27459 in the City of Sierra Madre.
                                                                 California Department of Transportation (Caltrans). 2009, November.
                                                                 Technical Noise Supplement.
                                                                 ———. 1998. Table 9-2136.2.
                                                                 California Office of Emergency Services (OES). 2007. Dam Inundation.
                                                                 DVD.
                                                                 Current, William R., and Karen Current. 1974. Greene | Architects in the
                                                                 Residential Style. Fort Worth [Tex.] Amon Carter Museum of Western Art:
                                                                 Amon Carter Museum. 14-15. Print.
                                                                 Gebhard, David, and Robert Winter. 1994. Los Angeles, an Architectural
                                                                 Guide. Salt Lake City: Gibbs Smith. 424-27. Print.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                 8-1

Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. 2003, October. State of          Sierra Madre, City of. 2010, March. Final Draft Urban Water Management
California General Plan Guidelines.                                          Plan. Prepared by Stetson Engineers, Inc.
Hines, Thomas S., and Irving Gill. 2000. Irving Gill and the Architecture of ———. 2008, July. City of Sierra Madre Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan.
Reform: A Study in Modernist Architectural Culture. New York: Monacelli.
148-54. Print.                                                               ———. Municipal Code. Title 9, Public Peace, Morals, and Welfare.
                                                                             Chapter 9, Noise.
“Historic Sierra Madre California.” 2002. Sierra Madre, CA: Sierra Madre
Historical Preservation Society. Print.                                      South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD). 2007. 2007 Air
                                                                             Quality Management Plan.
International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 2007. Fourth Assessment
Report: Climate Change 2007. New York: Cambridge University Press.           ———. 2005. Guidance Document for Addressing Air Quality Issues in
                                                                             General plans and Local Planning.
Kanner, Diane. 2005. Wallace Neff and the Grand Houses of the Golden State.
New York, NY: Monacelli. 100-02. Print.                                      Transportation Research Board. 2000. Highway Capacity Manual 2000.
Keith, Elizabeth P. 1976. Sierra Madre Vistas: A Pictorial History of Sierra Turney, Catherine. 1985. The History of a Parish. Sierra Madre, CA: Church
Madre. Sierra Madre, CA: Sierra Madre Historical Society. Print.             of the Ascension. Print.
Makinson, Randell L. 1977. Greene & Greene: Architecture as a Fine Art. Salt United States Census Bureau. 2010 Census.
Lake City: Gibbs Smith. 90-91. Print.                                        ———. 2005-2009 American Community Survey for Modal Transportation
Matthias, John I. “California House in Sierra Madre.” 1974, May. The         Split.
Architectural Forum: Magazine of Building. 65-69. Print.                     Winter, Robert. 2011. “Living Lightly on the Land: Louis B. Easton’s
Robinson, John W. 2001. Sierra Madre’s Old Mount Wilson Trail. [S.l.]: Big   California Craftsman Showpiece.” American Bungalow, Winter 2011: 72-83.
Santa Anita Historical Society. Print.                                       Print.
Robinson, John W. 1991. The San Gabriels: The Mountain Country from          Wortham, Josephine. 1999. “El Retiro.” American Bungalow, Fall 1999: 34-
Soledad Canyon to Lyttle Creek. Arcadia, CA: Big Santa Anita Historical      39. Print.
Society. Print.                                                              Zack, Michele. 2009. Southern California Story: Seeking the Better Life in Sierra
                                                                             Madre. Sierra Madre: Sierra Madre Historical Preservation Society. Print.
8-2                                                              GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

WEBSITES                                                                 ———. University of California Santa Barbara Biogeography Lab. 1986c.
                                                                         Southern Sycamore Alder Riparian Woodland. http://www.biogeog.ucsb.
Aspen Environmental Group. 2009, September. Appendices C-15 and C-21     edu/projects/gap/data/cnddb/62400.html
to: California Public Utilities Commission. Final Environmental Impact
                                                                         ———. University of California Santa Barbara Biogeography Lab. 1986d.
Report for Southern California Edison’s Tehachapi Renewable Transmission
                                                                         Open Englemann Oak Woodland. http://www.biogeog.ucsb.edu/projects/
Project. ftp://ftp.cpuc.ca.gov/gopher-data/environ/tehachapi_renewables/
                                                                         gap/data/cnddb/71181.html.
TRTP_SpecialistReports/SpecialistReports/2BioResources/Apps/App-C-
CNDDB-maps.pdf.                                                          Calflora.org. 2007, November 29. Southern California Plant Communities.
                                                                         http://www.calflora.net/botanicalnames/plantcommunities.html.
California Air Resources Board (CARB). 2011. Ambient Air Quality
Monitoring Data. http://www.arb.ca.gov/adam/welcome.html.                Congressional Research Service (CRS). 2005, April 11. Designation of
                                                                         Critical Habitat under the Endangered Species Act [ESA]. http://www.cnie.
———. 2010a, March. Area Designations: Activities and Maps. http://www.
                                                                         org/NLE/CRSreports/05apr/RS20263.pdf.
arb.ca.gov/desig/adm/adm.htm.
                                                                         Creative Arts Group (CAG). 2011. http://www.creativeartsgroup.org/about.
California Department of Conservation (CDC). 2010 Geologic Map of
                                                                         htm.
California. http://www.quake.ca.gov/gmaps/GMC/stategeologicmap.html.
                                                                         E. Waldo Ward (EWW). 2011. E. Waldo Ward & Son: History. http://www.
California Department of Fish and Game (CDFG). 2012, January 17.
                                                                         waldoward.com/history.aspx.
California Natural Diversity Database.
                                                                         Los Angeles Conservancy (LAC). 2011. Preservation Resources. http://www.
California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection (CalFire). 2009,
                                                                         laconservancy.org/preservation/resources_sites_la_ir.php4.
September 3. http://www.fire.ca.gov/about/downloads/20LACRES.pdf.
                                                                         Los Angeles County Fire Department (LACFD). Incorporated Fire Hazard
California Gap Analysis Project (CGAP). University of California Santa
                                                                         Severity Zone City of Sierra Madre. California Department of Forestry and
Barbara Biogeography Lab. 1986a. Southern Coast Live Oak Riparian Forest
                                                                         Fire Protection: Fire Prevention. ftp://frap.cdf.ca.gov/fhszlocalmaps/los_
(61310).      http://www.biogeog.ucsb.edu/projects/gap/data/cnddb/61310.
                                                                         angeles/sierra_madre.pdf.
html.
                                                                         Mater Dolorosa Passionist Retreat Center (MDPRC). 2011. http://www.
———. University of California Santa Barbara Biogeography Lab. 1986b.
                                                                         passionist.org/materdolorosa/overview.
Southern Alluvial Fan Scrub. http://www.biogeog.ucsb.edu/projects/gap/
data/cnddb/63330.html.                                                   Nature Friends Los Angeles (NFLA). 2008. http://www.naturefriendsla.org/
                                                                         web/index.php?&MMN_position=1:1.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                                                     8-3

Pasadena Unified School District (PUSD). 2010. Draft Initial Study and     ———. 2007, March 28. Hillside Management Zone Ordinance Update
Mitigated Negative Declaration Sierra Madre School Upper Campus Sierra     Draft EIR. Prepared by RBF Consulting. http://cityofsierramadre.com/
Madre, California. http://measurett.org/37370001_Sierra%20Madre%20         online-services/documents/document-archive/item/hillside-management-
School_IS%20MNDrevi.pdf.                                                   zone-ordinance-update-draft-eir-2.
PCR Services Corporation. 2006, January. Biological Resources Assessment:  Sierra Madre Historical Preservation Society (SMHPS). 2011a. About Us.
Altadena Significant Ecological Area. http://planning.lacounty.gov/assets/ http://www.smhps.org/museums.html.
upl/project/sea_altadena.pdf.
                                                                           ———. 2011b. Museums: Lizzie’s Trail Inn and Richardson House. http://
Riverside County Integrated Project (RCIP). 2002, November. Coastal Sage   www.smhps.org/museums.html.
Scrub. http://www.rcip.org/Documents/draft_2_mshcp_vol_2/c_06.pdf.
                                                                           Sierra Madre News Net (SMNN). 2011. Lizzie’s Trail Inn. http://www.
San Gabriel Valley Council of Governments et al. (SGVCOG). 2004,           sierramadrenews.net/lizziestrailinn.htm.
October. Rio Hondo Watershed Management Plan. http://www.rmc.ca.gov/
plans/rio_hondo/Rio%20Hondo%20Water%20Management%20Plan_                   Sierra Madre Patch (SMP). 2011a. Places: Art Galleries. http://sierramadre.
small.pdf.                                                                 patch.com/search/listings?cat=1273105825.
Sanitation Districts of Los Angeles County (SDLAC). Boundary Map           ———. 2011b. Community Resources, Community Centers: Sierra
District 15. http://www.lacsd.org/info/wastewater_services/connectionfee/  Madre      Playhouse.      http://sierramadre.patch.com/listings/sierra-madre-
district15.asp.                                                            playhouse5825.
Sierra Madre, City of. 2011a. Community Services: Arts. http://www.        Sierra Madre Women’s Club (SMWC). Essick House History. http://www.
cityofsierramadre.com/arts.                                                smwc.info/.
———. 2011b. Police Department. http://www.cityofsierramadre.com/           Southern California Earthquake Data Center (SCEDC), 2011. http://www.
departments/police-department.                                             data.scec.org/significant/index.html
———. 2011c. Police Department: Crime Alerts and Statistics. Police         US Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). 2012a, January 19. National
Department Annual Report 2010. http://www.cityofsierramadre.com/crime-     Wetlands Mapper. http://137.227.242.85/wetland/wetland.htm.
prevention/crime-alerts-a-statistics.                                      ———. 2012b, January 19. Critical Habitat Mapper. http://criticalhabitat.
———. 2011d. Public Works: Water. http://www.cityofsierramadre.com/         fws.gov/crithab/flex/crithabMapper.jsp.
water.
8-4                                                           GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA

This page intentionally left blank.
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA 8-5
      8-6             GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
Source: Kim Herkewitz
                                                                             Chapter 9
                                                                            Appendices
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA          9-1
This page intentionally left blank.
9-2                                 GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
                                                                                                APPENDIX A
                                                                         AM and PM Level of Service Worksheets
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                                 9-3
This page intentionally left blank.
9-4                                 GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
1: Grandview Ave & Michillinda Ave                                               1/19/2012
Movement                   WBL WBR       NBT    NBR    SBL    SBT
Lane Configurations
Sign Control               Stop          Free                 Free
Grade                        0%            0%                  0%
Volume (veh/h)               200     50     60    80     20    190
Peak Hour Factor            0.92  0.92    0.92  0.92   0.92   0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)       217    54      65    87     22    207
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type               None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume      359    109                  152
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol           359   109                  152
tC, single (s)                6.4   6.2                 4.1
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                        3.5   3.3                  2.2
p0 queue free %               66    94                   98
cM capacity (veh/h)          630   945                1429
Direction, Lane #         WB 1    NB 1   SB 1
Volume Total                 272   152     228
Volume Left                  217      0     22
Volume Right                   54   87        0
cSH                          675  1700   1429
Volume to Capacity          0.40  0.09    0.02
Queue Length 95th (ft)        49      0       1
Control Delay (s)           13.9    0.0    0.8
Lane LOS                        B             A
Approach Delay (s)          13.9    0.0    0.8
Approach LOS                    B
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                               6.1
Intersection Capacity Utilization       43.3%       ICU Level of Service A
Analysis Period (min)                       15
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                           Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions AM                                                              Page 1
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
2: Grandview Ave & Lima St                                                                  1/19/2012
Movement                    EBL   EBT    EBR  WBL    WBT    WBR      NBL  NBT  NBR  SBL   SBT    SBR
Lane Configurations
Sign Control                      Stop               Stop                 Stop            Stop
Volume (vph)                  10   222      7    26    254       6     17   23   19    9    31      20
Peak Hour Factor            0.92  0.92   0.92  0.92   0.92   0.92    0.92 0.92 0.92 0.92  0.92    0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)         11  241      8    28    276       7     18   25   21   10    34      22
Direction, Lane #          EB 1 WB 1    NB 1  SB 1
Volume Total (vph)           260   311     64    65
Volume Left (vph)              11   28     18    10
Volume Right (vph)              8    7     21    22
Hadj (s)                    0.02 0.04   -0.10 -0.14
Departure Headway (s)         4.6  4.6    5.2   5.2
Degree Utilization, x       0.33 0.40    0.09  0.09
Capacity (veh/h)             748   753    610   611
Control Delay (s)           10.0 10.6     8.8   8.7
Approach Delay (s)          10.0 10.6     8.8   8.7
Approach LOS                    A    B      A     A
Intersection Summary
Delay                                    10.0
HCM Level of Service                        B
Intersection Capacity Utilization      36.4%       ICU Level of Service           A
Analysis Period (min)                      15
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                                      Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions AM                                                                         Page 2
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
3: Grandview Ave & Mountain Trail Ave                                                        1/19/2012
Movement                    EBL   EBT   EBR   WBL     WBT    WBR      NBL  NBT  NBR  SBL   SBT    SBR
Lane Configurations
Sign Control                      Stop                Stop                 Stop            Stop
Volume (vph)                  27    91     38    48     189      10     50   29    9   17   112      43
Peak Hour Factor            0.92  0.92   0.92  0.92    0.92   0.92    0.92 0.92 0.92 0.92  0.92    0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)         29   99     41    52     205      11     54   32   10   18   122      47
Direction, Lane #          EB 1 WB 1    NB 1  SB 1
Volume Total (vph)           170   268     96   187
Volume Left (vph)              29   52     54    18
Volume Right (vph)             41   11     10    47
Hadj (s)                   -0.08 0.05    0.09 -0.10
Departure Headway (s)         4.9  4.9    5.4   5.1
Degree Utilization, x       0.23 0.37    0.14  0.26
Capacity (veh/h)             670   687    601   650
Control Delay (s)             9.4 10.8    9.3    9.9
Approach Delay (s)            9.4 10.8    9.3   9.9
Approach LOS                    A    B      A      A
Intersection Summary
Delay                                    10.0
HCM Level of Service                        B
Intersection Capacity Utilization      42.7%        ICU Level of Service           A
Analysis Period (min)                      15
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                                       Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions AM                                                                          Page 3
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
4: Grandview Ave & Santa Anita Ave                                                            1/19/2012
Movement                    EBL   EBT    EBR    WBL    WBT    WBR      NBL  NBT  NBR  SBL   SBT    SBR
Lane Configurations
Sign Control                      Stop                 Stop                 Stop            Stop
Volume (vph)                    8   26      85     34     30       0     74   67   19    4   106      26
Peak Hour Factor            0.92  0.92    0.92   0.92   0.92   0.92    0.92 0.92 0.92 0.92  0.92    0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)          9   28      92     37     33       0     80   73   21    4   115      28
Direction, Lane #          EB 1 WB 1     NB 1   NB 2   SB 1    SB 2
Volume Total (vph)           129    70      80     93      4    143
Volume Left (vph)               9   37      80      0      4       0
Volume Right (vph)             92     0       0    21      0      28
Hadj (s)                   -0.38 0.14     0.53  -0.12   0.53  -0.10
Departure Headway (s)         4.4  5.0     5.7    5.0    5.7     5.1
Degree Utilization, x       0.16 0.10     0.13   0.13   0.01   0.20
Capacity (veh/h)             757   667     608    685    599    678
Control Delay (s)             8.2   8.5    8.3    7.6    7.5     8.1
Approach Delay (s)            8.2  8.5     7.9           8.1
Approach LOS                    A     A       A            A
Intersection Summary
Delay                                       8.1
HCM Level of Service                          A
Intersection Capacity Utilization       31.4%        ICU Level of Service           A
Analysis Period (min)                       15
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                                        Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions AM                                                                           Page 4
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Signalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
5: Sierra Madre Blvd & Michillinda Ave                                                                 1/19/2012
Movement                    EBL   EBT     EBR   WBL     WBT    WBR       NBL    NBT   NBR    SBL    SBT     SBR
Lane Configurations
Ideal Flow (vphpl)         1900   1900   1900   1900    1900    1900    1900   1900   1900  1900   1900     1900
Total Lost time (s)           4.0   4.0     4.0   4.0      4.0    4.0             4.0                 4.0     4.0
Lane Util. Factor           1.00  0.95    1.00  1.00     0.95   1.00            0.95                1.00    1.00
Frt                         1.00   1.00   0.85  1.00     1.00   0.85            0.99                1.00    0.85
Flt Protected               0.95  1.00    1.00  0.95     1.00   1.00            0.97                1.00    1.00
Satd. Flow (prot)          1770   3539   1583   1770    3539    1583           3413                1856     1583
Flt Permitted               0.95  1.00    1.00  0.95     1.00   1.00            0.97                1.00    1.00
Satd. Flow (perm)          1770   3539   1583   1770    3539    1583           3413                1856     1583
Volume (vph)                 120    140    260     60     280      40     240    180     30    20    280     260
Peak-hour factor, PHF       0.92  0.92    0.92  0.92     0.92   0.92     0.92   0.92   0.92  0.92   0.92     0.92
Adj. Flow (vph)              130   152     283     65     304      43     261    196     33    22    304     283
RTOR Reduction (vph)            0     0    217      0        0     35       0       3     0     0       0    148
Lane Group Flow (vph)        130   152       66    65     304       8       0    487      0     0    326     135
Turn Type                   Prot         Perm    Prot          Perm      Split               Split         Perm
Protected Phases                5     2             1        6              8       8           4       4
Permitted Phases                              2                     6                                           4
Actuated Green, G (s)        9.3  19.1    19.1    5.1 14.4      14.4            19.0                22.2    22.2
Effective Green, g (s)       9.3  19.6    19.6    5.1 15.4      15.4            20.0                23.2    23.2
Actuated g/C Ratio          0.11  0.23    0.23  0.06 0.18       0.18            0.24                0.28    0.28
Clearance Time (s)           4.0    4.5    4.5    4.0     5.0     5.0             5.0                 5.0     5.0
Vehicle Extension (s)        2.5    4.0     4.0   2.5     3.0     3.0             4.0                 4.0     4.0
Lane Grp Cap (vph)           196   827     370   108      650     291            814                 513     438
v/s Ratio Prot            c0.07   0.04          0.04 c0.09                     c0.14               c0.18
v/s Ratio Perm                            0.04                   0.00                                       0.09
v/c Ratio                   0.66  0.18    0.18  0.60     0.47   0.03            0.60                0.64    0.31
Uniform Delay, d1           35.8  25.7    25.7  38.4     30.6   28.1            28.4                26.6    24.0
Progression Factor          1.00  1.00    1.00  1.00     1.00   1.00            1.00                1.00    1.00
Incremental Delay, d2         7.4   0.1     0.3   7.7     0.5     0.0             1.4                 2.9     0.6
Delay (s)                   43.2  25.9    26.0  46.1     31.1   28.1            29.8                29.5    24.6
Level of Service               D      C       C     D       C       C              C                    C       C
Approach Delay (s)                29.9                   33.2                   29.8                27.2
Approach LOS                          C                     C                      C                    C
Intersection Summary
HCM Average Control Delay                 29.7        HCM Level of Service                C
HCM Volume to Capacity ratio              0.59
Actuated Cycle Length (s)                 83.9        Sum of lost time (s)            16.0
Intersection Capacity Utilization       56.9%         ICU Level of Service                B
Analysis Period (min)                        15
c Critical Lane Group
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                                               Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions AM                                                                                    Page 5
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
6: Sierra Madre Blvd & Lima St                                                              1/19/2012
Movement                    EBL   EBT    EBR  WBL    WBT    WBR      NBL  NBT  NBR  SBL   SBT    SBR
Lane Configurations
Sign Control                      Stop               Stop                 Stop            Stop
Volume (vph)                  22   266     25    17    294      21     27   54   22   24    94      47
Peak Hour Factor            0.92  0.92   0.92  0.92   0.92   0.92    0.92 0.92 0.92 0.92  0.92    0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)         24  289     27    18    320      23     29   59   24   26   102      51
Direction, Lane #          EB 1 WB 1    NB 1  SB 1
Volume Total (vph)           340   361    112   179
Volume Left (vph)              24   18     29    26
Volume Right (vph)             27   23     24    51
Hadj (s)                    0.00 0.01   -0.04 -0.11
Departure Headway (s)         5.4  5.4    6.1   5.9
Degree Utilization, x       0.51 0.54    0.19  0.29
Capacity (veh/h)             631   639    496   537
Control Delay (s)           13.8 14.4    10.6  11.4
Approach Delay (s)          13.8 14.4    10.6  11.4
Approach LOS                    B    B      B     B
Intersection Summary
Delay                                    13.2
HCM Level of Service                        B
Intersection Capacity Utilization      40.2%       ICU Level of Service           A
Analysis Period (min)                      15
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                                      Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions AM                                                                         Page 6
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
7: Sierra Madre Blvd & Baldwin Ave                                                             1/19/2012
Movement                    EBL    EBT    EBR   WBL    WBT    WBR      NBL   NBT  NBR  SBL   SBT    SBR
Lane Configurations
Sign Control                       Stop                 Stop                 Stop            Stop
Volume (vph)                  73    126     104   85     146      30     81   192   43   20   259     103
Peak Hour Factor            0.92   0.92    0.92 0.92    0.92   0.92    0.92  0.92 0.92 0.92  0.92    0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)         79   137     113   92     159      33      88  209   47   22   282     112
Direction, Lane #          EB 1   EB 2 WB 1     NB 1   NB 2    SB 1    SB 2
Volume Total (vph)           216    113     284  297      47    303     112
Volume Left (vph)              79      0     92   88       0      22       0
Volume Right (vph)              0   113      33    0      47       0    112
Hadj (s)                    0.22  -0.67 0.03    0.18   -0.67   0.07   -0.67
Departure Headway (s)         8.0    7.1    7.7  7.8     6.9     7.6     6.9
Degree Utilization, x       0.48   0.22 0.61    0.64    0.09   0.64    0.21
Capacity (veh/h)             413    469     434  438     487    444     497
Control Delay (s)           16.9   10.9 21.8    22.7     9.4   22.1    10.5
Approach Delay (s)          14.9           21.8 20.9           18.9
Approach LOS                    B             C    C               C
Intersection Summary
Delay                                      19.1
HCM Level of Service                          C
Intersection Capacity Utilization        67.5%       ICU Level of Service            C
Analysis Period (min)                        15
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                                         Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions AM                                                                            Page 7
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
8: Sierra Madre Blvd & Mountain Trail Ave                                                   1/19/2012
Movement                    EBL   EBT    EBR  WBL    WBT    WBR      NBL  NBT  NBR  SBL   SBT    SBR
Lane Configurations
Sign Control                      Stop               Stop                 Stop            Stop
Volume (vph)                  47   140      7    33    145      33     17  129   27   34   190      80
Peak Hour Factor            0.92  0.92   0.92  0.92   0.92   0.92    0.92 0.92 0.92 0.92  0.92    0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)         51  152      8    36    158      36     18  140   29   37   207      87
Direction, Lane #          EB 1 WB 1    NB 1  SB 1
Volume Total (vph)           211   229    188   330
Volume Left (vph)              51   36     18    37
Volume Right (vph)              8   36     29    87
Hadj (s)                    0.06 -0.03  -0.04 -0.10
Departure Headway (s)         5.9  5.8    5.8   5.5
Degree Utilization, x       0.34 0.37    0.30  0.50
Capacity (veh/h)             551   565    555   616
Control Delay (s)           11.9 12.1    11.2  13.8
Approach Delay (s)          11.9 12.1    11.2  13.8
Approach LOS                    B    B      B     B
Intersection Summary
Delay                                    12.5
HCM Level of Service                        B
Intersection Capacity Utilization      46.1%       ICU Level of Service           A
Analysis Period (min)                      15
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                                      Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions AM                                                                         Page 8
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
9: Orange Grove Ave & Baldwin Ave                                                            1/19/2012
Movement                    EBL   EBT   EBR   WBL     WBT    WBR      NBL  NBT  NBR  SBL   SBT    SBR
Lane Configurations
Sign Control                      Stop                 Stop                Stop            Stop
Volume (vph)                  29    88     77  173      212      65     56  244   39   25   440      45
Peak Hour Factor            0.92  0.92   0.92 0.92     0.92   0.92    0.92 0.92 0.92 0.92  0.92    0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)         32   96     84  188      230      71     61  265   42   27   478      49
Direction, Lane #          EB 1 WB 1 WB 2     NB 1    NB 2    SB 1    SB 2
Volume Total (vph)           211   418     71  193      175    266     288
Volume Left (vph)              32  188      0    61        0     27      0
Volume Right (vph)             84    0     71     0      42       0     49
Hadj (s)                   -0.17 0.26 -0.67   0.19    -0.14   0.09   -0.08
Departure Headway (s)         8.4  8.3    7.3   8.7      8.4    8.3    8.1
Degree Utilization, x       0.49 0.96 0.14    0.47     0.41   0.61    0.65
Capacity (veh/h)             412   428    477  410      426    433     443
Control Delay (s)           19.4 62.2 10.4    17.9     15.8   22.2    23.5
Approach Delay (s)          19.4 54.7         16.9            22.9
Approach LOS                    C    F            C               C
Intersection Summary
Delay                                    30.7
HCM Level of Service                        D
Intersection Capacity Utilization      68.9%        ICU Level of Service           C
Analysis Period (min)                      15
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                                       Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions AM                                                                          Page 9
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
10: Orange Grove Ave & Rancho Rd                                                                  1/19/2012
Movement                    EBL   EBT    EBR    WBL     WBT    WBR      NBL    NBT  NBR  SBL    SBT    SBR
Lane Configurations
Sign Control                      Free                  Free                  Stop             Stop
Grade                              0%                     0%                    0%               0%
Volume (veh/h)                  7  163        3      3    290       7       3    12   19   16     15     31
Peak Hour Factor            0.92  0.92    0.92  0.92     0.92   0.92    0.92   0.92 0.92 0.92   0.92   0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)          8  177        3      3   315        8       3    13   21   17     16     34
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type                                                                   None             None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume      323                  180                     561    523  179  547    521    319
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol           323                  180                    561    523  179  547    521    319
tC, single (s)               4.1                  4.1                    7.1    6.5  6.2  7.1    6.5    6.2
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                        2.2                  2.2                    3.5   4.0  3.3  3.5    4.0    3.3
p0 queue free %               99                  100                     99     97   98   96     96     95
cM capacity (veh/h)        1237                 1395                     404    455  864  425    456    722
Direction, Lane #          EB 1 WB 1     NB 1   SB 1
Volume Total                 188   326      37     67
Volume Left                     8     3       3    17
Volume Right                    3     8     21     34
cSH                        1237 1395       609    546
Volume to Capacity          0.01 0.00     0.06  0.12
Queue Length 95th (ft)          0     0       5    10
Control Delay (s)             0.4   0.1   11.3   12.5
Lane LOS                        A     A       B      B
Approach Delay (s)            0.4   0.1   11.3   12.5
Approach LOS                                  B      B
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                               2.2
Intersection Capacity Utilization       31.0%         ICU Level of Service             A
Analysis Period (min)                       15
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                                           Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions AM                                                                              Page 10
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
1: Grandview Ave & Michillinda Ave                                               1/19/2012
Movement                   WBL WBR       NBT    NBR    SBL    SBT
Lane Configurations
Sign Control               Stop          Free                 Free
Grade                        0%            0%                  0%
Volume (veh/h)                80    10     146   194     13    108
Peak Hour Factor            0.92  0.92    0.92  0.92   0.92   0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)        87    11     159   211     14    117
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type               None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume      410    264                  370
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol           410   264                  370
tC, single (s)               6.4    6.2                 4.1
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                        3.5   3.3                  2.2
p0 queue free %               85    99                   99
cM capacity (veh/h)          591   775                1189
Direction, Lane #         WB 1    NB 1   SB 1
Volume Total                  98   370     132
Volume Left                   87      0     14
Volume Right                  11   211        0
cSH                          607  1700   1189
Volume to Capacity          0.16  0.22    0.01
Queue Length 95th (ft)        14      0       1
Control Delay (s)           12.1    0.0     1.0
Lane LOS                        B             A
Approach Delay (s)          12.1    0.0     1.0
Approach LOS                    B
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                               2.2
Intersection Capacity Utilization       31.3%       ICU Level of Service A
Analysis Period (min)                       15
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                           Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions PM                                                              Page 1
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
2: Grandview Ave & Lima St                                                                    1/19/2012
Movement                    EBL   EBT     EBR   WBL    WBT    WBR      NBL  NBT  NBR  SBL   SBT    SBR
Lane Configurations
Sign Control                      Stop                 Stop                 Stop            Stop
Volume (vph)                  27   189        3    17    106       7     19   26   29    7    31      14
Peak Hour Factor            0.92  0.92    0.92   0.92   0.92   0.92    0.92 0.92 0.92 0.92  0.92    0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)         29  205        3    18    115       8     21   28   32    8    34      15
Direction, Lane #          EB 1 WB 1     NB 1   SB 1
Volume Total (vph)           238   141      80     57
Volume Left (vph)              29   18      21      8
Volume Right (vph)              3     8     32     15
Hadj (s)                    0.05 0.03    -0.15  -0.10
Departure Headway (s)         4.5  4.5     4.7    4.8
Degree Utilization, x       0.29 0.18     0.11   0.08
Capacity (veh/h)             782   753     703    684
Control Delay (s)             9.3   8.5    8.3    8.2
Approach Delay (s)            9.3   8.5    8.3    8.2
Approach LOS                    A     A       A     A
Intersection Summary
Delay                                       8.8
HCM Level of Service                          A
Intersection Capacity Utilization       29.2%        ICU Level of Service           A
Analysis Period (min)                       15
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                                        Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions PM                                                                           Page 2
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
3: Grandview Ave & Mountain Trail Ave                                                         1/19/2012
Movement                    EBL   EBT     EBR   WBL    WBT    WBR      NBL  NBT  NBR  SBL   SBT    SBR
Lane Configurations
Sign Control                      Stop                 Stop                 Stop            Stop
Volume (vph)                  37   128      15     12     93      18     14   64   29   11    65      26
Peak Hour Factor            0.92  0.92    0.92   0.92   0.92   0.92    0.92 0.92 0.92 0.92  0.92    0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)         40  139      16     13    101      20     15   70   32   12    71      28
Direction, Lane #          EB 1 WB 1     NB 1   SB 1
Volume Total (vph)           196   134     116    111
Volume Left (vph)              40   13      15     12
Volume Right (vph)             16   20      32     28
Hadj (s)                    0.03 -0.03   -0.10  -0.10
Departure Headway (s)         4.7  4.7     4.7    4.8
Degree Utilization, x       0.25 0.17     0.15   0.15
Capacity (veh/h)             727   720     703    697
Control Delay (s)             9.2   8.6     8.6   8.6
Approach Delay (s)            9.2   8.6    8.6    8.6
Approach LOS                    A     A       A     A
Intersection Summary
Delay                                       8.8
HCM Level of Service                          A
Intersection Capacity Utilization       31.3%        ICU Level of Service           A
Analysis Period (min)                       15
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                                        Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions PM                                                                           Page 3
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
4: Grandview Ave & Santa Anita Ave                                                             1/19/2012
Movement                    EBL   EBT    EBR    WBL     WBT    WBR      NBL  NBT  NBR  SBL   SBT    SBR
Lane Configurations
Sign Control                      Stop                  Stop                 Stop            Stop
Volume (vph)                  16    27      88     19      10       2     91  120   37    2    76       8
Peak Hour Factor            0.92  0.92    0.92   0.92    0.92   0.92    0.92 0.92 0.92 0.92  0.92    0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)         17   29      96     21      11       2     99  130   40    2    83       9
Direction, Lane #          EB 1 WB 1     NB 1   NB 2    SB 1    SB 2
Volume Total (vph)           142    34      99    171       2      91
Volume Left (vph)              17   21      99       0      2       0
Volume Right (vph)             96     2       0    40       0       9
Hadj (s)                   -0.34 0.12     0.53  -0.13    0.53  -0.03
Departure Headway (s)         4.5  5.1     5.6     4.9    5.7     5.2
Degree Utilization, x       0.18 0.05     0.15   0.23    0.00   0.13
Capacity (veh/h)             751   655     626    710     596    663
Control Delay (s)             8.4   8.3    8.4     8.2    7.6     7.7
Approach Delay (s)            8.4  8.3     8.2            7.7
Approach LOS                    A     A       A             A
Intersection Summary
Delay                                       8.2
HCM Level of Service                          A
Intersection Capacity Utilization       26.0%         ICU Level of Service           A
Analysis Period (min)                       15
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                                         Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions PM                                                                            Page 4
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Signalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
5: Sierra Madre Blvd & Michillinda Ave                                                                1/19/2012
Movement                    EBL EBT EBR        WBL     WBT    WBR       NBL    NBT   NBR    SBL    SBT     SBR
Lane Configurations
Ideal Flow (vphpl)         1900 1900 1900      1900    1900    1900    1900   1900   1900  1900   1900     1900
Total Lost time (s)           4.0  4.0     4.0   4.0     4.0     4.0             4.0                 4.0     4.0
Lane Util. Factor           1.00 0.95 1.00     1.00     0.95   1.00            0.95                1.00    1.00
Frt                         1.00 1.00 0.85     1.00     1.00   0.85            0.98                1.00    0.85
Flt Protected               0.95 1.00 1.00     0.95     1.00   1.00            0.98                0.99    1.00
Satd. Flow (prot)          1770 3539 1583      1770    3539    1583           3394                1852     1583
Flt Permitted               0.95 1.00 1.00     0.95     1.00   1.00            0.98                0.99    1.00
Satd. Flow (perm)          1770 3539 1583      1770    3539    1583           3394                1852     1583
Volume (vph)                 310   432    504     76     178      27     174    188     60    25    188     124
Peak-hour factor, PHF       0.92 0.92 0.92     0.92     0.92   0.92     0.92   0.92   0.92  0.92   0.92     0.92
Adj. Flow (vph)              337   470    548     83     193      29     189    204     65    27    204     135
RTOR Reduction (vph)            0    0    366      0       0      25       0       9     0     0       0    107
Lane Group Flow (vph)        337   470    182     83     193       4       0    449      0     0    231       28
Turn Type                   Prot        Perm    Prot          Perm      Split               Split         Perm
Protected Phases                5    2             1       6               8       8           4       4
Permitted Phases                             2                     6                                           4
Actuated Green, G (s)       25.5 31.6 31.6       8.3    13.9   13.9            19.1                19.4    19.4
Effective Green, g (s)      25.5 32.1 32.1       8.3    14.9   14.9            20.1                20.4     20.4
Actuated g/C Ratio          0.26 0.33 0.33     0.09     0.15   0.15            0.21                0.21    0.21
Clearance Time (s)           4.0   4.5    4.5    4.0     5.0     5.0            5.0                  5.0     5.0
Vehicle Extension (s)        2.5   4.0     4.0   2.5     3.0     3.0            4.0                  4.0     4.0
Lane Grp Cap (vph)           466 1172     524   152      544     243            704                 390     333
v/s Ratio Prot            c0.19 c0.13          0.05     0.05                  c0.13               c0.12
v/s Ratio Perm                           0.11                   0.00                                       0.02
v/c Ratio                   0.72 0.40 0.35     0.55     0.35   0.02            0.64                0.59    0.09
Uniform Delay, d1           32.5 25.0 24.5     42.5     36.7   34.8            35.1                34.5    30.7
Progression Factor          1.00 1.00 1.00     1.00     1.00   1.00            1.00                1.00    1.00
Incremental Delay, d2         5.2  0.3     0.5   3.1     0.4     0.0            2.1                  2.8     0.2
Delay (s)                   37.6 25.3 25.0     45.6     37.1   34.8            37.2                37.3    30.9
Level of Service               D     C       C     D       D       C              D                    D       C
Approach Delay (s)                28.3                  39.2                   37.2                34.9
Approach LOS                         C                     D                      D                    C
Intersection Summary
HCM Average Control Delay                32.2        HCM Level of Service                C
HCM Volume to Capacity ratio             0.59
Actuated Cycle Length (s)                96.9        Sum of lost time (s)            12.0
Intersection Capacity Utilization      60.6%         ICU Level of Service                B
Analysis Period (min)                       15
c Critical Lane Group
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                                              Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions PM                                                                                   Page 5
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
6: Sierra Madre Blvd & Lima St                                                              1/19/2012
Movement                    EBL   EBT    EBR  WBL    WBT    WBR      NBL  NBT  NBR  SBL   SBT    SBR
Lane Configurations
Sign Control                      Stop               Stop                 Stop            Stop
Volume (vph)                  23   369     34    27    217      20     25   61   32   34    46      34
Peak Hour Factor            0.92  0.92   0.92  0.92   0.92   0.92    0.92 0.92 0.92 0.92  0.92    0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)         25  401     37    29    236      22     27   66   35   37    50      37
Direction, Lane #          EB 1 WB 1    NB 1  SB 1
Volume Total (vph)           463   287    128   124
Volume Left (vph)              25   29     27    37
Volume Right (vph)             37   22     35    37
Hadj (s)                    0.00 0.01   -0.09 -0.09
Departure Headway (s)         5.1  5.4    6.0   6.1
Degree Utilization, x       0.66 0.43    0.22  0.21
Capacity (veh/h)             675   629    512   500
Control Delay (s)           17.5 12.4    10.7  10.7
Approach Delay (s)          17.5 12.4    10.7  10.7
Approach LOS                    C    B      B     B
Intersection Summary
Delay                                    14.3
HCM Level of Service                        B
Intersection Capacity Utilization      42.8%       ICU Level of Service           A
Analysis Period (min)                      15
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                                      Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions PM                                                                         Page 6
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
7: Sierra Madre Blvd & Baldwin Ave                                                             1/19/2012
Movement                    EBL    EBT    EBR   WBL    WBT    WBR      NBL   NBT  NBR  SBL   SBT    SBR
Lane Configurations
Sign Control                       Stop                 Stop                 Stop            Stop
Volume (vph)                 105    202     135   53      99      33     97   213   44   20   190     104
Peak Hour Factor            0.92   0.92    0.92 0.92    0.92   0.92    0.92  0.92 0.92 0.92  0.92    0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)       114    220     147   58     108      36    105   232   48   22   207    113
Direction, Lane #          EB 1   EB 2 WB 1     NB 1   NB 2    SB 1    SB 2
Volume Total (vph)           334    147     201  337      48    228     113
Volume Left (vph)            114       0     58  105       0      22       0
Volume Right (vph)              0   147      36    0      48       0    113
Hadj (s)                    0.21  -0.67 -0.02   0.19   -0.67   0.08   -0.67
Departure Headway (s)         7.7    6.8    7.9  7.8     6.9     7.8     7.1
Degree Utilization, x       0.71   0.28 0.44    0.73    0.09   0.50    0.22
Capacity (veh/h)             446    507     415  446     494    424     474
Control Delay (s)           26.1   11.1 17.0    27.7     9.4   17.2    10.9
Approach Delay (s)          21.5           17.0 25.4           15.1
Approach LOS                   C              C    D               C
Intersection Summary
Delay                                      20.4
HCM Level of Service                          C
Intersection Capacity Utilization        67.6%       ICU Level of Service            C
Analysis Period (min)                        15
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                                         Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions PM                                                                            Page 7
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
8: Sierra Madre Blvd & Mountain Trail Ave                                                    1/19/2012
Movement                    EBL   EBT     EBR  WBL    WBT    WBR      NBL  NBT  NBR  SBL   SBT    SBR
Lane Configurations
Sign Control                      Stop                Stop                 Stop            Stop
Volume (vph)                  41   212      17    18    112      18     16   87   23   32    81      30
Peak Hour Factor            0.92  0.92    0.92  0.92   0.92   0.92    0.92 0.92 0.92 0.92  0.92    0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)         45  230      18    20    122      20     17   95   25   35    88      33
Direction, Lane #          EB 1 WB 1     NB 1  SB 1
Volume Total (vph)           293   161     137   155
Volume Left (vph)              45   20      17    35
Volume Right (vph)             18   20      25    33
Hadj (s)                    0.03 -0.01   -0.05 -0.05
Departure Headway (s)         4.9  5.1     5.3   5.2
Degree Utilization, x       0.40 0.23     0.20  0.23
Capacity (veh/h)             686   651     609   623
Control Delay (s)           11.2    9.6    9.6   9.7
Approach Delay (s)          11.2   9.6     9.6   9.7
Approach LOS                    B     A      A     A
Intersection Summary
Delay                                     10.3
HCM Level of Service                         B
Intersection Capacity Utilization       40.4%       ICU Level of Service           A
Analysis Period (min)                       15
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                                       Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions PM                                                                          Page 8
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
9: Orange Grove Ave & Baldwin Ave                                                           1/19/2012
Movement                    EBL   EBT   EBR   WBL    WBT    WBR      NBL  NBT  NBR  SBL   SBT    SBR
Lane Configurations
Sign Control                      Stop                Stop                Stop            Stop
Volume (vph)                  37   337     43   66      93      26     72  297   43   98   284      27
Peak Hour Factor            0.92  0.92   0.92 0.92    0.92   0.92    0.92 0.92 0.92 0.92  0.92    0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)         40  366     47   72     101      28     78  323   47  107   309      29
Direction, Lane #          EB 1 WB 1 WB 2     NB 1   NB 2    SB 1    SB 2
Volume Total (vph)           453   173     28  240     208    261     184
Volume Left (vph)              40   72      0   78       0    107       0
Volume Right (vph)             47    0     28    0      47       0     29
Hadj (s)                   -0.01 0.24 -0.67   0.20   -0.12   0.24   -0.08
Departure Headway (s)         7.7  9.0    8.0  8.4     8.1     8.5    8.1
Degree Utilization, x       0.97 0.43 0.06    0.56    0.47   0.61    0.42
Capacity (veh/h)             453   396    437  419     445    417     443
Control Delay (s)           62.7 17.4 10.4    20.5    16.9   22.9    15.6
Approach Delay (s)          62.7 16.4         18.8           19.9
Approach LOS                    F    C           C               C
Intersection Summary
Delay                                    31.7
HCM Level of Service                        D
Intersection Capacity Utilization      62.3%       ICU Level of Service           B
Analysis Period (min)                      15
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                                      Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions PM                                                                         Page 9
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
HCM Unsignalized Intersection Capacity Analysis
10: Orange Grove Ave & Rancho Rd                                                                  1/19/2012
Movement                    EBL   EBT    EBR    WBL     WBT    WBR      NBL    NBT  NBR  SBL    SBT    SBR
Lane Configurations
Sign Control                      Free                  Free                  Stop             Stop
Grade                              0%                     0%                    0%               0%
Volume (veh/h)                15   411        1      2    137      17       2    24    8   11      8     11
Peak Hour Factor            0.92  0.92    0.92  0.92     0.92   0.92    0.92   0.92 0.92 0.92   0.92   0.92
Hourly flow rate (vph)        16   447        1      2    149      18       2    26    9   12      9     12
Pedestrians
Lane Width (ft)
Walking Speed (ft/s)
Percent Blockage
Right turn flare (veh)
Median type                                                                   None             None
Median storage veh)
Upstream signal (ft)
pX, platoon unblocked
vC, conflicting volume      167                  448                     659    652  447  664    643    158
vC1, stage 1 conf vol
vC2, stage 2 conf vol
vCu, unblocked vol           167                  448                    659    652  447  664    643    158
tC, single (s)               4.1                  4.1                    7.1    6.5  6.2  7.1    6.5    6.2
tC, 2 stage (s)
tF (s)                        2.2                  2.2                    3.5   4.0  3.3  3.5    4.0    3.3
p0 queue free %               99                  100                     99     93   99   97     98     99
cM capacity (veh/h)        1410                 1112                     362    382  611  346    387    887
Direction, Lane #          EB 1 WB 1     NB 1   SB 1
Volume Total                 464   170      37     33
Volume Left                   16      2       2    12
Volume Right                    1   18        9    12
cSH                        1410 1112       418    462
Volume to Capacity          0.01 0.00     0.09  0.07
Queue Length 95th (ft)          1     0       7      6
Control Delay (s)             0.4   0.1   14.5   13.4
Lane LOS                        A     A       B      B
Approach Delay (s)            0.4   0.1   14.5   13.4
Approach LOS                                  B      B
Intersection Summary
Average Delay                               1.7
Intersection Capacity Utilization       42.8%         ICU Level of Service             A
Analysis Period (min)                       15
Sierra Madre General Plan Update                                                           Synchro 6 Report
Existing Conditions PM                                                                              Page 10
Fehr & Peers Associates, Inc.
                                                                                              APPENDIX B
                                                                            Sierra Madre Historic Landmarks
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                             9-25
                                                                                                         9-5
This page intentionally left blank.
9-6
9-26                                GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
                               Sierra Madre Designated Historical Landmarks
                                                                    Historical      Current    Architectural
      Name and Year Built                       Address                 Use           Use          Style
J. Gamble Carson House – 1914 or     332 Sturtevant Drive
                                                                     Residential   Residential      —
19181
Dupre-Nash House – 19182             551 Alta Vista Drive
                                                                     Residential   Residential      —
Hawks & Copps Building – 1889        26 N. Baldwin Avenue
                                                                        Hotel      Commercial       —
(c.1911-Hotel Shirley)
Twycross House – 1915                123 S. Baldwin Avenue           Residential   Residential   Craftsman
Blake Craftsman Bungalow – 1908      169 N. Baldwin Avenue           Residential   Residential   Craftsman
El Retiro (Webb House) – 1911        171 S. Baldwin Avenue           Residential   Residential      —
William Deutsch House – 1883 or      229 N. Baldwin Avenue
                                                                     Residential   Residential      —
18873
Ascension Church – 1888              240 N. Baldwin Avenue             Church        Church         —
Willis Residence – 1941              650 Baldwin Court               Residential   Residential      —
Arthur Carter House – 1906           425 N. Canon Avenue             Residential   Residential      —
Fraiberg Residence/                  304-306 Churchill Road
Mt. Glen Healthatarium or also                                       Resort and
                                                                                       —            —
known as the Cypress Camp                                           Sanatorium
Headquarters – 1916
Emile Deutsch House & Cigar          20 W.     Grandview    Avenue
Factory – 1885 and 1914,             (house)                       Residential and
respectively4                                                       Commercial,    Residential      —
                                     30 W. Laurel Avenue (cigar     respectively
                                     factory)
Norris House – 1884                  80 W. Grandview Avenue          Residential   Residential      —
Climie Sisters House – 1907          252 E. Grandview Avenue         Residential   Residential      —
Karl Graf House “Austrian            355 E. Grandview Avenue
Vacation Villa” – 1920s                                              Residential   Residential      —
C.J. Pegler House – 1912             375 E. Grandview Avenue
                                                                     Residential   Residential   Craftsman
Spanish Colonial Revival – 1933      585 W. Grandview Avenue                                      Spanish
                                                                     Residential   Residential
                                                                                                  Revival
Sierra Madre Elementary School       141 W. Highland Avenue                                       Spanish
                                                                       School        School
– 1930                                                                                            Revival
J.C. Pegler House – 1894             419 E. Highland Avenue          Residential   Residential      —
J.C. Pegler Carriage House – 1895    423 E. Highland Avenue           Barn and
                                                                                   Residential      —
                                                                   Carriage House
Decker House – 1890                  427 W. Highland Avenue          Residential   Residential      —
Bailey House – 1910                  470 W. Highland Avenue          Residential   Residential      —
Barlow Villa (Alverno High           675 W. Highland Avenue
School)                                                              Residential     School         —
– 1928
Emile Deutsch Cigar Factory –        30 W. Laurel Avenue
                                                                    Commercial     Residential      —
1885

Bayard-Webster House – 1912       305 E. Laurel Avenue          30 W. Laurel  30 W. Laurel
                                                                                                 —
                                                                   Avenue       Avenue
Hunting Lodge – 1882 or 18875     145 S. Lima Street               Lodge       Residential       —
Pinney House (Sierra Vista Hotel) 225 N. Lima Street
                                                                    Hotel      Residential       —
– 1887
Sierra Bonita Ranch               40 Lowell Avenue
                                                                 Residential   Residential       —
“Yerxa House” – 1911
Clark Carriage House – 1885       180 S. Michillinda Avenue      Residential   Residential       —
Ocean View House – 1882           93 W. Mira Monte Avenue        Residential/
                                                                               Residential       —
                                                                    Hotel
Mt. Wilson Trail – 1864           167 E. Mira Monte Avenue
                                                                Recreational  Recreational       —
Richardson House – 1890           167 E. Mira Monte Avenue
                                                                 Residential   Residential       —
Tufts House – 1884                159 W. Montecito Avenue
                                                                 Residential   Residential       —
Wilson-Bixby House – 1881         397 W. Montecito Avenue
                                                                 Residential   Residential
Jennie Reeve House – 1905 or      197 N. Mountain Trail Avenue
                                                                 Residential   Residential       —
19066
Fletcher House – 1890             89 Olive Avenue                Residential   Residential       —
                         7
W. P. Caley House – 1898          233 Ramona Avenue              Residential   Residential    Craftsman
Old City Hall – 1927              55 W. Sierra Madre Boulevard                 Office and
                                                                Public/Civic     Bed &           —
                                                                               Breakfast
Congregational Church – 1928      170     W.      Sierra  Madre                              Romanesque
                                                                   Church        Church
                                  Boulevard                                                    Revival
Old North Church – 1890           191     W.      Sierra  Madre
                                                                   Church        Church          —
                                  Boulevard
Hart Winery Building – 1884       222     W.      Sierra  Madre                  Senior
                                  Boulevard                        Winery        Citizen         —
                                                                                 Center
George A. Jones Sierra Madre      241 E. Sierra Madre Boulevard
                                                                               Residential       —
Dairy – 1923
Pioneer Cemetery – 18848          501 E. Sierra Madre Boulevard   Cemetery     Cemetery          —
Caldwell/Fairbank House – 1907    647     W.      Sierra  Madre
                                                                 Residential   Residential    Craftsman
                                  Boulevard
Tucker House – 1906               43 Sierra Place
                                                                   School      Residential       —
Old Schoolhouse (conversion)
Canyon Store, Rooms, & Tea        525 Woodland Drive            Commercial/
                                                                               Residential       —
Garden – 1913                                                       Hotel
Rockledge House – 1922            651 Woodland Drive                                       Spanish/Medite
                                                                 Residential   Residential
                                                                                           rranean Revival
Kot Kontent Cabin – 1915          697 Woodland Drive             Residential   Residential       —

Notes per Debbie R. Henderson, Associate Librarian, of Sierra Madre Library:
1
  J. Gamble Carson House was completed in 1918 according to Building Biographer Tim Gregory and in 1914 according to a Sierra Madre
   Cultural Heritage Commission walking map. The current address is 332 Sturtevant Drive. During the 1920s the address was 332 Sturtevant
   Trail. The property was substantial and had more than one entrance so alternative addresses were 331 and 333 E. Alegria.
2
  The Dupre-Nash House is also known as the Sturtevant House. Houses are most often named for their owners but they were also known by
   other names and in this case “Sturtevant” for the nearby trail.
3
  William Deutsch was Emile Deutsch’s brother. Most sources note that this house was built in 1883; however, one typed manuscript lists it as
   being constructed in 1887. It has not been verified who arrived and built first, William or Emile.
4
  The Emile Deutsch House on 20 W. Grand was moved from 21 Victoria Lane to this location.
5
  The lodge is listed as being built around 1887 by Gladys Carter in a document she compiled about Sierra Madre’s homes built prior to 1900.
   However, a walking tour map developed by the Sierra Madre Cultural Heritage Commission puts the construction date at 1882.
6
  The landmark list reads 1906 but the Cultural Heritage Commission walking tour map puts it at 1905. It is possible that the home was built
   in 1905. The Greene brothers were building in Sierra Madre as early as 1903. Additionally, a Ms. Reeves is listed at that location in the
   1906 Dictionary of Sierra Madre.
7
  William Paul Caley was the first Marshal of Sierra Madre. Sometimes this house is simply listed as the “Caley House.”
8
  The cemetery address of 501 E. Sierra Madre Boulevard appears on the City Landmark list. Other cemetery location references come up as
   “in the 500 block of E. Sierra Madre Blvd.” Additionally, a brochure for the Pioneer Cemetery lists 601 E. Sierra Madre Boulevard.
   Historical files are not helpful in this instance as the Cemetery Association listed a business address in various locations over time.

 
                                                                                              APPENDIX C
                                                                            Service Provider Correspondence
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                              9-31
                                                                                                          9-7
This page intentionally left blank.
9-32
9-8                                 GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA




























                   SIERRA MADRE GENERAL PLAN UPDATE AND DRAFT EIR
                                     Natural Gas Questionnaire
1. If available, please provide information on the current annual usage of natural gas within the
    City of Sierra Madre.
    This is the total usage for active customers from January-August 2011. This comes from an
    internal report with details of total gas usage:
    1,770,676 therms
2. If available, please describe the Southern California Gas Company (SCGC) natural gas
    facilities that are currently present in Sierra Madre.
There are no SoCalGas buildings in Sierra Madre
3. Are there any deficient or inefficient areas in Sierra Madre?
No, SoCalGas has no "deficient/inefficient areas" in Sierra Madre as it has no building facilities there.
4. How does SCGC measure natural gas demand by land use type? For example, is it
    measured in therms or BTUs per square foot, or per employee/resident, or by another
    measurement? Please provide natural gas demand rates for the following, if available:
    Natural gas demand is measured in therms by facility type (residential, commercial/
    industrial)
        Residential uses:        Consists of three major rates: GR (individually metered
    customers), GM (master metered), GS (submetered). See the links below for more
    information.
    GR Rate: http://www.socalgas.com/regulatory/tariffs/tm2/pdf/GR.pdf
    GS Rate: http://www.socalgas.com/regulatory/tariffs/tm2/pdf/GS.pdf
    GM Rate: http://www.socalgas.com/regulatory/tariffs/tm2/pdf/GM.pdf
        Commercial/Industrial uses: Consists of mainly G-10, GT-F, and GT-I. Please see the
    links below for more information about the rate.
    G-10 Rate: http://www.socalgas.com/regulatory/tariffs/tm2/pdf/G-10.pdf
    GT-F Rate: http://www.socalgas.com/regulatory/tariffs/tm2/pdf/GT-F.pdf
    GT-I Rate: http://www.socalgas.com/regulatory/tariffs/tm2/pdf/GT-I.pdf
        Office uses:             ________________________________________
        Institutional uses:      ________________________________________
5. Are there plans to expand natural gas infrastructure in the City? What are these
    expansions? Are funding sources identified for these expansions?
There are no plans to expand natural gas facilities at this time.
6. How are expansions/improvements funded, in general?
The Gas Company ratepayers generally underwrite capital improvement projects.
                                               Page 1 of 2
                  SIERRA MADRE GENERAL PLAN UPDATE AND DRAFT EIR
                                   Natural Gas Questionnaire
7. How would the proposed General Plan Update, which anticipates limited increases in
    population growth and other nonresidential uses, affect the existing natural gas service in
    Sierra Madre?
No effects/impact on SoCalGas' natural gas service.
8. What impact would the General Plan Update, in combination with all the other development
    projects in the area, have on SCGC’s ability to provide natural gas service?
No effects/impact on SoCalGas' natural gas service.
9. Please add any additional comments you may wish to make regarding this project.
Response Prepared By:
Helen Romero Shaw                                       Public Affairs Manager
Name                                                                    Title
Southern California Gas Company                                         9/27/11
Agency                                                                  Date
                                              Page 2 of 2

                                                             COUNTY SANITATION DISTRICTS OF LOS ANGELES COUNTY
                         SCHEDULE OF RATES FOR SOLID WASTE MATERIALS RECOVERY, TRANSFER, AND DISPOSAL FACILITIES
Payment must be in cash at the scales or by pre-arranged credit. No checks are accepted.
FACILITY                                                                                                                                                                                        RATE
                                                                                                                                                                                         January 1, 2011
PUENTE HILLS LANDFILL, Whittier (1)(2)
Municipal Solid and Inert Waste                                                                                                                                                          $38.26 /ton
                                                   (3)
          Volume Discount Program - Discounted Rate for ALL Tonnage Received that Month
          Direct Haul                    >5,000 tons in a calendar month                                                                                                                  34.17   /ton
          Transfer Haul                  >5,000 -12,500 tons in a calendar month                                                                                                          32.38   /ton
                                         >12,500 - 18,750 tons in a calendar month                                                                                                        31.08   /ton
                                         >18,750 tons in a calendar month                                                                                                                 28.28   /ton
Hard-to-Handle, Bulky Items                                                                                                                                                               46.24 /ton
Tires                                                                                                                                                                                     82.26 /ton
Special Handling                                                                                                                                                                          63.01 /ton
Minimum Charge MSW                                                                                                                                                                        37.25 per load
Pull-Offs                                                                                                                                                                                 33.00 each
Segregated Uncontaminated Green Waste (1-ton minimum charge)                                                                                                                              22.95 /ton
Asphalt                                                                                                                                                                                   2.00 /ton
   -Minimum Charge                                                                                                                                                                        10.00 per load
PUENTE HILLS MATERIALS RECOVERY FACILITY(MRF), Whittier (1)
Municipal Solid and Inert Waste                                                                                                                                                          $42.14   /ton
Mixed Plastics                                                                                                                                                                            25.00   /ton
Hard-to-Handle, Bulky Items                                                                                                                                                               46.24   /ton
Minimum Charge MSW                                                                                                                                                                        37.25   per load
SOUTH GATE TRANSFER STATION, South Gate (1)
Municipal Solid and Inert Waste                                                                                                                                                          $50.38   /ton
Mixed Plastics                                                                                                                                                                            25.00   /ton
Hard-to-Handle, Bulky Items                                                                                                                                                               57.63   /ton
Minimum Charge MSW                                                                                                                                                                        37.75   per load
DOWNEY AREA RECYCLING & TRANSFER FACILITY (D.A.R.T.), Downey (1)
Municipal Solid and Inert Waste                                                                                                                                                          $54.15   /ton
Mixed Plastics                                                                                                                                                                            20.00   /ton
Hard-to-Handle, Bulky Items                                                                                                                                                               61.40   /ton
Minimum Charge MSW                                                                                                                                                                        37.75   per load
Segregated Uncontaminated Green Waste                                                                                                                                                     38.95   /ton
     - Minimum Charge                                                                                                                                                                     38.95   per load
CALABASAS LANDFILL, Agoura (1)(2)
Municipal Solid and Inert Waste                                                                                                                                                          $40.82   /ton
Hard-to-Handle, Bulky Items                                                                                                                                                               48.79   /ton
Tires                                                                                                                                                                                     84.82   /ton
Special Handling                                                                                                                                                                          57.32   /ton
Minimum Charge MSW                                                                                                                                                                        39.25   per load
Pull-Offs                                                                                                                                                                                 33.00   each
Segregated Uncontaminated Green Waste (1-ton minimum charge)                                                                                                                              25.25   /ton
Asphalt                                                                                                                                                                                     5.50  /ton
   -Minimum Charge                                                                                                                                                                        20.00   per load
SCHOLL CANYON LANDFILL, Glendale (1)(4)
Municipal Solid and Inert Waste                                                                                                                                                          $48.99   /ton
Hard-to-Handle, Bulky Items                                                                                                                                                               58.05   /ton
Tires                                                                                                                                                                                     92.74   /ton
Special Handling                                                                                                                                                                          66.80   /ton
Minimum Charge MSW                                                                                                                                                                        48.25   per load
Pull-Offs                                                                                                                                                                                 40.00   each
Segregated Uncontaminated Green Waste (1-ton minimum charge)                                                                                                                              25.25   /ton
Asphalt                                                                                                                                                                                     8.50  /ton
   -Minimum Charge                                                                                                                                                                        30.00   per load
Clean Dirt                                                                                                                                                                                  4.00  /ton
   -Minimum Charge                                                                                                                                                                        30.00   per load
SOUTHEAST RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY (SERRF), Long Beach (5)
Municipal Solid and Inert Waste (1-ton minimum charge)                                                                                                                                   $45.00 /ton
COMMERCE REFUSE TO ENERGY FACILITY, Commerce (6)                                                                                                                                         January 3, 2011
Refuse                                                                                                                                                                                   $53.00   /ton
      -Minimum Charge                                                                                                                                                                     40.00   per load
High Energy Refuse (7)                                                                                                                                                                    42.00   /ton
      -Minimum Charge                                                                                                                                                                     40.00   per load
Certified Destruction                                                                                                                                                                    120.00   per load plus
      -Per Ton Rate                                                                                                                                                                      130.00   /ton
      -Minimum Charge                                                                                                                                                                     40.00   per load
USDA Regulated Waste (8)                                                                                                                                                                 160.00   per load plus
      -Per Ton Rate                                                                                                                                                                      180.00   /ton
      -Minimum Charge                                                                                                                                                                     40.00   per load
Uncovered Loads Capable of Producing Litter:                    Puente Hills, Puente Hills MRF, Calabasas, South Gate, DART - $4.40/ton surcharge; $4.40 minimum
                                                                Scholl Canyon - $5.00/ton surcharge; $5.00 minimum; Commerce - $6.00/ton surcharge; $6.00 minimum
Non-manifested Tire Loads:               Puente Hills, Calabasas - $4.40/ton surcharge; $4.40 minimum; Scholl Canyon - $5.00/ton surcharge; $5.00 minimum
(1)
    All rates excluding pull-offs, green waste, asphalt, and clean dirt include the following fees , as appropriate: California Integrated Solid Waste Management Fee ($1.40/ton); Los Angeles County Solid Waste
Management Fee ($1.50/ton); Los Angeles County Department of Health Services Regulatory Service Fee ($0.21/ton)
(2)
    All rates and surcharges include the Los Angeles County Business License Tax, as appropriate: 10% of gross receipts, excluding state and local fees and taxes.
(3)
    Customers must be registered with the Districts for the Volume Discount Program to receive the discounted rates.
(4)
    All rates and surcharges (except for Clean Dirt) include the City of Glendale - Scholl Canyon Landfill Assessment: 25% of gross receipts; City of Glendale vehicles are exempt.
(5)
    Rate effective July 1, 2010; Rates subject to change pursuant to SERRF Joint Powers Agreement.
(6)
    Rates effective as noted and subject to change pursuant to Commerce Refuse-to-Energy Facility Operating Agreement.
(7)
    High Energy Waste consists of dry scrap wood, textile waste, unrecyclable paper and cardboard, and additional unrecyclable material.
(8)
    USDA Regulated Waste is the destruction of regulated foreign waste in accordance with the regulation of the USDA and the terms of the Facility's USDA compliance agreement.
                     SIERRA MADRE GENERAL PLAN UPDATE AND EIR
                                        Library Questionnaire
1.       Please confirm or correct the following.
The current library building consists of 8,762 square feet and houses a collection of
approximately 76,000 cataloged items and a historical archives collection.
Access to technology has become increasingly important to society since 1996. Today
public libraries offer the public computers, networks to access the Internet, scanners,
databases, and Ebooks and audio for download. High speed connectivity and instructing
the public how to use technology is part of public library service. Today’s library buildings
need to people’s use of technology.
2.       Is the existing amount of library space and number of volumes of cataloged items
         considered adequate for the existing population within the affected library service
         area? If not, what is the estimated deficit of space and/or volumes?
At the October 26, 2011, the Library Board of Trustees reviewed the background
information provided by Library Director Buckner and reached a consensus that the total
space needed to support public library services is in the range of 15,000 to 25,000
square feet depending on an updated needs assessment and configuration of lot and
building design.
Background Information: No, the Library was constructed in 1955 and designed to hold
25,000 books. Today it houses 56,000 books, with DVDs, CDs, periodicals, and audio
book accounting for the balance of 76,000 items in the collection. In 2002, a study was
prepared by library staff to document how many square feet were needed to house the
existing collection and services at that time without evaluating needs. Using Libris
Design, a library facility planning information system and database, staff determined that
the Library should have 1,840 additional square feet just for its contents. Libris Design
was then used by a consultant to prepare a building program to guide architectural plans
in 2003 for the Library’s application for funding from the California Reading and Literacy
Improvement and Public Library Construction and Renovation Bond Act of 2000.
Proposed Square Feet for the Library Building  
  
             Sierra Madre Public Library                       Existing   Addition  Total  
                                                               Sq. Ft.    Sq. Ft.   Sq. Ft. 
1967‐76      Sierra Madre Library Cultural Center              7,116      0         16,618 
             Perdersen & Stice and Assoc. AIA 
1989         SMPL Building Program                             8,762      NA        17,935 
             Prepared by Rob Richard 
1996‐97      SMPL Building Addition                            8,762      5,800     14,562 
             PBWS Architects  
2003         Library Building Project Application              8,762      0         22,832 
             CA … Library Construction & Renovation Bond Act      
             PBWS Architects 
  
                                                Page 1 of 3

                   SIERRA MADRE GENERAL PLAN UPDATE AND EIR
                                     Library Questionnaire
3.      Are there any planned additions or expansions to existing library resources or
        facilities? If so, please clarify.
Remodel of the Children’s Library will improve the use of existing space. Funding is
available and construction is to begin in December or January.
4.      What factors are used to determine the amount of library space and number of
        volumes to serve a given population (e.g. square feet of library facility floor area
        per capita and book volumes per capita)?
Neither the American Library Association (ALA) nor the Public Library Association (PLA)
sets prescriptive standards for public libraries. Instead, they advocate an outcomes-
based assessment process. The reason for this is that each library serves a different
community with different needs. For example, a library serving a community with many
young families wants and needs a library with different facilities and services than a
library serving a similar size population with a high percentage of empty-nesters and
retirees. The State of California has not set standards either.
The Sierra Madre Public Library’s Board of Trustees follows the City’s strategic planning
process and also has adopted planning documents specific to the Library, Sierra Madre
Public Library Plan 2000 and the Sierra Madre Public Library Strategic Plan(s). A
community needs assessment and a building program were prepared for the California
Reading and Literacy Improvement and Public Library Construction and Renovation
Bond Act of 2000. Libris Design, the library facility planning information system and
database, was developed by the California State Library and does include data to help
estimate the amount of space needed for existing and planned services by a jurisdiction.
5.      What impact would the proposed Sierra Madre General Plan Update, which
        anticipates limited increases in population, have on existing and planned library
        facilities?
The Update would help guide responses to changes in community needs and
technology and the rehabilitation and modernization of existing facilities such as the
Library.
6.      How are new library facilities funded? Are new developments assessed impact
        fees that go toward funding library facilities? If so, in what amount for residential,
        commercial, office and industrial uses?
Small remodels and additions are usually funded with a combination of capital
campaigns, donations and City resources, e.g. public works and library staff.
Development impact fees are $3 per square foot however the City has minimal
development and this is unlikely source of funding for library facilities.
                                           Page 2 of 3

                   SIERRA MADRE GENERAL PLAN UPDATE AND EIR
                               Library Questionnaire
7.       Please add any additional comments you may wish to make regarding this
         project.
Response Prepared By:
Toni G. Buckner                                      Interim Library Director
Name                                                          Title
City of Sierra Madre                                 October 16, 2011
Agency                                                        Date
                                     Page 3 of 3
             SIERRA MADRE GENERAL PLAN UPDATE AND DRAFT EIR
                                  School Questionnaire
1. Within Sierra Madre, there is one public combined elementary/middle school (Sierra
   Madre School), which is housed on two campuses overseen by the Pasadena Unified
   School District (PUSD). The public high school for Sierra Madre residents is located in
   the City of Pasadena. Please confirm or correct.
   Pasadena High School is the school of residence for Sierra Madre citizens.
2. Please provide any information available on the school’s mentioned above regarding the
   current student enrollment and student capacities.
   Elementary Campus: 750 students (at capacity)
   Middle School Campus: 350 (Will have the capacity for 550 when the new campus
   is built.
3. Does PUSD have student generation rates for specific residential land uses that can be
   used to estimate future student generation? If so, please provide the generation rates
   used for the various types of residential land uses (e.g., single family, multifamily, etc.)
   Please refer to PUSD for its student generation rates.
4. Are there any existing shortages in the amount of classroom, athletic, recreational or
   other facilities available to serve the current number of students at each school that
   serves Sierra Madre residents?
   The elementary campus has extensive facilities.
   The middle school campus has limited recreational facilities during construction.
5. Does PUSD have plans for building any new schools or expanding any existing schools
   within or near the City of Sierra Madre? If so, where?
   Elementary Campus: New 4th/5th grade wing to replace existing bungalow.
   Middle School: Entirely brand new campus at 160 N. Canon
6. How would the proposed Sierra Madre General Plan Update, which anticipates limited
   increases in population, affect the existing school service in the City of Sierra Madre and
   the surrounding communities?
   Our number of teachers is based on a set ratio of students:teacher. The number
   of employees would adjust to any increases or decreases in population.
                                        Page 1 of 2

                  SIERRA MADRE GENERAL PLAN UPDATE AND DRAFT EIR
                                      School Questionnaire
7.       What school impact fees, if any, do you currently charge?
         We are committed to providing a free and appropriate education to all of our
         students.
8.       Please add any other comments you may wish to make regarding this project.
Response Prepared By:
Esther Salinas                                                 Elementary Principal
Name                                                                 Title
Garrett Newsom                                           Middle School Planning Principal
Name                                                                 Title
Sierra Madre School                                                 9/19/11
Agency                                                               Date
                                             Page 2 of 2
                  SIERRA MADRE GENERAL PLAN UPDATE AND EIR
                               Solid Waste Questionnaire
1. Solid waste generated in the City is hauled by Athens Services to its processing facility
   located in unincorporated Basset near the City of Industry. Once processed, solid waste
   is transported to the Puente Hills Landfill. Please confirm or correct.
   Reviewing the 2010 year, it is apparent that Athens is taking less processed solid waste
   to the Puente Hills Landfill. For the year, a total of 1,231 tons were taken to Puente
   Hills, and 4,832 tons went to United Waste and 4,911 tons were taken to Scholl Landfill.
   Staff is pleased to see the rise in the use of Scholl as Sierra Madre is one of only a few
   jurisdictions that are allowed to use this landfill due to a Glendale ordinance. It is to our
   advantage to use this landfill to support its viability.
2. The Puente Hills Landfill is the primary landfill that receives solid waste generated in the
   City of Sierra Madre. Since this landfill is nearing closure, which landfill(s) will serve the
   solid waste needs of Sierra Madre?
   As mentioned above, Athens is taking much less percentage of Sierra Madre’s solid
   waste to Puente Hills. With that said, the eventual closure of the landfill will undoubtedly
   affect the area and dumping costs are expected to rise. The County’s Sanitation
   Department had made contingency plans to create a “waste-by-rail” program to meet the
   post Puente Hills demands. Staff is monitoring this plan as well as others that may be
   used as future solutions.
3. What is the current rate of disposal for the Puente Hills Landfill? What is the current
   capacity of this landfill?
   Staff is unable to find current rates. However, staff is under the understanding that the
   land use permit for the Puente Hills Landfill will expire November 1, 2013. Staff has
   become aware of recent discussions that the Landfill may have the capacity to receive
   additional waste for a short period longer than what has been anticipated. However, we
   do not believe it would be prudent to count on the availability of this landfill to our
   Contractor past the November 1, 2013 date. Staff will need to work with Athens as they
   will face this challenge. (2011 LACSD Disposal Rates (monetary) is included with this
   questionnaire.
4. What additional sites are planned for solid waste disposal in the future, if any?
   Staff is under the impression that Athens Services intends to build a new Material
   Recovery Facility in the area of the Sante Fe Dam Recreational Facility (not sure if City
   of Irwindale, or unincorporated County territory). Representatives from Athens have
   informed the City that this will assist them in their future disposal location challenges.
5. Does the Los Angeles County Sanitation Districts have daily or annual solid waste
   generation rates (i.e. pounds per employee/resident/unit per day/year) for specific land
   uses that can be used to estimate future solid waste generation? If so, please provide
   these rates for: Staff does not have this information.
   Residential uses:        ________________________________________
   Commercial uses:         ________________________________________
   Office uses:             ________________________________________
   Industrial uses:         ________________________________________
   Institutional uses:      ________________________________________
                                         Page 1 of 2

                       SIERRA MADRE GENERAL PLAN UPDATE AND EIR
                                      Solid Waste Questionnaire
6.        Are existing solid waste disposal sites considered adequate to service the City of Sierra
          Madre?
          For reasons stated in previous answers including the lessoning of the reliance on the
          Puente Hills Landfill and the prospect of an additional material recovery facility operated
          by our Athens (contracted through 2026), staff believes that the collective “sites” could
          be considered adequate for now and the near future.
7.        Is there adequate existing and planned landfill capacity in the region to accommodate
          estimated solid waste generation that would occur under the General Plan Update,
          which anticipates limited increases in population growth and other nonresidential uses?
          Staff would have to see what type of growth will be assumed in the Update. However,
          assuming the growth would be very minor, staff believes landfill capacities for Sierra
          Madre to be adequate for the near future.
8.        Please add any additional comments you may wish to make regarding this project.
          Staff believes that the closure of the Puente Hills Landfill as early as 2013 would affect
          the    entire region. However, there are mitigating factors that may help the City’s
          Contractor, Athens Services, meet the needs of their industry. For long term planning
          purposes, the City will need the assistance of a competent Contractor, and should
          reasonably expect that the cost for managing solid wastes will rise.
Response Prepared By:
James Carlson                                                          Management Analyst
Name                                                                   Title
City of Sierra Madre                                                   10/3/2011
Agency                                                                 Date
                                               Page 2 of 2

                       SIERRA MADRE GENERAL PLAN UPDATE AND EIR
                                Water & Wastewater Questionnaire
WATER
1.      For the purpose of projecting future water use, does the Water Division have water
        demand factors for different land uses? For example, how many gallons of water are
        used daily per every square foot of office space, on average? Please provide water
        demand factors for:
        Single Family Residential uses:
                 2010 Water Usage 1,690 acre feet (A/F) utilized at 3,319 metered accounts
                 1,691/3,319 = 0.5091 A/F per account (165,920 gallons)
        Multi-Family Residential uses:
                 2010 Water Usage 284 A/F utilized at 354 accounts
                 284/354 = 0.8022 A/F per account (261,400 gallons)
        Commercial/Institutional/Office uses:
                 132 A/F utilized by 155 accounts
                 132/155 = 0.8516 A/F per account (277,500 gallons)
        Industrial uses:
                 528 A/F utilized by 12 accounts
                 528/12 = 44 A/F per account (14,337,620 gallons)
        Irrigation uses:
                 26 A/F were utilized by 28 accounts
                 26/28 = 0.9285 A/F per account (302,560 gallons)
Source: City of Sierra Madre 2010 Urban Water Management Plan, Table 5
2. Does the Water Division have adequate existing and planned water supplies to meet
   estimated water demands at buildout of the Sierra Madre General Plan Update, which
   anticipates limited increases in population and service connections?
   It is not known at this time what the buildout of the general plan update will be. The 2010
   Urban Water Management Plan (UWMP) assumes a buildout of an additional 52 single
   family dwellings.
   The UWMP notes that the City’s primary source of water, the Santa Anita Subarea (or,
   Eastern Unit) of the Raymond Groundwater Basin is not a reliable source of water in dry
   years or multiple dry years due to fluctuations in water level and the overall trend towards a
   decrease in water levels in the Eastern Unit. The City’s other normal source of water, its
   horizontal wells (tunnels) in Little Santa Anita Canyon are not reliable due to their seasonal
   variations in flow.
   The City’s secondary source of water is through its membership in the San Gabriel Valley
   Municipal Water District. The other members of the District are the cities of Alhambra,
   Monterey Park and Azusa. The District UWMP states that its supplies of imported State
   Water Project water will be adequate to serve member agencies for the next 20 years.
   Water imported by the District is placed in the Main San Gabriel Groundwater Basin via
   percolation.
   The City of Sierra Madre has no physical connection of its own to the Main Basin as it is
   commonly called. In order to access its District water in the Main Basin, Sierra Madre has to
                                             Page 1 of 4

                      SIERRA MADRE GENERAL PLAN UPDATE AND EIR
                              Water & Wastewater Questionnaire
   rely on the water system capacity of its neighboring city, Arcadia. In normal operations,
   Arcadia has system capacity to serve Sierra Madre and has historically done so via Sierra
   Madre’s system interconnection with that City. However, Arcadia has indicated that under
   certain circumstances, its system may not have capacity to deliver adequate water to Sierra
   Madre. Therefore the Sierra Madre source of water in the Main Basin is not completely
   reliable.
   It should be noted that the unreliability of its water supply is under existing conditions in the
   community and not a result of any modifications to the General Plan.
3. Are there any deficiencies of existing water supply infrastructure that would be aggravated
   by the proposed Sierra Madre General Plan Update? (i.e., out-of-date pipelines,
   contaminated wells, etc.)
   Due to potentially unreliable groundwater supplies from the Raymond Basin and the
   unreliability of the emergency connection with the City of Arcadia, SGVMWD is coordinating
   with Metropolitan Water District (through San Gabriel Valley Municipal Water District) to
   construct an emergency interconnection with the MWD Foothill Feeder which runs through
   Sierra Madre. This would allow the City to access treated imported water from MWD. The
   proposed emergency connection will have a capacity of up to five cubic feet per second
   (cfs). Such water will be available only under emergency conditions when the City’s wells
   cannot produce sufficient groundwater from the Raymond Basin and emergency supplies
   are not available from the City of Arcadia. This water source cannot be used to facilitate
   additional development in the City.
   In addition to water supply deficiencies, there are certain water production and distribution
   system deficiencies which could be aggravated by General Plan changes. While significant
   strides have been made to upgrade the City’s water system, multiple components of the
   system have reached the end of their service lives. Each of the City’s four production wells,
   several of the system’s booster pumps, one water storage reservoir and a large number of
   water main segments are in need of replacement. In addition, there are a number of water
   mains which should be upsized to better serve their existing neighborhoods, one reservoir
   that is in need of seismic upgrades, and the City should construct a production well in the
   Main San Gabriel Basin to increase supply reliability. General Plan changes could require
   that these projects be expedited.
4. Does the Water Division plan to increase its service capacity? If so, do these plans include
   increasing pipelines, wells, or treatment stations? Where and when would these expansions
   take place?
   There are neighborhoods throughout Sierra Madre which are served by water mains that are
   of inadequate size to properly serve existing development and land uses. Some of these are
   old infrastructure that is in need of replacement simply because of age and deterioration.
   When the mains are replaced, the replacement will be made at a size which is more
   appropriate for the level of surrounding (existing) land use. This would increase service
   capacity.
   The majority of planned water system improvements are needed in order to improve water
   supply reliability, rather than system capacity. Replacement of reservoirs, pipelines and
   wells will be done to ensure that the system is dependable; however each project will be
   implemented with consideration given to current standards of service and capacity.
                                            Page 2 of 4

                      SIERRA MADRE GENERAL PLAN UPDATE AND EIR
                                Water & Wastewater Questionnaire
   However, although there are a large number of projects needed, none are fully funded as of
   October 2011. Water projects will be implemented as funding becomes available.
5. Does the Water Division fund infrastructure expansions? If so, what funding sources are
   used for the construction of new infrastructure?
   The Water Department has historically used several sources of funding for water system
   improvements. Federal funding in the form of Congressional grants through USEPA have
   paid for portions of several projects in Sierra Madre. Each federal grant must be “matched”
   with local funds. Sierra Madre’s local match has been provided from local water revenue,
   loans and grants from San Gabriel Valley Municipal Water District, and from the proceeds of
   the City’s water revenue bonds. Recently, the Sierra Madre Community Redevelopment
   Agency funded a major water main replacement project.
6. How would the proposed Sierra Madre General Plan Update affect the existing water supply
   service in the City of Sierra Madre? Are there areas of specific concern or areas of new
   development that would require additional water supply facilities?
   A definitive answer to the first question cannot be provided at this time, due to the fact that
   there is not an Update available to analysis for effects on water service.
   Specific concerns tend to arise in conjunction with development proposals. For example, a
   development proposal for Stonehouse Canyon resulted in the identification of a need to
   relocate and upsize the existing water main that crosses the canyon. A development
   proposal for a project on West Sierra Madre Boulevard identified a need to upsize the water
   main in the boulevard in order to provide sufficient fire flow capacity in the main.
Wastewater
7. Does the Water Division have wastewater generation factors for different land uses? For
   example, how many gallons of wastewater are generated daily per every square foot of
   office space, on average? Please provide wastewater generation factors for:
              Land Use                 Cubic Feet per second per        Gallons per day per acre
                                                  acre
                 R-1                             0.004                            2,585
                 R-2                             0.008                            5,171
                 R-3                             0.012                            7,756
          R-P, Commercial                        0.015                            9,695
           Manufacturing                         0.021                            13,573
             Institutional                       0.015                            9,695
        Source: City of Sierra Madre 2009 Sewer Master Plan
8. Is there adequate existing and planned wastewater treatment capacity in the city/region to
   accommodate estimated wastewater generation under buildout of the Sierra Madre General
   Plan Update, which anticipates limited increases in population and service connections?
   Sierra Madre has no wastewater treatment capacity. The City operates a collection system
   only. The wastewater collection system is connected and discharges to sewer mains in the
   City of Arcadia and to Los Angeles County trunk mains in Baldwin Avenue, Sierra Madre
   Boulevard and East Orange Grove.
                                             Page 3 of 4

                     SIERRA MADRE GENERAL PLAN UPDATE AND EIR
                               Water & Wastewater Questionnaire
9. Are there any deficiencies of existing wastewater facilities that would be worsened by the
    proposed Sierra Madre General Plan Update?
    The 2009 Sewer Master Plan identified multiple minor deficiencies in the sewer collection
    system. It is anticipated that all of those deficiencies will be corrected during the life of the
    proposed General Plan Update. None are expected to be worsened by the General Plan
    Update.
10. Does the Sewer Division have any plans to expand existing wastewater facilities? If so, do
    these plans include increasing pipelines or treatment plants? Where and when would these
    expansions take place?
    There are no plans to expand the City’s wastewater collection facilities.
11. Does the Sewer Division fund infrastructure expansions? If so, what funding sources are
    used for the construction of new infrastructure?
    Sewer system expansions in Sierra Madre have historically been funded either by
    developers of housing tracts or by the formation of Assessment Districts. The Sewer
    Division does not fund construction of new infrastructure.
12. How would the proposed Sierra Madre General Plan Update affect the existing wastewater
    service in the City of Sierra Madre? Are there areas of specific concern or areas of new
    development that would require additional wastewater facilities?
13. Please add any other comments you may wish to make regarding this project.
Response Prepared By:
Name                                                                  Title
Agency                                                                Date
                                             Page 4 of 4

                                                                                       APPENDIX D
                                                                            Long Term and Short Term
                                                                             Noise Monitoring Results
GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA                       9-75
                                                                                                   9-9
This page intentionally left blank.
9-10
9-76                                GENERAL PLAN TECHNICAL BACKGROUND REPORT | CITY OF SIERRA MADRE, CALIFORNIA
Sound Level Meter Summary
Translated:                          3‐Nov‐11              15:32:18
File Translated:
Model Number:                              814
Serial Number:                 A0124
Firmware Rev:                            1.026
Software Version:                         1.07
Name:
Descr1:
Descr2:
Setup:                         NORMAL.slm
Setup Descr:                   Untitled                      
Octave Filters:                1/1 Octave Filters
Location:                      Sierra Madre GP update measurements
Note 1:                        Site 4
Note 2:
Overall Measurement                                                 Current Measurement
Start Time:                          1‐Nov‐11              12:08:05 Start Time              12:08:05
Elapsed Time:                          15:01.0                      Elapsed Time             15:01.0
Leq:                                      42.6                      Leq:                        42.6
SEL:                                      72.1                      SEL:                        72.1
Dose:                                      838                      Dose:                        838
Proj. Dose:                             26816                       Proj. Dose:               26816
Threshold:                                      0                   Threshold:                     0
Criterion:                                      0                   Criterion:                     0
Exchange Rate:                                  3                   Exchange Rate:                 3
                         Min:        32.3                                          Min:     32.3
                 Min Occurred:    1‐Nov‐11             12:22:06           Min Occurred:   1‐Nov‐11    12:22:06
                         Max:        62.7                                         Max:      62.7
                Max Occurred:     1‐Nov‐11             12:16:57           Max Occurred:   1‐Nov‐11    12:16:57
                       Peak‐1:       95.4                                       Peak‐1:     95.4
             Peak‐1 Occurred:     1‐Nov‐11             12:10:45        Peak‐1 Occurred:   1‐Nov‐11    12:10:45
                       Peak‐2:       88.5                                       Peak‐2:     88.5
             Peak‐2 Occurred:     1‐Nov‐11             12:11:45        Peak‐2 Occurred:   1‐Nov‐11    12:11:45
L1.00                                     52.2
L10.00                                    43.5
L25.00                                    40.5
L50.00                                    38.1
L90.00                                    34.0
L99.00                                    32.7
Detector:                      Slow
Weighting:                     A
SPL Exceedance Level 1:                    115                      Exceeded:                      0 times
SPL Exceedance Level 2:                    120                      Exceeded:                      0 times
Peak‐1 Exceedance Level:                   140                      Exceeded:                      0 times
Peak‐2 Exceedance Level:                   140                      Exceeded:                      0 times
Hysteresis:                                     2
Overloaded:                                     0
Pause Count:                                    0                   Pause Time:              00:00.0
Calibrated:                          1‐Nov‐11              12:06:26 Offset:                     18.3 dB
Checked:                             1‐Nov‐11              12:06:26 Level:                      93.8 dB
Calibrator:                    not set                              Level:                      93.8
Cal Record Count:                               1
Interval Records:              Enabled                              Number Interval Rec            2
Time History:                  Enabled                              Number History Reco           18
814 Memory:                            262144
Free Memory:                           197221                       Percent Free:            75.23%
Battery Level:                            49%                       Source:             INT

Sound Level Meter Time History
Translated:             3‐Nov‐11 15:36:31
File Translated:
Model Number:                 814
Serial Number:        A0124
Firmware Rev:               1.026
Software Version:            1.07
Name:
Descr1:
Descr2:
Setup:                NORMAL.slm
Setup Descr:          Untitled                      
Octave Filters:       1/1 Octave Filters
Location:             Sierra Madre GP update measurements
Note 1:               Site 4
Note 2:
          Rec #           Date           Time        Leq
            1          1‐Nov‐11       12:08:05       Run
            2          1‐Nov‐11       12:08:05       40.9
            3          1‐Nov‐11       12:09:05       38.4
            4          1‐Nov‐11       12:10:05       40.9
            5          1‐Nov‐11       12:11:05       46.9
            6          1‐Nov‐11       12:12:05       38.2
            7          1‐Nov‐11       12:13:05       38.4
            8          1‐Nov‐11       12:14:05       43.1
            9          1‐Nov‐11       12:15:05       40.3
            10         1‐Nov‐11       12:16:05       49.9
            11         1‐Nov‐11       12:17:05       42.0
            12         1‐Nov‐11       12:18:05       40.3
            13         1‐Nov‐11       12:19:05       37.9
            14         1‐Nov‐11       12:20:05       38.8
            15         1‐Nov‐11       12:21:05       38.1
            16         1‐Nov‐11       12:22:05       36.1
            17         1‐Nov‐11       12:23:05       38.0
            18         1‐Nov‐11       12:24:05       Stop

Sound Level Meter Summary
Translated:                      3‐Nov‐11                  15:54:10
File Translated:
Model Number:                     814
Serial Number:                  A0124
Firmware Rev:                   1.026
Software Version:                1.07
Name:
Descr1:
Descr2:
Setup:                      NORMAL.slm
Setup Descr:                Untitled                      
Octave Filters:             1/1 Octave Filters
Location:                   Sierra Madre GP update measurements
Note 1:                     Site 5
Note 2:
Overall Measurement                                                 Current Measurement
               Start Time:       1‐Nov‐11                  12:33:13           Start Time      12:33:13
            Elapsed Time:          15:49.5                                 Elapsed Time        15:49.5
                       Leq:           44.3                                           Leq:          44.3
                       SEL:           74.1                                           SEL:          74.1
                     Dose:           1328                                          Dose:          1328
               Proj. Dose:          40448                                    Proj. Dose:         40448
               Threshold:                  0                                  Threshold:              0
                 Criterion:                0                                   Criterion:             0
          Exchange Rate:                   3                            Exchange Rate:                3
                      Min:       34.4                                               Min:      34.4
           Min Occurred:      1‐Nov‐11                     12:35:37      Min Occurred:      1‐Nov‐11     12:35:37
                      Max:        59                                                Max:       59
           Max Occurred:      1‐Nov‐11                     12:45:52     Max Occurred:       1‐Nov‐11     12:45:52
                   Peak‐1:       95.5                                            Peak‐1:      95.5
        Peak‐1 Occurred:      1‐Nov‐11                     12:37:45   Peak‐1 Occurred:      1‐Nov‐11     12:37:45
                   Peak‐2:       90.6                                            Peak‐2:      90.6
        Peak‐2 Occurred:      1‐Nov‐11                     12:46:44   Peak‐2 Occurred:      1‐Nov‐11     12:46:44
L1.00                            53.8
L10.00                           49.2
L25.00                           43.4
L50.00                           39.3
L90.00                           36.3
L99.00                           34.6
Detector:                   Slow
Weighting:                  A
SPL Exceedance Level 1:                115                          Exceeded:                         0 times
SPL Exceedance Level 2:                120                          Exceeded:                         0 times
Peak‐1 Exceedance Level:               140                          Exceeded:                         0 times
Peak‐2 Exceedance Level:               140                          Exceeded:                         0 times
Hysteresis:                                2
Overloaded:                                0
Pause Count:                               1                        Pause Time:                00:11.0
Calibrated:                      1‐Nov‐11                  12:06:26 Offset:                        18.3 dB
Checked:                         1‐Nov‐11                  12:06:26 Level:                         93.8 dB
Calibrator:                 not set                                 Level:                         93.8
Cal Record Count:                          0
Interval Records:           Enabled                                 Number Interval Re                2
Time History:               Enabled                                 Number History Rec               21
814 Memory:                        262144
Free Memory:                       197221                           Percent Free:               75.23%
Battery Level:                        47%                           Source:               INT

Sound Level Meter Time History
Translated:               3‐Nov‐11 15:56:34
File Translated:
Model Number:              814
Serial Number:            A0124
Firmware Rev:             1.026
Software Version:          1.07
Name:
Descr1:
Descr2:
Setup:                NORMAL.slm
Setup Descr:          Untitled                      
Octave Filters:       1/1 Octave Filters
Location:             Sierra Madre GP update measurements
Note 1:               Site 5
Note 2:
          Rec #            Date               Time    Leq
            1           1‐Nov‐11          12:33:13    Run
            2           1‐Nov‐11          12:33:13    45.6
            3           1‐Nov‐11          12:34:13    41.8
            4           1‐Nov‐11          12:35:13    36.5
            5           1‐Nov‐11          12:36:13    39.3
            6           1‐Nov‐11          12:37:13    47.5
            7           1‐Nov‐11          12:38:13    41.3
            8           1‐Nov‐11          12:39:13    38.6
            9           1‐Nov‐11          12:40:13    46.0
           10           1‐Nov‐11          12:41:13    44.5
           11           1‐Nov‐11          12:42:13    40.1
           12           1‐Nov‐11          12:43:13    39.2
           13           1‐Nov‐11          12:44:13    41.8
           14           1‐Nov‐11          12:45:13    50.0
           15           1‐Nov‐11          12:46:13   Pause
           16           1‐Nov‐11          12:47:13   Cont
           17           1‐Nov‐11          12:46:03    49.3
           18           1‐Nov‐11          12:47:03    40.1
           19           1‐Nov‐11          12:48:03    43.9
           20           1‐Nov‐11          12:49:03    43.8
           21           1‐Nov‐11          12:50:03    Stop

Sound Level Meter Summary
Translated:                               3‐Nov‐11              16:03:39
File Translated:                 C:\Documents and Settings\User\My Documents\Projects\TPC\SierraMadreGP\Data\Raw\SierraMadreGP‐ST_4.slmdl
Model Number:                                      814
Serial Number:                   A0124
Firmware Rev:                                   1.026
Software Version:                                 1.07
Name:
Descr1:
Descr2:
Setup:                           NORMAL.slm
Setup Descr:                     Untitled                      
Octave Filters:                  1/1 Octave Filters
Location:                        Sierra Madre GP update measurements
Note 1:
Note 2:
Overall Measurement                                                      Current Measurement
                    Start Time:       1‐Nov‐11                  14:31:07          Start Time      14:31:07
                 Elapsed Time:         15:41.2                                 Elapsed Time        15:41.2
                           Leq:          62.7                                            Leq:        62.7
                            SEL:         92.4                                            SEL:        92.4
                          Dose:         89856                                          Dose:        89856
                    Proj. Dose:           0                                      Proj. Dose:          0
                    Threshold:            0                                       Threshold:          0
                     Criterion:           0                                        Criterion:         0
                Exchange Rate:            3                                  Exchange Rate:           3
                           Min:          40.6                                           Min:         40.6
                 Min Occurred:        1‐Nov‐11                  14:34:10      Min Occurred:       1‐Nov‐11      14:34:10
                           Max:          81.3                                           Max:         81.3
                Max Occurred:         1‐Nov‐11                  14:39:49     Max Occurred:        1‐Nov‐11      14:39:49
                       Peak‐1:          103.5                                        Peak‐1:        103.5
             Peak‐1 Occurred:         1‐Nov‐11                  14:39:47   Peak‐1 Occurred:       1‐Nov‐11      14:39:47
                       Peak‐2:           94.8                                        Peak‐2:         94.8
             Peak‐2 Occurred:         1‐Nov‐11                  14:39:49   Peak‐2 Occurred:       1‐Nov‐11      14:39:49
                          L1.00          75.8
                        L10.00           64.0
                        L25.00           60.6
                        L50.00           56.1
                        L90.00           47.4
                        L99.00           41.3
Detector:                        Slow
Weighting:                       A
SPL Exceedance Level 1:                            115                            Exceeded:                  0 times
SPL Exceedance Level 2:                            120                            Exceeded:                  0 times
Peak‐1 Exceedance Level:                           140                            Exceeded:                  0 times
Peak‐2 Exceedance Level:                           140                            Exceeded:                  0 times
Hysteresis:                                             2
Overloaded:                                             0
Pause Count:                                            0                Pause Time:                   00:00.0
Calibrated:                               1‐Nov‐11              12:06:26 Offset:                          18.3 dB
Checked:                                  1‐Nov‐11              12:06:26 Level:                           93.8 dB
Calibrator:                      not set                                 Level:                           93.8
Cal Record Count:                                       0
Interval Records:                Enabled                                 Number Interval Re                  2
Time History:                    Enabled                                 Number History Rec                 18
814 Memory:                                  262144
Free Memory:                                 197221                      Percent Free:                 75.23%
Battery Level:                                     47%                   Source:              INT

Sound Level Meter Time History
Translated:             3‐Nov‐11 16:05:13
File Translated:
Model Number:              814
Serial Number:           A0124
Firmware Rev:             1.026
Software Version:         1.07
Name:
Descr1:
Descr2:
Setup:                 NORMAL.slm
Setup Descr:           Untitled                      
Octave Filters:        1/1 Octave Filters
Location:              Sierra Madre GP update measurements
Note 1:                Site 6
Note 2:
          Rec #           Date            Time        Leq
            1           1‐Nov‐11       14:31:07       Run
            2           1‐Nov‐11       14:31:07       61.9
            3           1‐Nov‐11       14:32:07       61.9
            4           1‐Nov‐11       14:33:07       54.1
            5           1‐Nov‐11       14:34:07       59.6
            6           1‐Nov‐11       14:35:07       63.7
            7           1‐Nov‐11       14:36:07       57.4
            8           1‐Nov‐11       14:37:07       56.9
            9           1‐Nov‐11       14:38:07       65.9
            10          1‐Nov‐11       14:39:07       69.7
            11          1‐Nov‐11       14:40:07       67.2
            12          1‐Nov‐11       14:41:07       61.3
            13          1‐Nov‐11       14:42:07       55.6
            14          1‐Nov‐11       14:43:07       51.9
            15          1‐Nov‐11       14:44:07       58.7
            16          1‐Nov‐11       14:45:07       54.3
            17          1‐Nov‐11       14:46:07       57.9
            18          1‐Nov‐11       14:47:07       Stop

Sound Level Meter Summary
Translated:                              3‐Nov‐11                   16:08:14
File Translated:
Model Number:                           814
Serial Number:                        A0124
Firmware Rev:                          1.026
Software Version:                      1.07
Name:
Descr1:
Descr2:
Setup:                          NORMAL.slm
Setup Descr:                    Untitled                      
Octave Filters:                 1/1 Octave Filters
Location:                       Sierra Madre GP update measurements
Note 1:                         Site 7
Note 2:
Overall Measurement                                                          Current Measurement
                   Start Time:      1‐Nov‐11                   15:00:31                 Start Time      15:00:31
                Elapsed Time:        15:03.2                                         Elapsed Time        15:03.2
                          Leq:          59.1                                                   Leq:        59.1
                           SEL:        88.6                                                    SEL:        88.6
                         Dose:        37632                                                  Dose:        37632
                   Proj. Dose:           0                                             Proj. Dose:          0
                   Threshold:            0                                              Threshold:          0
                    Criterion:           0                                               Criterion:         0
              Exchange Rate:             3                                        Exchange Rate:            3
                          Min:         44.9                                                   Min:         44.9
                Min Occurred:       1‐Nov‐11                   15:06:16             Min Occurred:       1‐Nov‐11        15:06:16
                          Max:         73.9                                                   Max:         73.9
               Max Occurred:        1‐Nov‐11                   15:03:34            Max Occurred:        1‐Nov‐11        15:03:34
                      Peak‐1:          101.5                                               Peak‐1:        101.5
            Peak‐1 Occurred:        1‐Nov‐11                   15:02:19         Peak‐1 Occurred:        1‐Nov‐11        15:02:19
                      Peak‐2:           91.3                                               Peak‐2:         91.3
            Peak‐2 Occurred:        1‐Nov‐11                   15:03:34         Peak‐2 Occurred:        1‐Nov‐11        15:03:34
                         L1.00         67.3
                       L10.00           63.4
                       L25.00           59.8
                       L50.00           55.2
                       L90.00           48.8
                       L99.00           46.2
Detector:                       Slow
Weighting:                      A
SPL Exceedance Level 1:                          115                                    Exceeded:                    0 times
SPL Exceedance Level 2:                          120                                    Exceeded:                    0 times
Peak‐1 Exceedance Level:                         140                                    Exceeded:                    0 times
Peak‐2 Exceedance Level:                         140                                    Exceeded:                    0 times
Hysteresis:                                          2
Overloaded:                                          0
Pause Count:                                         0                       Pause Time:                       00:00.0
Calibrated:                              1‐Nov‐11                   12:06:26 Offset:                              18.3 dB
Checked:                                 1‐Nov‐11                   12:06:26 Level:                               93.8 dB
Calibrator:                     not set                                      Level:                               93.8
Cal Record Count:                                    0
Interval Records:               Enabled                                      Number Interval Reco                    2
Time History:                   Enabled                                      Number History Reco                    18
814 Memory:                                262144
Free Memory:                               197221                            Percent Free:                     75.23%
Battery Level:                                  47%                          Source:                INT

Sound Level Meter Time History
Translated:             3‐Nov‐11 16:10:08
File Translated:
Model Number:              814
Serial Number:           A0124
Firmware Rev:             1.026
Software Version:         1.07
Name:
Descr1:
Descr2:
Setup:                 NORMAL.slm
Setup Descr:           Untitled                      
Octave Filters:        1/1 Octave Filters
Location:              Sierra Madre GP update measurements
Note 1:                Site 7
Note 2:
          Rec #           Date            Time        Leq
            1           1‐Nov‐11       15:00:31       Run
            2           1‐Nov‐11       15:00:31       56.3
            3           1‐Nov‐11       15:01:31       60.4
            4           1‐Nov‐11       15:02:31       57.1
            5           1‐Nov‐11       15:03:31       62.0
            6           1‐Nov‐11       15:04:31       58.0
            7           1‐Nov‐11       15:05:31       58.7
            8           1‐Nov‐11       15:06:31       57.9
            9           1‐Nov‐11       15:07:31       58.3
            10          1‐Nov‐11       15:08:31       61.5
            11          1‐Nov‐11       15:09:31       59.2
            12          1‐Nov‐11       15:10:31       60.0
            13          1‐Nov‐11       15:11:31       57.6
            14          1‐Nov‐11       15:12:31       58.9
            15          1‐Nov‐11       15:13:31       59.2
            16          1‐Nov‐11       15:14:31       57.2
            17          1‐Nov‐11       15:15:31       56.1
            18          1‐Nov‐11       15:16:31       Stop

                                                          LONG TERM NOISE MEASUREMENT RESULTS
                                                                                       MEASUREMENT LOCATION 1
                                                                                     AmbientNoiseDailyPattern
                               70
                               65
HourlyNoiseLevel(dBALeq)
                               60
                                                                                            55.5   55.5                 55.7          55.8
                                                                                     55.0
                               55                               53.5                                                                                54.0
                                                                              53.0                                                                                53.3
                                                         52.2                                                                  52.5                                      52.7   52.3   52.4
                                                                       52.0                               51.7   51.6
                                    50.7   51.1                                                                                              50.8          51.0                               50.9   51.2
                               50
                                                  46.4
                               45
                               40
                               35
                                     0      1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9     10     11     12     13     14     15     16     17     18     19     20     21     22     23
                                                                                                                   Hour
                                                                                                                                        Noise Peak Hour = 2PM
                                                                                                                               Peak Hour Noise (dBA Leq)= 55.8
                                                                                                                 Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) = 58.6
                                                              LONG TERM NOISE MEASUREMENT RESULTS
                                                                                            MEASUREMENT LOCATION 2
                                                                               AmbientNoiseDailyPattern
                               70
                               65                                                                                                                 63.8
                                                                                                                      63.0
                                                                                                                                    61.7
                                                                                                                                           60.7
HourlyNoiseLevel(dBALeq)
                                                                                     60.5                      60.6
                                    59.5                                                    59.6                                                         59.2 58.8
                               60                                                                                            58.1
                                                                                                   57.4 57.5                                                         57.6
                                                                              56.3
                                                                                                                                                                            54.7
                               55          52.8                 52.8                                                                                                               53.4
                                                                       51.9                                                                                                               51.3
                                                         49.7                                                                                                                                    49.7
                               50
                                                  46.6
                               45
                               40
                               35
                                     0      1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9   10     11     12     13     14     15     16     17   18     19     20     21     22     23
                                                                                                                 Hour
                                                                                                                                             Noise Peak Hour = 4PM
                                                                                                                                    Peak Hour Noise (dBA Leq)= 63.8
                                                                                                                      Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) = 62.1
                                                          LONG TERM NOISE MEASUREMENT RESULTS
                                                                                       MEASUREMENT LOCATION 3
                                                                                     AmbientNoiseDailyPattern
                               70
                               65
HourlyNoiseLevel(dBALeq)
                               60
                               55
                                                                                            52.5
                                                                                     51.0                                             50.6
                               50                                                                         48.8          48.8                 48.7          49.0   48.6
                                                                                                   48.0
                                                                                                                 47.3
                                                                46.5
                                                                                                                                                    45.8
                                                                              44.7                                             45.1
                               45                                                                                                                                                      43.7   44.0
                                    43.2                                                                                                                                 43.0
                                           42.6                                                                                                                                                      42.6
                                                                       41.8                                                                                                     41.5
                                                         40.9
                                                  39.9
                               40
                               35
                                     0      1      2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9     10     11     12     13     14     15     16     17     18     19     20     21     22     23
                                                                                                                   Hour
                                                                                                                                        Noise Peak Hour = 8AM
                                                                                                                               Peak Hour Noise (dBA Leq)= 52.5
                                                                                                                 Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) = 51.1
