               City of Huntington Park
                      2030 General Plan
Community Development Department 6550 Miles Avenue Huntington Park, California 90255
INTRODUCTION TO
                 THE
        HUNTINGTON
                PARK
           GENERAL
               PLAN
1.1 OVERVIEW
This City of Huntington Park General Plan serves as a long-range comprehensive plan
that will regulate land uses and development in the City for the next 10 to 20 years.
The individual Elements that comprise this general plan contain policies and programs
that will guide future development in the City. The State Legislature has indicated that
a local General Plan serves as the “constitution” of the local government with respect
to development and land uses. State law requires every city and county to prepare and
adopt a comprehensive General Plan to serve as a guide for development. Planning
case law has placed the General Plan atop the hierarchy of local government laws that
regulate land use and development. Consequently, California requires consistency
between the General Plan and all other regulations and ordinances. The City of
Huntington Park’s zoning, specific plans, and future development proposals must all be
consistent with the policies, plans, and standards contained in this general plan.
California law requires every city and county to adopt a comprehensive, long-term
General Plan to guide the physical development of its community. The Huntington
Park General Plan is a comprehensive long-range plan since it applies to and affects all
land areas within the City’s corporate boundaries. The General Plan is comprehensive
because it addresses a wide range of municipal issues ranging from the City’s physical
development, the provision of services, and the identification of key issues that must
be considered in future land use planning.
1-2  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

1.2 FORMAT AND CONTENT
The State of California requires that a General Plan contain seven elements, which
includes a land use element, a circulation element, a housing element, a conservation
element, an open space element, a noise element, and a safety element. The
Huntington Park General Plan has been reformatted to address the aforementioned
requirements in the following Elements:
      •	 The Land Use & Community Development Element indicates the general
         location and distribution of the existing and permitted land uses in the City.
         The Land Use and Sustainability Element also considered issues related to
         urban design and economic development.
      •	 The Mobility & Circulation Element indicates the general location and
         the extent of existing and proposed roadway improvements and provides
         standards for roadway design and level of service standards.
      •	 The Resource Management Element meets the State-mandated
         requirements for the conservation and open space elements. The Resource
         Management Element provides for the conservation, development, and use
         of natural resources. This Element also addresses air quality, water quality,
         historic resources, and parks and recreation.
                                                          SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION       1-3

      •	 The Health & Safety Element provides for the protection of the community
         from a variety of man-made and natural hazards. Other related issues
         addressed in the Health and Safety Element include environmental hazards
         and noise.
      •	 The Housing Element evaluates the existing and projected housing needs
         of the City and establishes policies and programs that will be effective
         in the preservation, improvement, and development of housing that will
         accommodate the City’s future housing need.
The five elements cover a wide range of planning and environmental issues. The issues
that are addressed in each of the Elements are indicated below in Table 1-1.
1-4  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Table 1-1: General Plan Issue Matrix
                                     SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION 1-5
       Table 1-2: Relationship of Huntington Park General Plan
        Elements & the State-Mandated General Plan Elements
As indicated previously, State law requires every city and county to prepare and adopt
a comprehensive General Plan that consists of seven mandatory elements: land use,
housing, circulation, safety, conservation, open space, and noise. Table 1-2 outlines
the format of the Huntington Park General Plan Elements and how these elements
address the seven mandatory elements required under State planning law.
1-6  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
1.3 THE CITY & PLANNING AREA
The City of Huntington Park is centrally located within the greater Los Angeles
metropolitan area approximately five miles southeast of downtown Los Angeles in
Los Angeles County. The City’s regional location is shown in Exhibit 1-1. The City
of Huntington Park was incorporated on September 1, 1906, with a population of
526 residents. The City developed as a suburban community, providing a centralized
location for workers employed in Los Angeles and the surrounding industrial cities of
Commerce, Vernon, and South Gate. The City’s land use and development patterns
were well established by the 1930’s. A thriving downtown centered along Pacific
Avenue was testament to the area’s prosperity. The City is bounded on the north
by the cities of Vernon and Maywood; on the south by the City of South Gate and
unincorporated Los Angeles County; on the east by the cities of Cudahy, Bell, and
Maywood; and on the west by the City of Los Angeles and unincorporated Los Angeles
County. The City has a land area of approximately 3.01 square miles. The City’s
location is shown in Exhibit 1-2. A map of the City is provided in Exhibit 1-3.
                                                          SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION    1-7

    Exhibit 1-1: The City’s Regional Location in Los Angeles County
1-8 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Exhibit 1-2: Area-Wide Map of the City of Hungtinton Park
                                        SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION 1-9
                 Exhibit 1-3: Map of the City of Hunginton Park
1-10 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
As the post World War II era progressed, the City began to experience a shift in its
demographic character. In addition, the decline of the manufacturing sector in the
area also contributed to the economic transition that affected the region. According to
the most recent State of California Department of Finance estimates for January 2015,
the City’s population was 59,312 persons. Key development and land use patterns are
summarized in the following paragraphs.
                                          •	 The City of Huntington Park contains
                                             a variety of uses; however, the most
                                             prominent land use in the City is
                                             residential. Extensive residential
                                             development of varying densities
                                             is observed east of Seville Avenue,
                                             extending east to the City’s easternmost
                                             boundary, north to the City’s
                                             northernmost boundary, and south
                                             to the City’s southernmost boundary.
                                             Residential land uses are also located
                                             west of Pacific Avenue and extend as far
                                             west as Regent Street.
•	 Commercial development is found
   along the major roadways that traverse
   the City including Slauson Avenue,
   Pacific Boulevard, Gage Avenue,
   Santa Fe Avenue, and Florence
   Avenue. In addition, small pockets of
   commercial development occupy the
   frontages along many of the residential
   streets. The heaviest concentration
   of commercial uses is located in the
   City’s downtown area along the Pacific
   Boulevard corridor which functions as
   the City’s central business district.
                                                          SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION    1-11

                                          •	 The City’s industrial areas are located
                                             within the northern and western portion
                                             of the City. Industrial land uses extend
                                             from the City’s northern border with
                                             Vernon along Slauson Avenue and 52nd
                                             Street, and westerly to the City’s border
                                             with unincorporated Los Angeles
                                             County along Wilmington Avenue. The
                                             City’s main industrial district is generally
                                             bounded by Santa Fe Avenue, Pacific
                                             Boulevard, the City of Vernon to the
                                             east and Randolph Street to the south.
•	 Alameda Street, a major north-south
   arterial route, passes through the
   western portion of the City. The
   Alameda Corridor, a 20-mile long rail
   cargo expressway, extends through the
   center of Alameda Street. The portion
   of the Alameda Corridor that traverses
   the City is located within the 33-foot
   deep Mid-Corridor Trench.
1-12  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

1.4 POLICY FRAMEWORK
The scope and content of a General Plan prepared by a local government, as well
as the process that must be followed in its adoption and amendment, is governed
by the State of California planning laws. In addition, the courts have further refined
the interpretation of the legislature’s intent over the past decades. Presently, the
Huntington Park General Plan represents the cornerstone in the long-range planning
for land use and development. The importance of the General Plan is clearly stated
in the government code, which indicates the Plan is designed to “serve as the
constitution of the local government for which it has been prepared.” The foundation
of the United States Constitution rests on the Bill of Rights and its 26 Amendments. As
with the Nation’s constitution, the Huntington Park General Plan’s foundation rests on
the policies contained within it. With regard to policies, the State of California General
Plan Guidelines indicates the following:
       “The General Plan shall consist of a statement of development policies
       and shall include a diagram or diagrams and text setting forth objectives,
       principals, standards, and plan proposals. A development policy is a
       General Plan statement that guides action. Development policies include
       goals, objectives, principals, plan proposals, and standards. Therefore,
       with regard to General Plans, “policy” has both a specific and general
       meaning”.
                                                           SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION     1-13

The General Plan Guidelines prepared by the State provide some valuable guidance
when formulating and reviewing policies by indicating the following:
     •	 A policy is a specific statement that guides decision-making. It indicates a
        clear commitment of the local legislative body. A policy is based on a General
        Plan’s goals and objectives as well as the analysis of data.
     •	 A realistic policy is one that is adopted by local legislators who are mindful of
        the General Plan’s implementation.
     •	 For a policy to be useful as a guide to the decision-makers, it must be clear
        and unambiguous. Clear policies are particularly important when it comes to
        judging whether or not zoning decisions, subdivisions, public works projects,
        etc., are consistent with a General Plan.
     •	 When writing policies, local officials need to be aware of the difference
        between “shall” and “should.” “Shall” indicates an unequivocal directive.
        “Should” signifies a less rigid directive, to be honored in the absence of
        compelling or contravening considerations. It is better to adopt no policy
        than to adopt a policy with no backbone.
     •	 Solid policy is based on solid information. The analysis of data collected
        as part of a General Plan’s development should provide local officials with
        a knowledge of trends, existing conditions, and projections they need to
        formulate policy.
1-14 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT POLICIES
ISSUE: LAND USE DIVERSITY
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 1. The City of
       Huntington Park shall maintain and preserve those industrial and commercial
       areas of the City while preventing land use conflicts through comprehensive
       land use planning and environmental review.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 2. The City of
       Huntington Park shall promote mixed-use development (residential, retail, and
       commercial uses) in key activity areas of the City as indicated on the Land Use
       Policy Map.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 3. The City of
       Huntington Park shall continue to support the development of senior housing
       in locations with convenient access to commercial uses, services, and public
       transportation.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 4. The City of
       Huntington Park shall encourage single room occupancy (SROs) uses in the
       Central Business District and SRO/Commercial Mixed Use Overlay as a means
       to provide affordable housing.
                                                        SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION     1-15

ISSUE: NEW DEVELOPMENT & LAND USE COMPATABILITY
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 5. The City of
        Huntington Park shall require that multi-family development provide adequate
        buffers (such as decorative walls and landscaped setbacks) to prevent impacts
        on surrounding neighborhoods due to noise, traffic, parking, light and glare,
        and differences in scale as a means to ensure privacy and to provide
        visual compatibility.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 6. The City of
        Huntington Park shall require that new developments are properly designed
        so as to minimize potential land use conflicts and environmental impacts.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 7. The City of
        Huntington Park shall ensure that new industrial development does not lead
        to any environmental impacts related to contamination, excessive noise, air
        pollution, and truck traffic.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 8. The City of
        Huntington Park shall develop and implement an amortization program to
        require legal non-conforming uses to meet current building code and
        zoning requirements.
ISSUE: EXPANSION & DIVERSIFICATION OF ECONOMIC BASE
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 9. The City
        of Huntington Park shall encourage the growth and expansion of local
        businesses through a streamlined permit approval processes.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 10. The City of
        Huntington Park shall actively promote the City as a place for businesses
        to locate through marketing, advertising, and cooperation with the local
        Chamber of Commerce.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 11. The City of
        Huntington Park shall target certain businesses and industries that will benefit
        the local market.
1-16 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 12. The City of
       Huntington Park shall maintain, market, and further develop the Pacific
       Boulevard corridor as a regional retail destination.
ISSUE: URBAN DESIGN
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 13. The City
       of Huntington Park shall require that new and rehabilitated residential,
       commercial, and light industrial development located adjacent to pedestrian
       and recreational amenities provide linkages to those amenities including
       ground-level access; pedestrian-oriented ground-floor uses; and locating on-
       site parking away from pedestrian-oriented areas.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 14. The City of
       Huntington Park shall oversee the preparation of urban design guidelines
       that, together with the City’s Zoning Ordinance, will serve as a guide for new
       development and rehabilitation.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 15. The City of
       Huntington Park shall establish a consistent design vocabulary for all public
       signage, including fixture type, lettering, colors, symbols, and logos.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 16. The City of
       Huntington Park shall locate distinctive public signage and landscaping for
       key entry points into the City and will require that signage on commercial
       structures be compatible and integrated with the surrounding area.
ISSUE: REVITILIZATION AND NEW DEVELOPMENT
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 17. The City of
       Huntington Park shall use various land use and development incentives to
       facilitate the revitalization of underutilized or blighted properties.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 18. The City of
       Huntington Park shall continue to require property maintenance through
       continued Code Enforcement efforts.
                                                           SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION  1-17

     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 19. The City of
        Huntington Park shall continue to pursue funding sources to assist in the
        implementation of residential and commercial rehabilitation programs.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 20. The City of
        Huntington Park shall continue to encourage the restoration and rehabilitation
        of properties eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places
        and will support tax credit incentives of the National Trust for
        Historic Preservation.
ISSUE: DEVELOPMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICES
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 21. The City of
        Huntington Park shall require that new development(s) pay their “Fair Share”
        for the provision of the necessary infrastructure and other support services
        that will be required to serve the development.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 22. The City of
        Huntington Park shall work with the Huntington Park Police Department and
        the Los Angeles County Fire Department to ensure that sufficient resources
        continue to be available to meet the existing and projected service demands.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 23. The City of
        Huntington Park shall require all new development, including commercial,
        industrial, and residential development to install fire protection systems,
        including automatic sprinkler systems.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 24. The City of
        Huntington Park shall enhance public crime prevention awareness through
        the development of new or expanded educational programs (in both Spanish
        and English) that address personal safety awareness, neighborhood watch
        programs, and the City shall take into account public safety in the design of
        new developments.
1-18 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

ISSUE: INTERAGENCY COORDINATION AND COOPERATION
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 25. The City of
       Huntington Park shall cooperate with surrounding jurisdictions in the review
       and implementation of larger development projects in the region.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 26. The City of
       Huntington Park shall work with public agencies in the region so as to avoid
       the duplication of services.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 27. The City of
       Huntington Park shall coordinate with the Los Angeles Unified School District
       as it expands and upgrades existing educational facilities.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 28. The City of
       Huntington Park shall work with the library system to identify the
       service needs.
ISSUE: INFRASTRUCTURE
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 29. The City of
       Huntington Park shall work closely with local water purveyors in determining
       future area needs to identify and implement water conservation programs.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 30. The City of
       Huntington Park shall ensure that adequate water and sewer service is
       available as new development occurs.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 31. The City
       of Huntington Park shall continue to require the use of drought-resistant
       landscaping to reduce water use.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 32. The City of
       Huntington Park shall strive to correct identified storm drain deficiencies
       and develop a long-range program for replacing aging drainage system
       components.
                                                        SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION    1-19

ISSUE: SOLID WASTE COLLECTION, DISPOSAL, & RECYCLING
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 33. The City of
        Huntington Park shall work closely with the County of Los Angeles and other
        responsible agencies so as to reduce solid waste generated in the City.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 34. The City of
        Huntington Park shall explore the creation of City-managed recycling drop-off
        stations in the City.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 35. The City of
        Huntington Park shall encourage waste reduction, recycling, and use of
        recycled materials within City government.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 36. The City of
        Huntington Park shall encourage composting as an alternative to disposal for
        solid wastes.
MOBILITY & CIRCULATION ELEMENT POLICIES
ISSUE: LOCAL STREET SYSTEM
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 1. The City of Huntington Park shall
        design and employ appropriate traffic control measures to ensure City streets
        and roads function with safety and efficiency and shall coordinate street
        system improvements and signalization with regional transportation efforts.
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 2. The City of Huntington Park shall
        design local, collector, and residential streets to discourage their use as
        through traffic routes.
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 3. The City of Huntington Park shall
        require the traffic impacts of major new developments include a traffic impact
        analysis to identify measures to mitigate the traffic impacts.
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 4. As new development or
        redevelopment occurs, the City of Huntington Park shall limit driveway
1-20 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

       access onto arterial streets, restrict travel through adjacent residential
       neighborhoods, and provide bus turnouts where appropriate along heavily
       traveled arterials.
ISSUE: REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 5. The City of Huntington Park shall
       support completion of planned improvements to the Long Beach
       Freeway (I-710).
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 6. The City of Huntington Park shall
       coordinate the development of arterial streets with the Los Angeles County
       Congestion Management Plan to assure that arterial streets will be compatible
       with those of neighboring jurisdictions.
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 7. The City of Huntington Park shall
       promote regional mobility and transportation efforts including the provision of
       transit and support the Eco-Rapid Transit Authority.
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 8. The City of Huntington Park shall
       coordinate the development of goods movement system that will reduce the
       impact of trucks on the local traffic and the street infrastructure.
ISSUE: TRAFFIC REDUCTION
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 9. The City of Huntington Park shall
       support the implementation of employer traffic demand management (TDM)
       as required in the City’s TDM Ordinance.
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 10. The City of Huntington Park shall
       require that proposals for major new developments include submission of a
       TDM plan to the City, including monitoring and enforcement provisions.
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 11. The City of Huntington Park shall
       promote ridesharing through publicity and outreach to the public.
                                                          SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION 1-21

        Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 12. The City of Huntington Park
        shall encourage employers to reduce vehicular trips by offering employees
        incentives such as reduced rate transit passes as well as apportioning
        preferred parking for ridesharing.
ISSUE: PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 13. The City of Huntington Park shall
        work with the MTA to develop improved connections to the Blue Line and
        encourage the MTA to upgrade its transit station located at Slauson Avenue.
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 14. The City of Huntington Park
        shall work with the MTA to identify needs for additional local and express bus
        service to Huntington Park.
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 15. The City of Huntington Park shall
        require new development to provide transit facilities, such as bus shelters and
        turn-outs, where deemed necessary.
ISSUE: ALTERNATIVE FORMS OF TRANSPORTATION
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 16. The City of Huntington Park shall
        provide for safety of pedestrians and bicycles in the planning and construction
        of new roadway and transit projects.
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 17. The City of Huntington Park
        shall maintain existing pedestrian facilities and require new development to
        provide pedestrian access to existing public walkways.
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 18. The City of Huntington Park shall
        work with adjacent jurisdictions and the MTA to develop a network of on-
        street bike lanes or off-street bike paths.
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 19. The City of Huntington Park shall
        encourage the provision of an accessible and secure area for bicycle storage
        at all new and existing developments.
1-22 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

ISSUE: PARKING
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 20. The City of Huntington Park shall
       review the City’s off-street parking requirements and revise as necessary to
       conform to actual parking demands.
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 21. Joint use of parking facilities
       may be granted as part of an area plan or site plan in the City of Huntington
       Park, depending on the peak parking generation of the permitted uses in the
       planning area.
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 22. The City of Huntington Park shall
       establish a parking overlay zone and designate appropriate areas of the Land
       Use Plan Map to facilitate the development of parking facilities through such
       methods as alley vacation and lot consolidation.
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 23. The City of Huntington Park shall
       explore the feasibility of on-street parking restrictions in certain areas
       of the City.
ISSUE: TRUCK TRAFFIC
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 24. The City of Huntington Park
       shall limit primary truck routes to major arterials to lessen the impacts to the
       residential neighborhoods.
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 25. The City of Huntington Park shall
       maintain truck routes to appropriate design standards to safely accommodate
       truck volumes.
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 26. The City of Huntington Park shall
       require all truck parking and queuing to occur outside of the public
       rights-of-ways.
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 27. The City of Huntington Park will
       continue to require truck loading areas that do not interfere with nearby
       traffic circulation.
                                                         SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION      1-23

RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT POLICIES
ISSUE: REDUCE AIR POLLUTION
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 1. The City of Huntington Park shall
        endorse regional and local air quality and transpor­tation management plans in
        order to reduce air pollution emissions and vehicular trips.
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 2. The City of Huntington Park shall
        participate in regional and statewide measures to address global warming.
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 3. The City of Huntington Park shall
        encourage the improvement of existing, and the development of new, shuttle,
        and transit systems to reduce vehicular trips and air pollution.
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 4. The City of Huntington Park
        shall encourage the use of energy conservation devices in project design and
        construction to increase energy efficiency and decrease pollution emissions
        from energy production and use.
ISSUE: CONSERVE & PROTECT WATER RESOURCES
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 5. The City of Huntington Park shall
        protect groundwater resources from depletion and pollution.
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 6. The City of Huntington Park shall
        reduce water consumption by providing water conservation techniques and
        by using reclaimed water, water-conserving appliances, and drought-resistant
        landscaping when feasible.
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 7. The City of Huntington Park shall
        comply with Statewide measures that are designed to promote a reduction in
        water use.
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 8. The City of Huntington Park shall
        implement a water conservation ordinance that includes the installation of
        xeriscape and water-conserving plumbing fixtures.
1-24 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

ISSUE: ENERGY CONSERVATION
    •	 Resource Management Element Policy 9. The City of Huntington Park shall
       encourage innovative site planning and building designs which minimize
       energy consumption by taking advantage of sun/shade patterns, prevailing
       winds, landscaping, and building materials.
    •	 Resource Management Element Policy 10. The City of Huntington Park
       shall establish, update, and implement building code requirements in
       accordance with State Title 24 energy and low impact development
       (LID) regulations.
    •	 Resource Management Element Policy 11. The City of Huntington Park
       shall promote the use of solar panels as a mean to reduce electricity usage.
    •	 Resource Management Element Policy 12. The City of Huntington Park
       shall promote the use of energy-efficient lighting throughout the City.
ISSUE: MAN-MADE AND NATURAL RESOURCES
    •	 Resource Management Element Policy 13. The City of Huntington Park
       shall promote the preservation of important historic resources in the City,
       including but not limited to, the ongoing implementation of the City’s Historic
       Preservation Ordinance.
    •	 Resource Management Element Policy 14. The City of Huntington Park
       shall comply with the requirements of AB-52 requiring consultation with local
       Native American tribes in the revised revision of new development proposals.
    •	 Resource Management Element Policy 15. The City of Huntington Park
       shall encourage the use of California native vegetation in the landscaping of
       larger developments.
    •	 Resource Management Element Policy 16. The City of Huntington Park
       shall strive to maintain parkway landscaping throughout the City.
                                                        SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION    1-25

ISSUE: OPEN SPACE, PARKS, & RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 17. The City of Huntington Park
        shall provide an active and passive park system and recreational facilities,
        based on the distribution of population within the City so as to serve the
        needs of residents of all ages, economic levels, and physical conditions.
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 18. The City of Huntington Park shall
        upgrade existing park facilities to improve park use and appearance and shall
        utilize opportunities for joint use of public facilities for recreational purposes,
        such as schools, utility easements, and abandoned railroad right-of-ways.
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 19. The City of Huntington Park
        shall encourage the development of common and private open space and
        recreational facilities within multi-family developments to increase
        recreational opportunities.
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 20. The City of Huntington Park
        shall coordinate local open space development with regional open space
        opportunities to satisfy a wide range of recreational demands.
HEALTH & SAFETY ELEMENT POLICIES
ISSUE: SEISMIC HAZARDS
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 1. The City of Huntington Park shall
        continue to implement the City’s seismic hazard abatement program for
        existing un-reinforced buildings.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 2. In areas with liquefaction potential, the
        City of Huntington Park shall require review of soils and geologic conditions,
        and if necessary, on-site borings, to determine liquefaction susceptibility of
        the proposed site.
1-26 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 3. The City of Huntington Park shall
       maintain and periodically review emergency procedures for earthquakes in the
       City’s Disaster Response Plan.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 4. The City of Huntington Park shall
       promote earthquake preparedness within the community by participation
       in quake awareness programs, including distribution of brochure materials
       in Spanish and English. The City will encourage property owners to anchor
       buildings to their foundations, bolt water heaters to walls, and implement
       other preventive measures.
ISSUE: FLOODING
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 5. The City of Huntington Park shall work
       with the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works to identify and
       construct needed local and regional storm drain improvements to relieve local
       flooding problems in Huntington Park.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 6. The City of Huntington Park shall support
       the Army Corps of Engineers to expand the capacity of the Rio Hondo and
       Los Angeles River channels.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 7. The City of Huntington Park shall prepare
       and maintain a master drainage plan.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 8. The City of Huntington Park shall require
       local drainage-related improvements to be implemented as part of new
       development approvals.
ISSUE: FIRE
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 9. The City of Huntington Park shall enforce
       building code requirements for new construction that ensure provision of
       adequate fire protection.
                                                       SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION    1-27

     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 10. The City of Huntington Park shall
        maintain mutual aid agreements with surrounding jurisdictions for
        fire protection.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 11. The City of Huntington Park shall
        maintain an ongoing fire inspection program to reduce fire hazards associated
        with older buildings, critical facilities, public assembly facilities, and industrial
        and commercial buildings.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 12. The City of Huntington Park shall
        maintain and periodically review procedures for managing fire emergencies in
        the City’s Disaster Response Plan.
ISSUE: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 13. The City of Huntington Park shall locate
        new and existing land uses involved in production, storage, transportation,
        handling, and/or disposal of hazardous materials a safe distance from other
        land uses that may be sensitive to such activities.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 14. The City of Huntington Park shall
        coordinate with Los Angeles County in sponsoring regular household
        hazardous waste disposal programs to enable residents to bring backyard
        pesticides, cleaning fluids, paint cans, and other common household toxics to
        a centralized collection center for proper disposal.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 15. The City of Huntington Park shall
        cooperate with the County in local implementation of applicable portions of
        the Los Angeles Hazardous Waste Management Plan.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 16. The City of Huntington Park shall
        consult with companies operating underground pipelines, as well as the Public
        Utilities Commission and Office of Pipeline Safety, to determine the likelihood
        of explosion or rupture in case of accident or earthquake and shall ensure
        that the Fire Department and other disaster response agencies have access to
        route, depth, and shut-off information about each line.
1-28 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

ISSUE: EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 17. The City of Huntington Park shall
       maintain and regularly update the City’s Disaster Response Plan.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 18. The City of Huntington Park shall hold
       emergency drills to test the effectiveness of emergency pre­paredness plans.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 19. The City of Huntington Park shall
       periodically inspect emergency shelters to ensure that equipment and
       supplies are available and operational.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 20. The City of Huntington Park shall
       sponsor and support bilingual public education programs on emergency
       preparedness and disaster response. The City will distribute information about
       emergency planning to community groups, schools, churches, and
       business associations.
ISSUE: TRANSPORTATION NOISE
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 21. The City of Huntington Park shall ensure
       the inclusion of noise mitigation measures in the design of new roadway
       projects in Huntington Park.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 22. The City of Huntington Park shall
       enforce City, State, and Federal noise standards, especially those for mufflers
       and modified exhaust systems.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 23. The City of Huntington Park shall
       monitor noise from buses and other heavy vehicles in residential areas. If
       necessary, the City will consider alternate circulation routes for those
       types of vehicles.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 24. The City of Huntington Park shall
       discourage through-traffic in residential neighborhoods.
                                                         SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION    1-29

ISSUE: NOISE & LAND USE
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 25. The City of Huntington Park shall ensure
        acceptable noise levels near schools, hospitals, convalescent homes, and
        other noise-sensitive areas.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 26. The City of Huntington Park shall
        establish standards for all types of noise not already governed by local
        ordinances or preempted by State or Federal law.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 27. The City of Huntington Park shall
        require noise-reduction techniques in site planning, architectural design, and
        construction where noise reduction is necessary.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 28. The City of Huntington Park shall
        discourage and, if necessary, prohibit the location of noise-sensitive land uses
        in noisy environments.
ISSUE: NON-TRANSPORTATION CONTROL MEASURES
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 29. The City of Huntington Park shall review
        the City’s existing noise ordinances and revise them as necessary to better
        regulate noise-generating uses. The City will ensure strict enforcement.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 30. The City of Huntington Park shall
        consider adoption of a comprehensive City Noise Ordinance to regulate
        hours of operation and control excessive noise from lawn blowers, trimmers,
        construction activity, street sweepers, machinery, and other disturbances.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 31. The City of Huntington Park shall
        reduce noise generated by building activities by requiring sound attenuation
        devices on construction equipment.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 32. The City of Huntington Park shall
        establish and maintain coordination among the agencies involved in noise
        abatement.
1-30 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

HOUSING ELEMENT POLICIES
ISSUE AREA: HOUSING CONSERVATION
    •	 Housing Element Policy 1. The City of Huntington Park shall promote the
       maintenance of the existing housing units and shall require property
       owners to maintain their housing so the units are safe, healthful, and
       aesthetically pleasing.
    •	 Housing Element Policy 2. The City of Huntington Park shall minimize
       housing displacement and require expeditious and equitable relocation in the
       event units are demolished.
    •	 Housing Element Policy 3. The City of Huntington Park shall vigorously
       oppose any public agency initiative that would result in the removal of existing
       housing units without the provision of replacement housing.
    •	 Housing Element Policy 4. The City of Huntington Park, where possible,
       shall work with property owners to bring any illegal additions or building
       construction up to the current Building Code and other health and safety
       code requirements.
ISSUE AREA: DEVELOPMENT OF NEW HOUSING
    •	 Housing Element Policy 5. The City of Huntington Park shall encourage an
       adequate supply of dwelling units to meet the needs of all income groups
       through its General Plan.
    •	 Housing Element Policy 6. The City of Huntington Park shall promote the
       development of new owner-occupied housing units to meet the housing
       demand for moderate and upper income households.
    •	 Housing Element Policy 7. The City of Huntington Park shall continue to
       cooperate with other public agencies and NGOs as a means to maintain and
       preserve the existing emergency and transitional housing in certain areas of
       the City.
                                                       SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION     1-31

     •	 Housing Element Policy 8. The City of Huntington Park shall ensure that new
        higher-density residential projects are kept at a scale (number of units, height,
        etc.) compatible in design with adjacent residential areas.
ISSUE AREA: IDENTIFICATION OF ADEQUATE SITES
     •	 Housing Element Policy 9. The City of Huntington Park shall assist
        developers in the identification of land suitable for housing developments for
        medium- and lower-income families and individuals.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 10. The City of Huntington Park shall explore
        opportunities for new residential development within those areas of the City
        occupied by vacant and obsolete commercial and industrial uses.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 11. The City of Huntington Park shall work to ensure
        that potential sites for residential development, located in those areas that
        were previously occupied by non-residential land uses, are investigated to
        determine whether or not previous on-site uses present potential health risks.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 12. The City of Huntington Park shall implement
        new land use designations, such as Mixed Use, for key areas of the City that
        could accommodate such development.
ISSUE AREA: REMOVAL OF GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
     •	 Housing Element Policy 13. The City of Huntington Park shall continue to
        review and streamline administrative procedures for processing development
        permits and establish finite time limits for such approvals so as to minimize the
        time, costs, and uncertainty associated with development.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 14. The City of Huntington Park shall periodically
        review and update development codes and standards to minimize their
        impact on new development.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 15. The City of Huntington Park shall explore
        innovative strategies that will facilitate the planning and design review process
1-32 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

       while providing clear and consistent direction to housing developers and
       property owners.
    •	 Housing Element Policy 16. The City of Huntington Park shall continue to
       cooperate with other public agencies and the adjacent cities in identifying
       strategies to promote and facilitate new housing construction.
ISSUE AREA: EQUAL HOUSING
    •	 Housing Element Policy 17. The City of Huntington Park shall ensure that
       all persons with special housing needs, such as the elderly and handicapped,
       have an adequate choice of suitable dwelling units.
    •	 Housing Element Policy 18. The City of Huntington Park shall ensure
       adequate housing and high quality community services for all persons
       regardless of income, age, race, sex, marital status, or ethnic background.
    •	 Housing Element Policy 19. The City of Huntington Park shall vigorously
       oppose those prejudices, practices, and market behaviors that result in
       housing discrimination.
    •	 Housing Element Policy 20. The City of Huntington Park shall cooperate
       with other public agencies involved in the enforcement of laws aimed at
       promoting access to housing (fair housing laws) and non-discrimination.
                                                        SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION    1-33

1.5 AMENDING & ONGOING REVIEW
OF THE GENERAL PLAN
California Government Code Section 65400 requires the City to annually review the
General Plan and the corresponding Implementation Plan. An annual report should
be prepared for review and approval by the Planning Commission/City Council and
forwarded to the State Office of Planning and Research and the State Housing and
Community Development office on or before October 1 of each year. The annual
review report is intended to provide information on how the General Plan is being
implemented. As a “living document,” the General Plan is reviewed and periodically
amended to reflect changes in the housing market, the economy, etc. Should
individual elements require amendment, these amendments can be adopted up to
four times per year after noticed public hearings.
1-34   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

THIS PAGE HAS BEEN INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.
                             SECTION 1: INTRODUCTION 1-35
              LAND USE
                     &
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
               ELEMENT
2.1 INTRODUCTION
SCOPE OF THE LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT
The Land Use and Community Development Element serves as a long-range guide for
development and planning in the City of Huntington Park and indicates the location
and extent of existing and future development throughout the City. The Element
identifies those areas where existing and future land uses will be permitted. According
to the State planning law, this Element must:
       •	 Designate the distribution, location, and extent of land uses for housing,
           business, industry, open space, recreation, and public facilities;
       •	 Establish standards of population density and building intensity for each land
           use category covered by the General Plan; and,
       •	 Identify land uses in those areas subject to development constraints, such
           as flooding.
The primary objective of the Land Use and Community Development Element is to
assist in the management of future growth, to improve the City’s physical appearance,
and to minimize land use conflicts. Additionally, the State General Plan Guidelines
indicate this Element must focus on the following issues:
2-2  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

       •	 Promote a balanced and functional mix of land uses consistent with the
          community’s values;
       •	 Reflect those opportunities and constraints identified in other elements of the
          General Plan that may affect land use and development; and,
       •	 Assist in reducing the potential for loss of life, injury, property damage, and
          economic and social dislocation resulting from natural hazards.
This Element also emphasizes sustainable development by coordinating growth
and new development in a comprehensive manner so as to avoid incremental and
uncoordinated decision making that lacks vision. Growth is targeted in those areas
of the City where growth may be accommodated while maintaining the residential
neighborhoods, and ensuring quality development.
RELATIONSHIP TO THE GENERAL PLAN
The Land Use and Community Development Element will serve as a blueprint for
land use and development within the City of Huntington Park and sets forth policies
and programs concerning physical development within the community. The Element
addresses a wide range of issues regarding existing and future development, land use
compatibility, the availability of public services and infrastructure, public safety, and
the conservation of resources of concern to the community. The scope and content of
this Land Use and Community Development Element is governed by State law (Section
65302(a) of the Government Code). According to State law, the policies included in
this Element must reflect the policies contained within the other General
Plan Elements.
       •	 The Housing Element contains policies for residential development that are
          considered in the Land Use and Community Development Element.
       •	 The Mobility and Circulation Element provides for the development of
          a transportation framework that will support the ultimate land uses and
          development anticipated under the Land Use Plan.
       •	 The Health and Safety Element identifies hazards that need to be considered
          in future land use planning. This Element is also used as a guide to establish
          noise mitigation.
                                   SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT            2-3

2.2 BACKGROUND FOR PLANNING
OVERVIEW OF LAND USE & DEVELOPMENT
Huntington Park was largely developed by the 1930’s. As a result, the City is an
urbanized community that was essentially fully developed prior to the Second World
War. Land use and development characteristics are summarized in below.
                                       •	 The City contains a variety of uses with
                                           residential development being the
                                           most extensive type of use. Single-
                                           family, medium density, and high density
                                           residential are the most dominant type of
                                           use in the central portion of the City, which
                                           is bounded by Randolph Street to the
                                           north, the west of side of Stafford Avenue
                                           to the west, Florence Avenue to the South,
                                           and Bissell Street to the east. Single-family
                                           residential development is also found in
                                           the southern portion of the City.
2-4 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

                                       •	 The northeastern portion of the City
                                          is generally occupied by high density
                                          residential development. High density
                                          residential is generally concentrated west
                                          of Rugby Avenue, east of Regent Street,
                                          south of Randolph Street, and north of
                                          Florence Avenue. In addition, medium
                                          density residential is located north of
                                          Randolph Street.
     •	 Commercial uses are
        concentrated along major
        arterial routes including Pacific
        Boulevard, Slauson Avenue,
        Florence Avenue, and Gage
        Avenue. Neighborhood
        commercial uses are also
        located within the southeastern
        section of the City.
                                                •	 Industrial uses generally occupy
                                                    the western portion of the City,
                                                    with a small pocket located along
                                                    both sides of the Union Pacific
                                                    Railroad right-of-way (ROW) in the
                                                    northeastern section of the City.
Table 2-1 summarizes the distribution of land uses and development in the City.
                                 SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT           2-5

      Table 2-1: Distribution of Existing Land Uses in the City
2-6 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
OVERVIEW OF EXISTING RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Residential development is the predominant land use in the City. Various sections
of the City are occupied by different residential land uses, which are separated by
density. The southeast portion of the City is dominated by single-family residential.
Single-family uses extend as far north as Gage Avenue and as far south as the City’s
southern border with South Gate and unincorporated Walnut Park. In addition, single-
family residential uses extend as far west as the west side of Passaic Street to Salt
Lake Avenue to the east. Medium density residential uses are separated by Randolph
Street and extend just north of Gage Avenue. The aforementioned section of medium
density residential is bounded by Templeton Street to the west and by the east side
of Bissell Street to the east. Three pockets of medium density residential are located
between Slauson Avenue to the north and Randolph Street to the south. One last
pocket of medium density residential is located north of Slauson Avenue along the
north side of 58th Street and extends to the City’s northern border with Vernon. High
density residential is concentrated within the northeastern portion of the City and to
the east and west of the downtown area. The concentration of high density residential
located to the east of downtown is generally bounded by Randolph Street to the
north, Seville Avenue to the west, Florence Avenue to the south, and the eastern
side of Mountain View Avenue to the east. The second concentration of high density
residential located to the west of downtown is generally bounded by Randolph Street
to the north, Florence Avenue to the south, Rugby Avenue to the east, and Regent
Street to the west. One small pocket of high density residential is located north of
Florence Avenue, west of Salt Lake Avenue, and south of Saturn Avenue.
OVERVIEW OF EXISTING COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT
Commercial uses are concentrated along major arterial routes including Pacific
Boulevard, Slauson Avenue, Florence Avenue, Santa Fe Avenue, and Gage Avenue.
Strips of neighborhood commercial uses are located within the southeastern section
of the City along both sides of State Street and California Avenue. Pacific Boulevard
serves as the City’s main commercial thoroughfare. Much of the City’s commercial uses
are concentrated along Pacific Boulevard, Florence Avenue, and Gage Avenue. The
City’s Downtown is located along Pacific Boulevard. The Downtown area is bounded
on the north by Randolph Street, on the south by Florence Avenue, on the east by
                                  SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT          2-7

Miles Avenue, and on the west by Rugby Avenue. Strip commercial centers are
generally located along Florence Avenue.
INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT
The City’s industrial area is located within the northern and western portion of the
City. Industrial land uses extend from the City’s northern border with Vernon along
Slauson Avenue and 52nd Street, and westerly to the City’s border with unincorporated
Los Angeles County along Wilmington Avenue. The industrial sector is generally
bounded by Santa Fe Avenue, Pacific Boulevard, and the City of Vernon to the east
and Randolph Street to the south.
INFRASTRUCTURE - WATER
The City of Huntington Park is served by four water companies which obtain their
supply of water from two sources: groundwater from local wells and water supplied by
the Metropolitan Water District. The four water companies are listed below.
       •	 Maywood Mutual Water Company. The Maywood Mutual Water Company
          serves the northeastern portion of the City. The service boundaries
          extend east to west from Maywood Avenue to the City’s border with
          Maywood, and north to south from Slauson Avenue to Randolph Avenue.
          Approximately 70% of the Maywood Mutual Water Company’s costumers
          reside in Huntington Park.
       •	 Walnut Park Mutual Water Company. The Walnut Park Mutual Water
          Company serves the odd-numbered side of Walnut Street (addresses 2901-
          3501 Walnut Street).
       •	 Golden State Water Company. The City of Huntington Park is located within
          the Central Basin West service area of the Golden State Water Company.
          Golden State Water Company serves the western portion of the City. The
          service boundaries extend from Slauson Avenue to the north to Florence
          Avenue to the south, and from the City’s western border with Florence-
          Graham to the west to Alameda Street to the east.
2-8  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

        •	 Severn Trent Services. Severn Trent is the City’s main provider of water and
           operates multiple wells in the City, including Well Numbers 12, 14, and 17.
INFRASTRUCTURE - SEWERS
The City of Huntington Park Public Works Department maintains the City’s sewer
system. Sewage generated by the City is conveyed to regional sewage treatment
facilities maintained and operated by the Los Angeles County Sanitation District
(LACSD). Wastewater collected by the LACSD is conveyed to the Joint Water Pollution
Control Plant located at 24501 Figueroa Street in Carson. This treatment plant
provides primary and secondary treatment for approximately 280 million gallons per
day (mgd) and has a total permitted capacity of 400 mgd. Thus, a remaining capacity
of 120 mgd is available for future development in the region.
INFRASTRUCTURE - STORM DRAINAGE
There is minimal flood risk in the City of Huntington Park (Zone X), as indicated in the
Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Flood Insurance Rate Program. The Los
Angeles River Channel is a 500-foot wide concrete channel that is designed to handle
the storm water runoff from the Los Angeles area. The river is located north and east
of the City approximately 1.90 miles to the east. The maintenance of the river is the
responsibility of the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works, Flood Control
District. Flooding and inundation hazards are described in the Safety Element. The
majority of the storm drains in the City are owned and maintained by the Los Angeles
County Flood Control District. The storm drains extend along major arterials and
connect directly to the Los Angeles River to the east.
UTILITIES & COMMUNICATIONS
Natural gas service to the City is provided by the Southern California Gas Company
(a subsidiary of SEMPRA Energy) and electricity is provided by the Southern California
Edison (SCE) Company. Southern California Gas Company serves more than 21 million
residents throughout Central and Southern California. The SCE maintains overhead
and underground lines in the City to serve the energy demands of local residents
and businesses.
                                  SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT           2-9

LIBRARY FACILITIES
The Huntington Park Library is located
at 6518 Miles Avenue and is part of the
County of Los Angeles Public Library
system. The library was first established
in 1913 and has relocated three times in
the years 1924, 1931, and finally in 1970
to its current location in the Civic Center.
The library is approximately 33,482
square feet and has a meeting room
with a maximum capacity of 84 persons.
Amenities include a children’s area, a teen
space, a 24-hour book drop, a household
battery recycling site, an American Indian
resource center, in-person and telephone
research assistance, a photocopier, live
homework help, a homework center,
a family place, story time kits, and a
Learning Express Library for teens.
                                             SCHOOL FACILITIES
                                             The City of Huntington Park is served by
                                             the Los Angeles Unified School District,
                                             which operates a total of 24 schools
                                             in the City. Approximately nine of the
                                             public schools in the City are charter
                                             schools. The City has a total of ten
                                             elementary schools, five middle schools,
                                             seven high schools, and two preschool/
                                             early education centers. Huntington
                                             Park is also within the service boundaries
                                             of East Los Angeles Community College
                                             (ELAC). Table 2-2 indicates the address
                                             of those schools that currently serve
                                             Huntington Park residents.
2-10   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Table 2-2: Schools that Serve the City Residents
                     SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 2-11
POLICE & FIRE FACILITIES
Police protection for the City is provided by the Huntington Park Police Department
(HPPD) that consists of 72 sworn personnel and 45 civilian employees for a total of 117
full-time employees. The department also has 25 part-time employees. The City of
Huntington Park has had police protection since it’s incorporation in 1906. The HPPD
was relocated twice, once in 1933 following the Long Beach earthquake, and a second
time in 1950 upon the completion of the Civic Center. In addition, the City operates
a 22 bed Type I Jail which houses unsentenced prisoners prior to their transfer to the
County facilities.
The City of Huntington Park contracts its fire serves through the Los Angeles County
Fire Department. The Los Angeles County Fire Department operates two fire stations
in the City: Fire Station 164, located at 6301 South Santa Fe Avenue, serves as the
area’s battalion headquarters (Huntington Park is serviced by Los Angeles County Fire
Department-Battalion 13); and Fire Station 165, located at 3255 Saturn Avenue.
2-12   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

2.3 PLANNING VISION
The City of Huntington Park, with the implementation of the Land Use and Community
Development Element, seeks to promote an orderly pattern of quality future
development to achieve a complete and controlled balance of growth among land
uses. The following objectives will be realized through the implementation of the
policies and programs contained in the Land Use and Community
Development Element:
      •	 To promote orderly development within the City while, at the same time,
         ensuring that sustainability is the cornerstone of this future development;
      •	 To provide for a variety of housing opportunities for all residents of the City of
         Huntington Park;
      •	 To maintain and conserve the existing residential neighborhoods in the
         community while providing for a variety of housing opportunities for
          all residents;
      •	 To increase employment opportunities in the City;
                                SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT             2-13

      •	 To promote the development of a wide range of commercial uses to meet the
         needs of the local and regional marketplace;
      •	 To ensure a strong industrial and commercial tax base to finance public
         improvements and services; and,
      •	 To promote quality design and sustainable development along the City’s
         major commercial corridors.
The City’s adopted land use and sustainability policies are outlined in the section that
follows. The policies are arranged under each of the issue areas discussed above. The
following policies will establish the policy framework for the Land Use and Community
Development Element.
LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT ELEMENT POLICIES
ISSUE: LAND USE DIVERSITY
      •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 1. The City of
         Huntington Park shall maintain and preserve those industrial and commercial
         areas of the City while preventing land use conflicts through comprehensive
         land use planning and environmental review.
      •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 2. The City of
         Huntington Park shall promote mixed-use development (residential, retail, and
         commercial uses) in key activity areas of the City as indicated on the Land Use
         Policy Map.
      •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 3. The City of
         Huntington Park shall continue to support the development of senior housing
         in locations with convenient access to commercial uses, services, and
         public transportation.
      •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 4. The City of
         Huntington Park shall encourage single room occupancy (SROs) uses in the
         Central Business District and SRO/Commercial Mixed Use Overlay as a means
         to provide affordable housing.
2-14  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

ISSUE: NEW DEVELOPMENT & LAND USE COMPATIBILITY
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 5. The City of
       Huntington Park shall require that multi-family development provide adequate
       buffers (such as decorative walls and landscaped setbacks) to prevent impacts
       on surrounding neighborhoods due to noise, traffic, parking, light and glare,
       and differences in scale as a means to ensure privacy and to provide
       visual compatibility.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 6. The City of
       Huntington Park shall require that new developments are properly designed
       so as to minimize potential land use conflicts and environmental impacts.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 7. The City of
       Huntington Park shall ensure that new industrial development does not lead
       to any environmental impacts related to contamination, excessive noise, air
       pollution, and truck traffic.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 8. The City of
       Huntington Park shall develop and implement an amortization program to
       require legal non-conforming uses to meet current building code and
       zoning requirements.
ISSUE: EXPANSION & DIVERSIFICATION OF ECONOMIC BASE
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 9. The City
       of Huntington Park shall encourage the growth and expansion of local
       businesses through a streamlined permit approval processes.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 10. The City of
       Huntington Park shall actively promote the City as a place for businesses
       to locate through marketing, advertising, and cooperation with the local
       Chamber of Commerce.
                               SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT        2-15

     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 11. The City of
        Huntington Park shall target certain businesses and industries that will benefit
        the local market.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 12. The City of
        Huntington Park shall maintain, market, and further develop the Pacific
        Boulevard corridor as a regional retail destination.
ISSUE: URBAN DESIGN
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 13. The City
        of Huntington Park shall require that new and rehabilitated residential,
        commercial, and light industrial development located adjacent to pedestrian
        and recreational amenities provide linkages to those amenities including
        ground-level access; pedestrian-oriented ground-floor uses; and locating on-
        site parking away from pedestrian-oriented areas.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 14. The City of
        Huntington Park shall oversee the preparation of urban design guidelines that,
        together with the City’s Zoning Ordinance, will serve as a design guide for new
        development and rehabilitation.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 15. The City of
        Huntington Park shall establish a consistent design vocabulary for all public
        signage, including fixture type, lettering, colors, symbols, and logos.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 16. The City of
        Huntington Park shall locate distinctive public signage and landscaping for
        key entry points into the City and will require that signage on commercial
        structures be compatible and integrated with the surrounding area.
ISSUE: REVITALIZATION AND NEW DEVELOPMENT
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 17. The City of
        Huntington Park shall use various land use and development incentives to
        facilitate the revitalization of underutilized or blighted properties.
2-16 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 18. The City of
       Huntington Park shall continue to require property maintenance through
       continued Code Enforcement efforts.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 19. The City of
       Huntington Park shall continue to pursue funding sources to assist in the
       implementation of residential and commercial rehabilitation programs.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 20. The City of
       Huntington Park shall continue to encourage the restoration and rehabilitation
       of properties eligible for inclusion on the National Register of Historic Places
       and will support tax credit incentives of the National Trust for
       Historic Preservation.
ISSUE: DEVELOPMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICES
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 21. The City of
       Huntington Park shall require that new development(s) pay their “Fair Share”
       for the provision of the necessary infrastructure and other support services
       that will be required to serve the development.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 22. The City of
       Huntington Park shall work with the Huntington Park Police Department and
       the Los Angeles County Fire Department to ensure that sufficient resources
       continue to be available to meet the existing and projected service demands.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 23. The City of
       Huntington Park shall require all new development, including commercial,
       industrial, and residential development to install fire protection systems,
       including automatic sprinkler systems.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 24. The City of
       Huntington Park shall enhance public crime prevention awareness through
       the development of new or expanded educational programs (in both Spanish
       and English) that address personal safety awareness, neighborhood watch
       programs, and taking into account public safety in the design of
       new developments.
                               SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT           2-17

ISSUE: DEVELOPMENT AND PUBLIC SERVICES
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 21. The City of
        Huntington Park shall require that new development(s) pay their “Fair Share”
        for the provision of the necessary infrastructure and other support services
        that will be required to serve the development.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 22. The City of
        Huntington Park shall work with the Huntington Park Police Department and
        the Los Angeles County Fire Department to ensure that sufficient resources
        continue to be available to meet the existing and projected service demands.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 23. The City of
        Huntington Park shall require all new development, including commercial,
        industrial, and residential development to install fire protection systems,
        including automatic sprinkler systems.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 24. The City of
        Huntington Park shall enhance public crime prevention awareness through
        the development of new or expanded educational programs (in both Spanish
        and English) that address personal safety awareness, neighborhood watch
        programs, and taking into account public safety in the design of
        new developments.
ISSUE: INTERAGENCY COORDINATION AND COOPERATION
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 25. The City of
        Huntington Park shall cooperate with surrounding jurisdictions in the review
        and implementation of larger development projects in the region.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 26. The City of
        Huntington Park shall work with public agencies in the region so as to avoid
        the duplication of services.
     •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 27. The City of
        Huntington Park shall coordinate with the Los Angeles Unified School District
        as it expands and upgrades existing educational facilities.
2-18 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 28. The City of
       Huntington Park shall work with the library system to identify the
       service needs.
ISSUE: INFRASTRUCTURE
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 29. The City of
       Huntington Park shall work closely with local water purveyors in determining
       future area needs to identify and implement water conservation programs.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 30. The City of
       Huntington Park shall ensure that adequate water and sewer service is
       available as new development occurs.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 31. The City
       of Huntington Park shall continue to require the use of drought-resistant
       landscaping to reduce water use.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 32. The City of
       Huntington Park shall strive to correct identified storm drain deficiencies and
       develop a long-range program for replacing aging drainage
       system components.
ISSUE: SOLID WASTE COLLECTION, DISPOSAL, & RECYCLING
    •	 Land Use & Community Development
       Element Policy 33. The City of Huntington
       Park shall work closely with the County of Los
       Angeles and other responsible agencies so as
       to reduce solid waste generated in the City.
    •	 Land Use & Community Development
       Element Policy 34. The City of Huntington
       Park shall explore the creation of City-
       managed recycling drop-off stations in
       the City.
                              SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT            2-19

      •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 35. The City of
         Huntington Park shall encourage waste reduction, recycling, and use of
         recycled materials within City government.
      •	 Land Use & Community Development Element Policy 36. The City of
         Huntington Park shall encourage composting as an alternative to disposal for
         solid wastes.
LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS
The following programs will implement the policies outlined in the previous section.
      •	 Building Code Review Program. The City of Huntington Park will
         periodically review, and if necessary, update the Uniform Building Code (UBC)
         to reflect current technology and regulations. This review will be undertaken
         by designated individuals to identify appropriate changes to the UBC that
         should be considered. Amendments to the City’s building code will then be
         made, as appropriate. This program’s implementation strategy is
         summarized below:
            •	  Source of Funding: General Fund or other available resources.
            •	  2016-2021 Program Objectives: To undertake an annual review.
            •	  Agency Responsible for Implementation: Community
            	   Development Department.
            •	  Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
            	   be continued.
      •	 Capital Improvement Planning. The City’s Capital Improvement Program
         (CIP) is a five-year plan that indicates the timing of major capital expenditures.
         Individual projects are reviewed and ranked on an annual basis and may
         include streetscape upgrades, installation of traffic signals, slurry seal for
         streets, sidewalk repair, and sewer line upgrades. The City will continue to
         update, review, and implement its CIP to consider transportation-related
         improvements. This program’s implementation strategy is summarized below:
2-20 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

      •	 Source of Funding: General Fund or other available resources.
      •	 2016-2021 Objectives: To review and update the CIP
      •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation: Community
          Development Department.
      •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
          be continued.
•	 Code Enforcement. Code enforcement is an integral part of the City’s
   efforts to improve the appearance of substandard structures, properties,
   and signage. Community code enforcement efforts (funding and staffing)
   will continue to be the primary means to ensure that properties are well
   maintained. The objective of the City’s Code Enforcement Program, in
   regard to housing, is to bring substandard units into compliance with City
   codes. Potential code violations are identified based on exterior windshield
   surveys and complaints reported to the City. The City’s Code Enforcement
   Officers work closely with the Community Development staff and property
   owners to identify units in need of housing assistance. In order to address the
   continuing problem of illegal units, the Code Enforcement Officer surveys the
   City to identify such units, notifies property owners that they are in violation
   of City law, and enforces the steps necessary to bring their properties into
   compliance with City codes. These efforts result in improved maintenance of
   housing units throughout the City. Property owners are also informed of any
   rehabilitation loans or grants that are available as a means to correct code
   violations. This program’s implementation strategy is summarized below:
      •	 Source of Funding: General Fund or other available resources.
      •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level
      •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation: Community
          Development Department.
      •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
          be continued.
                           SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT             2-21

     •	 Design Guidelines and Review. The City shall continue to implement its
        current design review procedures. The purpose of the design review process
        is to ensure that building design, architecture, and site layouts are compatible
        with surrounding development. The design review process is an important
        component of development review. This process may be used to consider
        a potential development’s impact on the architectural integrity of historically
        significant structures and sites. This program’s implementation strategy is
        summarized below:
            •	 Source of Funding: General Fund or other available resources.
            •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To complete design guidelines for
               the areas plans by 2020.
            •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation: Community
               Development Department.
            •	 Implementation Schedule: he program will commence at the adoption
               of the General Plan.
     •	 Environmental Review. The City shall continue to evaluate the environmental
        impacts of new development and provide mitigation measures prior to
        development approval, as required by the California Environmental Quality
        Act (CEQA). Environmental review shall be provided for major projects, as
        well as those that will have the potential to adversely impact the environment.
        Land use and development are among the issue areas that will be addressed
        in the venvironmental analysis. In compliance with CEQA, the City shall also
        assign responsibilities for the verification of the implementation of mitigation
        measures that may be recommended as part of the environmental review
        process. This program’s implementation strategy is summarized below:
            •	 Source of Funding: General Fund or other available resources.
            •	 2016-2021 Objectives: To maintain the existing service level
            •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation: Community
               Development Department.
            •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
               be continued.
2-22 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

•	 Nonconforming Ordinance. The City shall review, and if required, revise its
   Nonconforming Ordinance on an ongoing basis to ensure that it meets the
   current objectives of the community. The initial step will require City staff to
   review the existing Nonconforming Ordinance. Staff shall prepare a report
   that will be submitted to the City council and planning commission describing
   provisions of the ordinance and any problems that have been experienced
   related to its implementation. This program’s implementation strategy is
   summarized below:
      •	 Source of Funding: General Fund or other available resources.
      •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level
      •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation: Community
         Development Department.
      •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
         be continued.
•	 Zoning Conformity Program. The City will continue to review the zoning
   ordinance and map to ensure that the development standards are consistent
   with those identified in the Land Use and Community Development Element.
   The City will also initiate appropriate changes to the zoning map to ensure
   conformity between the Land Use and Community Development Element and
   zoning map. This program’s implementation strategy is summarized below:
      •	 Source of Funding: General Fund and Community Development Block
         Grant (CDBG).
      •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level
      •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation: Community
         Development Department.
      •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
          be continued.
                            SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT           2-23

2.4 PLANNING IMPLEMENTATION
The land use map (Exhibit 2-1) indicates the location and extent of permitted
development in the City. With the City of Huntington Park completely urbanized, the
land use map’s focus is on the conservation, maintenance, the rehabilitation of existing
development, and the identification of opportunities for redevelopment in the City.
California planning law calls for conformity between the land use map and the zoning
map. This consistency provision is important, since the zoning ordinance serves as the
primary implementation tool of the Land Use and Community Development Element.
State law indicates that local governments have a “reasonable amount of time”
to amend their zoning ordinance to ensure consistency. The majority of the earlier
inconsistencies between the City’s General Plan and zoning map were resolved as part
of the previous General Plan update. The Land Use and Community Development
Element, through this update, focuses on those areas where there is an opportunity
for a change in land use and development. The focus of the City’s future planning
efforts relative to land use and development will be directed toward accomplishing the
following objectives:
       •	 To retain the existing desirable land uses while providing for a more
          compatible land use pattern in the City;
       •	 To ensure that the land use map accurately reflects the development and land
          use objectives of the community;
2-24   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

       •	 To make sure the boundaries for the various land use designations correspond
           to the boundaries of the various zone districts to ensure consistency; and,
       •	 To correct any potential inconsistencies between the land use plan and the
           zoning map.
LAND USE DESIGNATIONS
The Land Use and Community Development Element indicates the location and
extent of development and land uses throughout the City. The land use categories, or
“designations,” indicate the type of development that is permitted for specific areas
of the City. State law requires that these land use designations include a description
of standards for development intensity and population density. The reason for these
standards is to ensure that the types of development permitted under the various land
use designations are understood by the public, decision-makers, property owners, and
prospective developers. According to the California General Plan Guidelines, the land
use map is a spatial representation of the City’s land use policy. The map meets the
State’s requirement (Section 65302(a)) that calls for…
       “...the designation of the proposed general distribution and general
       location and extent of the uses of the land for housing, business, industry,
       open space, including agriculture, natural resources, recreation, and
       enjoyment of scenic beauty, education, public buildings and grounds, solid
       waste and liquid waste disposal facilities, and other categories of public
       and private land use.”
BASE GENERAL PLAN AND ZONING DISTRICTS
The Huntington Park Zoning Code and Zoning Map are the primary implementation
ordinances of the Land Use and Community Development Element. The zoning
map and ordinance indicate the specific land uses allowed in the City and establish
regulations and standards for use and development. The City’s Zoning Code consists
of eight base zone districts that include the following: R-L, R-M, R-H, C-P, C-N, C-G,
MPD, and OS. The major base zone districts that regulate land uses and development
are listed below:
                                 SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT           2-25

     •	 Residential Development. Three zones, R-L, R-M, and R-H, are applicable
        to residential development. The R-L (Residential, Low) zone generally applies
        to single-family detached residential development. The R-M (Residential,
        Medium) zone generally applies to higher density single-family residential
        development, duplexes, and lower density multiple-family developments.
        Finally, the R-H (Residential, High) zone applies to higher density multiple-
        family developments.
     •	 Commercial Development. Three zones, C-P, C-N, and C-G, are applicable
        to commercial development. The C-P (Commercial, Professional) zone
        generally applies to office, medical, and professional services. The C-N
        (Commercial, Neighborhood) zone generally applies to small
        neighborhood-serving commercial and retailing uses. Finally, the C-G zone
        applies to larger commercial centers and districts.
     •	 Industrial Development. A single zone, MPD, Industrial Planned
        Development is applicable to industrial development.
     Table 2-3: City of Huntington Park Land Use Designations
2-26 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Exhibit 2-1: A Generalized Land Use Map of the City
Exhibit 2-1 is land use map indicating the location and extent of permitted
development and land uses in the City.
                               SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT  2-27
OVERLAY ZONE DISTRICTS
In addition to the aforementioned base zone districts, the City of Huntington Park
Zoning Code includes a number of overlay zones. Overlay zoning is a regulatory tool
that creates a special zoning district, placed over an existing base zone that identifies
special provisions in addition to those in the underlying base zone. An overlay zone
can share common boundaries with the base zone or cut across base zone boundaries.
Special regulations or incentives are included in the overlay zone to facilitate certain
regulations in the geographic area that is subject to the overlay zone. The overlay
zones included in the City of Huntington Park Zoning Code are outlined below:
      •	 Medium Density Overlay Zone. The purpose of this overlay zoning district
         is to provide for multi-family residential units up to 17.42 units per acre within
         the underlying commercial zoning district. The Medium Density Overlay
         zoning district identifies parcels that are suitable for the development
         of medium density housing, either as the primary use on the parcel or in
         conjunction with other uses.
      •	 Parking Overlay Zone. The purpose of this overlay zoning district is to
         provide for the identification of areas where private owners and/or the City are
         encouraged to acquire property for off-street parking facilities. The Parking
         Overlay Zone designates parcels which are suitable for off-street
         parking facilities.
      •	 Senior Citizen Housing Overlay Zone. The purpose of this overlay zoning
         district is to provide for senior citizen housing at up to 225 dwelling units
         per acre, generally located in high-rise developments with shared open
         space, meeting facilities, and reduced parking requirements. Single Room
         Occupancy (SRO) facilities are also allowed at up to 400 units per acre.
      •	 Single Room Occupancy Overlay Zone. The purpose of this overlay zoning
         district is to provide for alternative types of residential living opportunities
         to help meet the needs of the community. All Single Room Occupancy
         (SRO) facilities allowed under this overlay zoning district shall be developed/
         operated in compliance with the provisions/standards contained in Chapter 3,
         Article 1 (Single Room Occupancy Facilities).
2-28  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

     •	 Special Use Overlay Zone. The purpose of this overlay zoning district
         is to accommodate adult-oriented businesses in certain areas of the City
         while minimizing the negative secondary effects, to the extent feasible, on
         surrounding areas.
     •	 Affordable Housing Overlay Zone. The purpose of this zoning district is
         to facilitate the development of affordable family housing at densities up to
         seventy (70) dwelling units per acre. Senior citizen housing at a density of 225
         units per acre and single room occupancy (SRO) facilities at a density of 400
         units per acre is also permitted.
     •	 Historic District Overlay District. The purpose of this zoning district is
         to preserve historic structure within this area of the City, and facilitate the
         development of affordable family housing at densities up to seventy (70)
         dwelling units per acre. Senior citizen housing at a density of 225 units per
         acre and single room occupancy (SRO) facilities at a density of 400 units per
         acre is also permitted.
The City’s overlay zones are summarized in Table 2-4.
                                 SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT             2-29

             Table 2-4: City of Huntington Park Zoning Ordinance,
                                                        Special, & Overlay Zones
SPECIFIC PLAN
The City has adopted a single specific plan, the Downtown Specific Plan (DTSP), which
is applicable to the central business district or downtown. The purpose of the DTSP
is to create a unique and identifiable downtown area for Huntington Park that is an
economically vibrant, pedestrian-oriented destination. The DTSP builds upon and
refines, economic development strategies developed specifically for the downtown
area focusing on beautification of public spaces and streetscapes and storefront. An
overall goal of the DTSP is the orderly development of downtown area consistent with
the City’s General Plan along with the community’s vision for the area.
The DTSP covers an area of approximately 85 acres in the City of Huntington Park’s
Downtown. The DTSP area extends from Randolph Street in the north to Florence
Avenue in the south. The eastern boundary is generally Seville Avenue, except for an
area that extends along Zoe Avenue to Miles Avenue, and the western boundary is
Rugby Avenue. Pacific Boulevard occupies the central portion of the DTSP area and
is considered the City’s Central Business District. The DTSP divides the downtown
area into four Districts (refer to Exhibit 2-2). Within each District there is particular
vision for future development. Land use and development standards, as well as
2-30   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

design guidelines, give direction for each of these Districts to achieve the future state
envisioned by the community. The four Districts are as follows:
       •	 District A – Gateway. District A encompasses parcels at the intersections of
          Randolph Street with Pacific Boulevard and Rita Avenue and Florence Avenue
          with Rugby Avenue, Pacific Boulevard, Rita Avenue, and Seville Avenue.
       •	 District B – Festival. District B encompasses all parcels fronting on Pacific
          Boulevard, except those parcels at the intersections with Randolph Street and
          Florence Avenue contained in District A as described above.
       •	 District C – Neighborhood. All parcels between Rugby Avenue and Seville
          Avenue that are not included in District A or District B are part of District C,
          except for select parcels at the intersection of Seville Avenue and Zoe Avenue.
       •	 District D – Zoe. District D encompasses those parcels bordering Zoe
          Avenue from the alley separating Rita Avenue and Seville Avenue to the
          intersection with Miles Avenue.
The DTSP offers methods to identify, preserve, and restore architecturally significant
buildings while promoting clean, organized, and attractive merchandise display areas,
storefronts, and building signage in order to prompt a stronger local identity and to
beautify the area. New street improvements, including enhanced paving patterns
and a cohesive collection of street furnishings, integrate with an effective way-finding
system to create a unique commercial destination. In addition, new development
standards provide opportunities for development to occur and thrive while design
guidelines encourage and promote quality development. It is the City’s intent through
this planning and design assignment to continue revitalization trends, set forth a vision
for this unique area, and provide an implementation strategy that is creative, realistic,
and attractive to private investment.
                                 SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT              2-31

      Exhibit 2-2: Map of the Downtown Specific Plan (DTSP)
2-32 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
TARGET AREAS FOR TRANSIT ORIENTED DEVELOPMENT (TODs)
Exhibit 2-3: Map of the TOD Target Areas
                     SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 2-33
                                       Exhibit 2-4: TOD Area 1 Map
2-34 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Exhibit 2-5: TOD Area 2 Map
                    SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 2-35
                                       Exhibit 2-6: TOD Area 3 Map
2-36 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Exhibit 2-7: TOD Area 4 Map
                    SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 2-37
                                       Exhibit 2-8: TOD Area 5 Map
2-38 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Exhibit 2-9: TOD Area 6 Map
                    SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 2-39
                                     Exhibit 2-10: TOD Area 7 Map
2-40 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
THIS PAGE HAS BEEN INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.
               SECTION 2: LAND USE & COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 2-41
    MOBILITY
           &
CIRCULATION
    ELEMENT
3.1 INTRODUCTION
SCOPE OF THE MOBILITY & CIRCULATION ELEMENT
This Mobility and Circulation Element of the Huntington Park General Plan is one of
seven State-mandated General Plan elements and is intended to serve as a guide
in the ongoing improvements to the City’s roadway and transportation facilities and
infrastructure. New development in the City and in the surrounding communities will
place additional demands on the City’s roadways in the coming years. The purpose
of this Element is to provide for the development of a safe and efficient circulation
system for the City. According to California Government Code Section 65302(b), this
Element must identify the general location and extent of existing and proposed major
thoroughfares, transportation routes, terminals, and other facilities, all correlated with
the Land Use and Sustainable Development Element.
3-2  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

RELATIONSHIP TO THE GENERAL PLAN
This Element provides the planning framework for the roadway system that will be
needed to accommodate existing and projected demand resulting from the land uses
and development permitted under the Land Use & Sustainable Development Element.
      •	 Traffic forecasts in this Mobility and Circulation Element are also used to
         determine future traffic noise levels within the Safety Element.
      •	 The Mobility and Circulation Element, together with the Health and Safety
         Element, indicate emergency evacuation routes and minimum road widths
         required to accommodate emergency vehicles.
      •	 Finally, this Mobility and Circulation Element is responsive to regional
         transportation plans, such as the Congestion Management Program,
         which focuses on the development of a regional transportation system to
         accommodate the future traffic demands within the region.
The remainder of the Mobility & Circulation Element consists of the following sections:
                                    •	 Background for Planning describes existing traffic
                                       and circulation characteristics in the City.
                                    •	 Mobility and Circulation Policies and Programs
                                       articulate City policies and implementing programs
                                       that are related to land use and
                                       economic development.
                                    •	 Mobility and Circulation Plan indicates the
                                       location and extent of future development
                                       permitted in the City, as well as standards for
                                       this development.
                                                    SECTION 3: MOBILITY & CIRCULATION  3-3

3.2 BACKGROUND FOR PLANNING
MAJOR ROADWAYS
The major roadway system in the City and surrounding area was designed to
accommodate commuter traffic in Huntington Park and the surrounding communities.
Regional access to the City of Huntington Park is readily available through the Long
Beach (I-710) Freeway, which has interchanges at Atlantic Boulevard and Florence
Avenue. Major streets in the City include Florence Avenue, Slauson Avenue, and Gage
Avenue, which are east-west arterials. Pacific Boulevard, Alameda Street, Santa Fe
Avenue, State Street, and Miles Avenue/Soto Street are north-south arterials. Local
collector streets in the City are primarily lined with residential uses. Major roadways in
the City are described below.
3-4  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
•	 Alameda Street is designated as a Major Arterial
   and traverses Huntington Park in a north to south
   orientation through the western portion of the
   City. The Alameda Corridor, a 20-mile long rail
   cargo expressway, extends through the center
   of Alameda Street, thus splitting the street
   into two north-south segments. The western
   segment has a curb-to-curb width of 47 feet with
   two travel lanes provided in each direction and
   left-turn pockets at major intersections. Parking
   is prohibited on both sides of the street. The
   eastern segment is smaller in width - 18 feet - and
   has one travel lane in each direction. Parking is
   permitted on both sides of the street; however,
   certain portions along the western side of the
   street feature diagonal parking stalls. Alameda
   Street passes through the industrial part of the
   City. The current (2015) daily traffic volumes
   for this roadway, between Slauson Avenue and
   Florence Avenue, range from 20,600 average daily
   trips (ADT) to 26,400 ADT.
•	 Santa Fe Avenue is another major north-south
   Major Arterial located in the western portion of
   the City. Santa Fe Avenue provides arterial access
   to/from downtown Los Angeles. The street has
   a curb-to-curb width of 65 feet and provides two
   travel lanes in each direction. There are left-turn
   pockets at major intersections and parking is
   generally permitted on both sides of the street.
   Land uses along Santa Fe Avenue are generally
   neighborhood-serving retail/commercial uses and
   single-family residential uses. The current (2016)
   daily traffic volumes for this roadway, between
   Randolph Street and Florence Avenue, range
   from 26,600 ADT to 27,000 ADT.
               SECTION 3: MOBILITY & CIRCULATION     3-5

     •	 Pacific Boulevard is also a Major Arterial that extends in a north-south
        orientation and is the primary anchor for the City’s historic Downtown. The
        street has a curb-to-curb width of 90 feet with two travel lanes provided in
        each direction. There are left-turn pockets at major intersections. Parking is
        provided along both sides of the street as diagonal stalls. The current (2016)
        daily traffic volumes for this roadway, between 52nd Street and Florence
        Avenue, range from 17,500 ADT to 18,100 ADT.
     •	 Miles Avenue is a Secondary Arterial that run in a north-south direction
        through the City and terminates at Florence Avenue. This street transitions
        into Soto Street at its northern terminus. Miles Avenue is a four-lane (two
        lanes in each direction) undivided roadway with on-street parking permitted
        on both sides of the street. Land uses along Miles Avenue are generally
        single-family residential with City Hall, Miles Avenue Elementary School, and
        Henry T. Gage Middle School located on the east side of the street, between
        Gage Avenue and Saturn Avenue.
     •	 Florence Avenue is an east-west
        Major Arterial roadway with two
        lanes in each direction with a two-
        way left-turn lane (TWLTL) serving
        as a median, with left turn pockets
        at major intersections. On-street
        parking is permitted on both sides
        of the street. Land uses along
        Florence Avenue are primarily retail/
        commercial uses. This roadway
        extends along the City’s southerly
        side. The average daily traffic
        volumes for the segment of Florence
        Avenue, between Alameda Avenue
        and Miles Avenue, range from 31,900
        ADT to 33,000 ADT.
3-6 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

      •	 Slauson Avenue is also a Major Arterial with four-lanes (two lanes in each
         direction) that extends through the northerly portion of the City. Slauson
         Avenue also has a TWLTL serving as a median, with left turn pockets at major
         intersections. On-street parking is permitted on both sides of the street.
         Land uses also Slauson Avenue are primarily retail/commercial with some light
         industrial uses along the north side of the roadway. The traffic volumes on this
         arterial total approximately 45,000 vehicles per day.
      •	 Gage Avenue is a four-lane east-to-west undivided Second Arterial roadway
         located in the central city area. Residential and commercial land uses front
         Gage Avenue along its length and parking is permitted on both sides of the
         street. Gage Avenue carries approximately 23,400 to 27,600 vehicles per day.
Other collector streets that serve the City are identified below.
      •	 Saturn Avenue is designated as a collector roadway with two travel lanes in
         each direction.
      •	 Rita Avenue is designated as a collector roadway with two travel lanes in
         each direction.
      •	 Rugby Avenue is designated as a collector roadway with two travel lanes in
         each direction.
      •	 Salt Lake Avenue is designated as a collector roadway with two travel lanes in
         each direction.
The remaining roadways in the City are local streets, providing one travel lane in each
direction. Exhibit 3-1 illustrates the roadway system that serves the City of Huntington
Park.
                                                  SECTION 3: MOBILITY & CIRCULATION   3-7

                         Exhibit 3-1: Roadway System in the City
3-8 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
INTERSECTION LEVELS OF SERVICE
Evaluating the ability of the circulation system to serve existing and projected traffic
demands requires the establishment of suitable “performance criteria.” These
performance criteria serve as a means by which traffic volumes are compared to
circulation infrastructure (roadway segments and intersections), and the adequacy of
that infrastructure to accommodate existing or projected traffic volumes. Performance
criteria have a policy component, which establishes a desired “Level of Service,” and
a technical component, which provides a more quantified measure. A qualitative
measure, Level of Service, or LOS, is often used in describing the operating condition
of a roadway segment or intersection. The LOS is a sliding scale (A through F), in
which LOS A represents optimal traffic conditions, while LOS F equates to significant
congestion and is generally considered to represent an unacceptable condition. A
more quantitative measure used to define an intersection’s level of service employs
a ratio of the intersection’s design capacity (as measured in traffic volumes) and the
existing and/or projected traffic volumes. This method, referred to as the Intersection
Capacity Utilization, or ICU, is correlated to LOS definitions in Table 3-1.
       •	 Santa Fe Avenue/Slauson Avenue (LOS E in PM peak hour)
       •	 State Street/Florence Avenue (LOS E in both peak hours)
                                                  SECTION 3: MOBILITY & CIRCULATION      3-9

                                       Table 3-1: Levels of Service
3-10 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table 3-2: Intersection Levels of Service
                                  SECTION 3: MOBILITY & CIRCULATION 3-11
            Table 3-2: Intersection Levels of Service (continued)
3-12 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
TRUCK ROUTES
The City of Huntington Park has restricted trucks to major roadways in the City. These
include Slauson Avenue, Florence Avenue, Gage Avenue, Santa Fe Avenue, and
Alameda Street. Trucks are prohibited on residential streets except for emergencies or
local deliveries. Exhibit 3-2 shows truck routes in the City.
BIKEWAYS
A Class I bikeway (trail dedicated exclusively for the use of bicyclists) extends along the
banks of the Los Angeles River channel. This bikeway begins at Atlantic Avenue, near
the northern end of the City and goes south to the City of Long Beach, connecting
to the Shoreline Trail. The Class I bikeway along the Rio Hondo River meets the Los
Angeles River trail where the two rivers connect, south of Huntington Park. A striped
bike lane on Randolph Street connects to the Los Angeles River trail and extends west
to the western boundary of the City.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
The Los Angeles County Metropolitan
Transportation Authority (MTA) buses run
along major streets in the City including
Pacific Boulevard, Florence Avenue, Gage
Avenue, and Santa Fe Avenue. MTA buses
passing through Huntington Park include
Routes 60, 102, 108-358, 110, 111-311, 251,
254, 611, 612, 751, and 760. These routes
pass through all major arterial roadways in
the City and provide connections to most
communities and major activity centers
throughout the region. The MTA Metro
Blue Line is a commuter rail service serving
downtown Los Angeles and areas to the south down to Long Beach. The Blue Line is
operated through Prop A funds with a fixed fare for any length of the trip. Bus routes
complement the Blue Line, and several park-and-ride and kiss-and-ride lots have been
developed along the route to encourage use of the Blue Line.
                                                 SECTION 3: MOBILITY & CIRCULATION      3-13
                                       Exhibit 3-2: Truck Routes
3-14 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
AIRPORTS
The Los Angeles International Airport (LAX) is approximately 13 miles west of the
City. LAX provides air transportation to the entire region. Airplanes over the City
of Huntington Park fly within the air space 2,000 to 7,000 feet above the City. The
Long Beach Municipal Airport is located approximately 11 miles south of the City and
provides additional air transportation services for local businesses and industries. The
Compton Airport, located approximately 6.77 miles southwest of Huntington Park,
is a County-owned airport used for general aviation of small planes. Other regional
airports are located approximately 25 to 45 miles from the City and include John
Wayne Airport, Long Beach Airport, and Ontario Airport.
HARBORS, PORTS, AND RAIL TRANSIT
The nearest harbor facilities to Huntington
Park are located in the Ports of Los
Angeles and Long Beach. In addition, the
Alameda Corridor, a 20-mile long rail cargo
expressway, traverses through the western
portion of the City. The Alameda Corridor
extends through the center of Alameda
Street and provides Los Angeles with direct
rail access to the Ports of Los Angeles and
Long Beach. The portion of the Alameda
Corridor that traverses the City is located
within the 33-foot deep Mid-Corridor Trench.
The Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe (AT&SF)
tracks are used by the Amtrak trains and
Metrolink commuter trains. Amtrak operates
trains daily with service between San Diego
and Santa Barbara. Metrolink serves the
station with four northbound trains and four
southbound trains in the AM and PM peak
periods, respectively. The Metrolink trains
travel from downtown Los Angeles to Orange
County and Oceanside.
                                                SECTION 3: MOBILITY & CIRCULATION     3-15
3.3 POLICIES AND PROGRAMS
MOBILITY & CIRCULATION ELEMENT ISSUES
The City of Huntington Park, with the implementation of the Land Use & Sustainable
Development Element, seeks to promote an orderly pattern of quality future
development to achieve a complete and controlled balance of growth among land
uses. The following issues are the focus of this Mobility and Circulation
Element policies:
      •	 Local Street System;                    •	 Parking; and,
      •	 Regional Transportation;                •	 Truck Traffic.
      •	 Traffic Reduction
      •	 Public Transportation;
      •	 Alternative Forms of Transportation;
3-16  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

The City’s adopted land use and sustainability policies are outlined in the section
that follows. The policies are arranged under each of the issue areas discussed
above. The following policies will establish the policy framework for the Land Use and
Sustainability Element.
ISSUE: LOCAL STREET SYSTEM
      •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 1. The City of Huntington Park shall
          design and employ appropriate traffic control measures to ensure City streets
          and roads function with safety and efficiency and shall coordinate street
          system improvements and signalization with regional transportation efforts.
      •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 2. The City of Huntington Park shall
          design local, collector, and residential streets to discourage their use as
          through traffic routes.
      •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 3. The City of Huntington Park shall
          require the traffic impacts of major new developments include a traffic impact
          analysis to identify measures to mitigate the traffic impacts.
      •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 4. As new development or
          redevelopment occurs, the City of Huntington Park shall limit driveway
          access onto arterial streets, restrict travel through adjacent residential
          neighborhoods, and provide bus turnouts where appropriate along heavily
          traveled arterials.
                                                    SECTION 3: MOBILITY & CIRCULATION 3-17

ISSUE: REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 5. The City of Huntington Park shall
        support completion of planned improvements to the Long Beach
        Freeway (I-710).
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 6. The City of Huntington Park shall
        coordinate the development of arterial streets with the Los Angeles County
        Congestion Management Plan to assure that arterial streets will be compatible
        with those of neighboring jurisdictions.
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 7. The City of Huntington Park shall
        promote regional mobility and transportation efforts including the provision of
        transit and support the Eco-Rapid Transit Authority.
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 8. The City of Huntington Park shall
        coordinate the development of goods movement system that will reduce the
        impact of trucks on the local traffic and the street infrastructure.
ISSUE: TRAFFIC REDUCTION
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 9. The City of Huntington Park shall
        support the implementation of employer traffic demand management (TDM)
        as required in the City’s TDM Ordinance.
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 10. The City of Huntington Park shall
        require that proposals for major new developments include submission of a
        TDM plan to the City, including monitoring and enforcement provisions.
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 11. The City of Huntington Park shall
        promote ridesharing through publicity and outreach to the public.
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 12. The City of Huntington Park
        shall encourage employers to reduce vehicular trips by offering employees
        incentives such as reduced rate transit passes as well as apportioning
        preferred parking for ridesharing.
3-18 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

ISSUE: PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 13. The City
       of Huntington Park shall work with the MTA to develop
       improved connections to the Blue Line and encourage the
       MTA to upgrade its transit station located at
       Slauson Avenue.
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 14. The City of
       Huntington Park shall work with the MTA to identify needs
       for additional local and express bus service to
       Huntington Park.
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 15. The City of Huntington Park shall
       require new development to provide transit facilities, such as bus shelters and
       turn-outs, where deemed necessary.
ISSUE: ALTERNATIVE FORMS OF TRANSPORTATION
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 16. The City of Huntington Park
       shall encourage employers to reduce vehicular trips by offering employees
       incentives such as reduced rate transit passes.
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 17. The City of Huntington Park shall
       provide for safety of pedestrians and bicycles in the planning and construction
       of new roadway and transit projects.
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 18. The City of Huntington Park
       shall maintain existing pedestrian facilities and require new development to
       provide pedestrian access to existing public walkways.
    •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 19. The City of Huntington Park shall
       work with adjacent jurisdictions and the MTA to develop a network of on-
       street bike lanes or off-street bike paths.
                                               SECTION 3: MOBILITY & CIRCULATION    3-19

     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 20. The City of Huntington Park shall
        encourage the provision of an accessible and secure area for bicycle storage at
        all new and existing developments.
ISSUE: PARKING
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 21. The City of
        Huntington Park shall review the City’s off-street parking
        requirements and revise as necessary to conform to actual
        parking demands.
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 22. Joint use of
        parking facilities may be granted as part of an area plan
        or site plan in the City of Huntington Park, depending on
        the peak parking generation of the permitted uses in the
        planning area.
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 23. The City of Huntington Park shall
        establish a parking overlay zone and designate appropriate areas of the Land
        Use Plan Map to facilitate the development of parking facilities through such
        methods as alley vacation and lot consolidation.
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 24. The City of Huntington Park
        shall limit primary truck routes to major arterials to lessen the impacts to the
        residential neighborhoods.
ISSUE: TRUCK TRAFFIC
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 25. The City of Huntington Park
        shall limit primary truck routes to major arterials to lessen the impacts to the
        residential neighborhoods.
     •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 26. The City of Huntington Park shall
        maintain truck routes to appropriate design standards to safely accommodate
        truck volumes.
3-20  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

      •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 27. The City of Huntington Park shall
         require all truck parking and queuing to occur outside of the public
         rights-of-ways.
      •	 Mobility & Circulation Element Policy 28. The City of Huntington Park shall
         allow for adequately sized truck loading areas which do not interfere with
         nearby traffic circulation.
MOBILITY & CIRCULATION ELEMENT PROGRAMS
This section of the Mobility & Circulation Element identifies those programs that will be
effective in the implementation of the policies identified in the previous section. Each
program is summarized below. Under each program, specific information regarding
its implementation is listed, including the source of funding, the program objectives,
the agency or City responsible for the program’s implementation, and the timing of the
program’s implementation.
      •	 Caltrans Coordination. The City will coordinate efforts with Caltrans to
         upgrade area freeways. The purpose of this undertaking is to ensure that
         the City is fully appraised of the improvement efforts in the early stages of
         planning and design. The City will continue to work with Caltrans and the
         Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA), as appropriate, and will request
         to be on all notification lists for future projects that may impact
         Huntington Park.
             •	 Source of Funding: General Fund or other sources.
             •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To continue with the ongoing
                dialogue and planning.
             •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
             •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
                 be continued.
      •	 Capital Improvement Planning. The City’s Capital Improvement Program
         (CIP) is a five-year plan that indicates the timing of major capital expenditures.
         Individual projects are reviewed and ranked on an annual basis and may
         include streetscape upgrades, installation of traffic signals, slurry seal for
         streets, sidewalk repair, and sewer line upgrades. The City will continue to
         update, review, and implement its CIP to consider transportation-related
         improvements.
                                                   SECTION 3: MOBILITY & CIRCULATION    3-21

            •	 Source of Funding: General Fund or other sources.
            •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: The City will review its CIP on an
               annual basis.
            •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
            •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
                be continued.
     •	 Enforcement of Truck Parking. The City of Huntington Park Police
        Department will enforce laws concerning trucks using non-designated truck
        routes, illegal on-street parking, and other traffic laws.
            •	 Source of Funding: General Fund or other sources.
            •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: The program will continue to
               be implemented.
            •	 Responsible Agency: Police Department.
            •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
                be continued.
     •	 Environmental Review. The City shall continue to evaluate the environmental
        impacts of new development and provide mitigation measures prior to
        development approval, as required by the California Environmental Quality
        Act (CEQA). Environmental review shall be provided for major projects, as
        well as those that will have the potential to adversely impact the environment.
        Land use and development are among the issue areas that will be addressed
        in the environmental analysis. In compliance with CEQA, the City shall also
        assign responsibilities for the verification of the implementation of mitigation
        measures that may be recommended as part of the environmental
        review process.
            •	 Source of Funding: General Fund or other sources.
            •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To continue the CEQA review of
               qualifying projects.
            •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
            •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
                be continued.
3-22 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

•	 Residential Parking Program. The City will review existing parking standards
   and regulations applicable to the residential neighborhoods. This program
   will consider the feasibility of additional on-street parking restrictions and a
   permit parking program as a means to eliminate the storage of extra vehicles
   on city streets.
      •	 Source of Funding: General Fund or other sources.
      •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: The program will continue to
          be implemented.
      •	 Responsible Agency: Police Department and Community
          Development Department.
      •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
          be continued.
•	 Signalization. The City will strive to provide optimum signalization on major
   thoroughfares to maximize circulation efficiency, such as participation in a
   regional signalization program. City staff will outline both the need and
   strategy for improved signalization.
      •	  Source of Funding: General Fund or other sources.
      •	  2016-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
      •	  Responsible Agency: Public Works.
      •	  Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
          be continued.
•	 Truck Route Planning. The City will work with other cities, public agencies,
   and stakeholders to establish a system of truck route plans for the sub-region.
      •	 Source of Funding: General Fund or other sources.
      •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain and update on an
          annual basis.
      •	 Responsible Agency: Public Works and Community
          Development Department.
      •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
           be continued.
                                            SECTION 3: MOBILITY & CIRCULATION      3-23

     •	 Transit Centers. Transit centers consisting of bus turnouts and loading
        areas, weatherproof shelters, information centers, emergency phones, and,
        in some areas, park-and-ride facilities, will be implemented as part of new
        development.
            •	 Source of Funding: General Fund for planning (grants will also be
               applied for to assist in long-range planning).
            •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To develop and implement a
               comprehensive plan for the creation of new transit centers.
            •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
            •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
               be continued.
3-24 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

3.4 MOBILITY & CIRCULATION PLAN
The Mobility & Circulation Plan for the City of Huntington Park supports the land use
and development objectives outlined in the Land use and Sustainable Development
Element. The Circulation Plan is discussed in this section.
ROADWAY CLASSIFICATIONS
The roadway classification system described herein is used to identify the function
of each roadway in the City. The classification system provides a logical framework
for the design and operation of roadways serving Huntington Park. The functional
classification system permits residents, staff, and elected officials to identify the
preferred characteristics of each street. If the observed characteristics of a street
change from the functional classification, then actions may be taken to return the
street to its originally intended use or to change the roadway classification in response
to increased traffic demand. In the latter instance, certain additional roadway
improvements may be required to accommodate the roadway’s new functional
classification and the corresponding standards.
                                                 SECTION 3: MOBILITY & CIRCULATION     3-25

The primary circulation system in the City of Huntington Park serves two distinct and
equally important functions: 1) providing access to individual properties, and 2) the
transport of people and goods into and through the City. The design and operation
of each roadway depends on the importance placed on each of these functions. For
example, some roadways are designed to carry larger traffic volumes and generally
have more lanes, higher speed limits, and fewer curb-cuts or driveways. The roadway
system in Huntington Park has been defined using a classification system that
describes a hierarchy of roadway types. The categories of roadways included in this
classification system differentiate the size, function, and capacity of each type of
roadway. Streets in the City of Huntington Park are classified according to their primary
function that are described below.
       •	 Major Arterials. The main function of a Major Arterial is to provide regional,
          subregional, and intra-city travel service. Through-traffic comprises the bulk
          of traffic volumes on major arterial roadways. These streets typically provide
          three traffic lanes in each direction, and the lanes may be separated by either
          a median strip or a two-way, left-turn lane. Major arterial roadways typically
          contain 84 feet of paving within a 100-foot right-of-way. Lanes are 12 feet
          wide, and the center median or turn lane is 16 feet wide.
       •	 Collector Streets. A Collector Street provides circulation in a defined
          geographic area of the City and connects this area to secondary streets,
          arterials, and freeways. Most traffic uses collector streets to move to roadways
          carrying intra-city or through-traffic.
       •	 Local Streets. Local streets are subordinate to the basic circulation network
          described above, yet constitute the majority of the City’s streets. These
          streets provide access to individual parcels and only provide circulation within
          a neighborhood block. Local streets in Huntington Park are generally 40 to 50
          feet wide, with a pavement width of between 24 to 30 feet. Most streets have
          been improved with curbs, gutters, and sidewalks.
3-26   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

       Table 3-3: Roadway Classifications and Standards
Table 3-3 summarize the standards generally applicable to each roadway classification.
ROADWAY PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Evaluating the ability of the circulation system to serve existing and projected traffic
demands requires the establishment of suitable “performance criteria.” These
performance criteria serve as a means by which traffic volumes are compared to
circulation infrastructure (roadway segments and intersections), and the adequacy of
that infrastructure to accommodate existing or projected traffic volumes. A qualitative
measure, Level of Service, or LOS, is often used in describing the operating condition
of a roadway segment or intersection. The LOS is a sliding scale (A through F), in
which LOS A represents optimal traffic conditions, while LOS F equates to significant
congestion and is generally considered to represent an unacceptable condition.
The City of Huntington Park has established LOS “D” as a target LOS standard,
and LOS “E” as a threshold standard. The City recognizes that not all intersections
within Huntington Park can meet the target LOS D. In these instances, the City
Council must find that the improvements necessary to meet the target LOS D are not
feasible because of one or more of the following reasons: 1) the cost of the necessary
improvements exceeds available funding sources; 2) the design of the necessary
improvements is not compatible with the surrounding land uses; or 3) the design of
the necessary improvements is contrary to other established City policies. The LOS
definitions are illustrated in Exhibit 3-3.
                                                 SECTION 3: MOBILITY & CIRCULATION       3-27

                                       Table 3-4: Levels of Service
3-28 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Exhibit 3-3: Intersection Level of Service
                                 SECTION 3: MOBILITY & CIRCULATION 3-29
                 Table 3-5: Future Intersection Levels of Service
3-30 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table 3-5: Future Intersection Levels of Service (continued)
Table 3-5 indicates the Future Level of Service and Volume-to-Capacity Ratio for major
intersections in the City. The volumes shown in Table 3-5 reflect anticipated volumes
from future development, as well as ambient growth in traffic consistent with that
assumed in the Los Angeles County Congestion Management Plan (CMP).
                                               SECTION 3: MOBILITY & CIRCULATION    3-31
      THIS PAGE HAS BEEN INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.
3-32 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
             ELEMENT
4.1 INTRODUCTION
SCOPE OF RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT
The Resource Management Element of the Huntington Park General Plan conforms to
the requirements for the open space and conservation elements. In the Huntington
Park General Plan, these mandated elements have been combined into a single
Resource Management Element. This Resource Management Element outlines
conservation programs that address resource utilization, resource preservation, and the
regulation of activities that could affect these resources. This Resource Management
Element also focuses on the maintenance of open space areas and the provision of
parks and recreational facilities.
This Resource Management Element focuses on those natural resources in Huntington
Park that must be considered in future planning and development in the City. The
Element focuses on a number of issues including earth and water resources, cultural
resources, air quality, and parks and open space. Natural and cultural resources in the
4-2  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
City are limited and are often non-renewable. As a result, these resources should be
carefully preserved and managed to prevent potential misuse and ensure their future
availability. The City of Huntington Park has identified important local resources and
the necessary preservation programs as a means to prevent their destruction and
exploitation and to ensure that conservation efforts are consistent and equitable.
RELATIONSHIP TO THE GENERAL PLAN
The Resource Management Element of the Huntington Park General Plan meets the
requirements for a conservation element and an open space element in the General
Plan. This Resource Management Element complies with regulations in Sections
65302(d) and 65302(e) of the California Government Code and the State Mining and
Reclamation Act (SMARA). The Element identifies significant resources within the City
and establishes a plan for their conservation, management, or preservation.
The Resource Management Element also fulfills the requirements of Section 65560
to 65570 of the California Government Code regarding the preparation of an open
space element. This Element contains a local open space plan for the comprehensive
and long-range preservation and conservation of the City’s remaining open space. All
future development projects, including the acquisition and disposal of open space
lands, shall be consistent with the open space plan.
In addition, Public Resources Code Section 5076 requires the open space element to
consider demands for trail-oriented recreational use along with specific open space
programs. For example, there is a potential for the addition of a new bikeway trail that
will extend from the City to the existing regional trail located along the Los Angeles
River. In addition, there are a number of other State-mandated issues, such as the
utilization of rivers, harbors, forests, that are not applicable to the City of Huntington
Park and thus, they will not require further consideration in this Element. Open space
and recreation issues are also addressed in this Resource Management Element
because the remaining open space resources are valuable resources for both outdoor
recreation and scenic enjoyment.
The policies contained in this Resource Management Element build upon those
contained in other elements of the Huntington Park General Plan. The Land Use
Element designates specific areas for open space and conservation areas. The Health
and Safety Element identifies areas with constraints that should be preserved in open
space for public health and safety reasons.
                                                    SECTION 4: RESOURCE MANAGEMENT         4-3

4.2 PLANNING BACKGROUND
NATURAL SETTING
The City of Huntington Park is centrally located within the coastal plain of the Los
Angeles basin. The Los Angeles Basin is bounded by mountainous areas on three
sides: the San Gabriel Mountains to the east, the Santa Monica Mountains to the
north, and the Santa Ana Mountains to the south. The basin is also traversed by three
major river systems including the Los Angeles River, the San Gabriel River, and the Rio
Hondo River. The area’s geomorphology is illustrated Exhibit 4-1.
The topography of the Los Angeles basin is a result of long periods of deformation
associated with faulting and uplift, the deposition of river-borne sediments, and
periodic changes in sea levels, and erosion. Prior to 1825 and between 1867 and 1868,
the Los Angeles River flowed westerly from the Los Angeles Narrows (between the
Elysian and Repetto Hills) through the Ballona gap. The soils in the area are typical of
the sediments that were deposited in the broad alluvial plain on which Huntington Park
and the surrounding communities are located. These alluvial materials and rocks are
4-4  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Exhibit 4-1: Regional Geomorphology
                             SECTION 4: RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 4-5
of recent age (15,000 years ago) and are unconsolidated and uncemented. Underneath
the alluvium is the Lakewood Formation, which features stream type alluvium and
floodplain fine-grained sediments on the upper layer (consisting 40 to 80% of the
deposits) and gravels and coarse sands with discontinuous lenses of sandy silt and clay
in the lower layers. Beneath the Lakewood Formation is the San Pedro Formation.
The San Pedro Formation consists of San Pedro sand, Timms Point silt, and Lomita silt
approximately 1,050 feet thick. The Lakewood and San Pedro Formation are deposits
of the Pleistocene age (one to three million years ago). More detailed discussion of
the underlying soil formations is provided under Groundwater Resources.
SOIL RESOURCES
A generalized soils map for Los Angeles County that was prepared by the United
States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service identifies the surface
soils in Los Angeles County according to their characteristics and qualities. A soil
association is defined by the predominant soil series in a group of soils and each
association has different properties and characteristics such as soil composition,
surface texture, slope, arrangement, sequence of layers, or other characteristics. The
General Soil Map for Los Angeles County indicates that soils in the City of Huntington
Park consist of the Hanford soil association and soils of the Tujunga-Soboba
association. Each soil association is described in detail below:
       •	 The Hanford association consists of 85 percent Hanford soils, 10% Yolo soils
          and 5% Hesperia soils. Hanford soils are pale-brown coarse sandy loam
          on the surface with a light yellowish brown coarse sandy loam and gravelly
          loam coarse sand substratum. These soils are over 60 inches deep, well
          drained and slightly acidic to mildly alkaline. Hanford soils have moderately
          rapid subsoil permeability and moderate inherent fertility. The Hanford soils
          association was placed into Class II, which are soils described as having some
          limitations. Hanford soils are at a slight risk for erosion; however, the City is
          completely developed and the underlying soils were disturbed in order to
          facilitate previous construction activities. The soils are not prone to shrinking
          and swelling because shrinking and swelling is influenced by the amount of
          clay present in the underlying soils. Clay is not present in the composition of
          Hanford soils. Moreover, Hanford soils are described as being used almost
          exclusively for residential and industrial development, as evident by the
          current level of urbanization present within the City.
4-6   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

•	 The Tujunga-Soboba association consists of 60% Tujunga soils, 30%
   Soboba soils and 10% of unnamed sandy and cobbly materials in the beds
   of intermittent streams. This association, over 60 inches deep, is excessively
   drained and has rapid subsoil permeability. The Tujunga-Soboba association
   has a very low inherent fertility and is used extensively for residential
   development, but is also suitable for recreational and industrial uses. Tujunga
   soils are brownish-gray or grayish-brown sand or loamy fine sand on the
   surface and have a stratified substratum. These soils are slightly acid to mildly
   alkaline and water holding capacity is four to five inches for 60 inches of
   depth. Tujunga soils have slow runoff capability and a slight erosion hazard,
   although soils of the Tujunga Soboba Association have a moderate to high
   wind erosion risk. Lastly, Tujunga-Soboba soils are not prone to shrinking and
   swelling because clay is not present in the composition of Tujunga Soboba
   soils. The location of the two different soils within the City is shown
   in Exhibit 4-2.
                                            SECTION 4: RESOURCE MANAGEMENT        4-7

                               Exhibit 4-2: Generalized Soils Map
4-8 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
MINERAL RESOURCES
The City is not located in a Significant Mineral Aggregate Resource Area (SMARA) nor
is it located in an area with active mineral extraction activities. A review of California
Division of Oil, Gas, and Geothermal Resources well finder indicates that there is one
abandoned well located within the City. The well was formerly owned by Occidental
Petroleum Corporation and was located at the intersection of Benedict Way and Bissell
Street. The well was abandoned on June 5, 1967. No other well extraction activities
are located within City boundaries nor are there any significant mineral resources.
GROUNDWATER RESOURCES
The City of Huntington Park is located within the central section of the Downey Plain
and is underlain by the Central groundwater basin. Water-bearing deposits found
beneath the Downey plain include unconsolidated and semi-consolidated marine
and non-marine alluvial sediments that yield significant amounts of groundwater.
The Central Basin is bounded on the north by the Elysian and Repetto Hills; on the
northeast by the Merced and Puente Hills; on the east by the Los Angeles County
line and on the southwest by the Newport-Inglewood fault along the Rosecrans,
Dominguez, Signal, and Bixby Ranch Hills.
Groundwater resources in the Central Basin consists of a body of shallow, unconfined,
and semi-perched water on the upper part of the alluvial deposits; the principal body
of fresh groundwater within the Recent and Pleistocene deposits; and salt water under
the freshwater resources. Groundwater basins are recharged by surface and subsurface
flows from the bordering hills and mountains; by downward percolation of waters from
major streams; by direct percolation of rain and artificial recharge at spreading basins
or injection wells. Water-bearing deposits are unconsolidated and semi-consolidated
alluvial sediments that hold water and allow water to pass through, and are referred
to as aquifers. Non-water-bearing deposits are consolidated rocks and ground layers
which provide limited water and form the boundaries between aquifers. The geologic
structure underlying the Huntington Park area consists of a topmost layer of deposition
from recent time (15,000 years ago), consisting of alluvium and the Gaspur Aquifer.
Alluvium found on or near the surface of the City is 60 inches thick or less and contains
poor quality water in small quantities. The Gaspur Aquifer consists of cobbles and
                                                  SECTION 4: RESOURCE MANAGEMENT           4-9
pebbles from the San Gabriel Mountains. The Lakewood Formation contains the
Exposition, Gage, and Gardena aquifers and aquicludes.
      •	 The Exposition Aquifer underlies the Gaspur aquifer and merges with it
         between the Los Angeles and San Gabriel Rivers. This aquifer is approximately
         100 feet thick and consists of coarse gravel and clay, with fine deposits
         between sandy and gravelly beds.
      •	 The Gage Aquifer underlies the Exposition aquifer and is approximately ten
         to 160 feet thick. This aquifer consists of fine to medium sand with varying
         amounts of coarse yellow sand and gravel. The Gardena Aquifer has coarser
         deposits than the Gage Aquifer, but these deposits are about the same age,
         thickness, and elevation. Both aquifers yield large amounts of water.
The San Pedro Formation contains five major aquifers interbedded with fine grained
layers. These aquifers are the principal aquifers used for domestic water in the Los
Angeles area and include the Hollydale, Jefferson, Lynwood, Silverado, and Sunnyside
Aquifers.
      •	 The Hollydale Aquifer is a discontinuous aquifer located underneath the
         Gage-Gardena Aquifer. This aquifer consists of shallow marine deposits,
         including yellow sands and gravel in the northeastern sections and grey, blue,
         and black sand with mud, clay, and marine shells near the Newport-Inglewood
         fault. It is found between 250 to 500 feet below mean sea elevation in an area
         located to the south of the City of Huntington Park. The Hollydale aquifer
         does not yield large amounts of water.
      •	 The Jefferson Aquifer consists of sand with gravelly and clayey layers and
         has a maximum thickness of 14 feet. Near the City of Huntington Park, it is
         approximately 30 feet thick with a base 300 feet below mean sea level. Like
         the Hollydale aquifer, few wells tap into the Jefferson Aquifer.
      •	 The Lynwood Aquifer consists of yellow, brown, and red coarse gravel, sand,
         silts, and clay, approximately 50 to 1,000 feet thick. The Rio Hondo and Pico
         faults have caused offsets on the Lynwood Aquifer in the Pico Rivera area.
         The Lynwood aquifer contains significant groundwater resources, with yields
         ranging from 200 to 2,100 gallons per minute.
4-10  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

      •	 The Silverado Aquifer consists of yellow to brown coarse to fine sands and
         gravel interbedded with yellow to brown silts and clays. This aquifer is 500
         feet thick and can be found at a maximum depth of 1,200 feet below mean
         sea level. It has also been considerably offset by all faults in the Los Angeles
         region. The Silverado aquifer is a major groundwater resource for the region,
         with a maximum yield of 4,700 gallons per minute.
      •	 The Sunnyside Aquifer consists of coarse deposits of sand and gravel with
         interlayers of sandy clay and clay. Marine shells and marine type clays and
         shales are also found within this aquifer. The Sunnyside aquifer is 300 feet thick
         or less and has a maximum yield of 1,500 gallons per minute. It is also offset
         by many faults in the region.
Bedrock within the surrounding mountains and hills do not contain groundwater. Also,
Pliocene age deposits in the region found 1,400 feet or more below the ground surface
are not tapped by groundwater wells in the region due to their depth.
PLANT AND ANIMAL LIFE
The City of Huntington Park is completely urban and no longer supports any natural
habitats including those that are considered to be ecologically sensitive. Increasing
urbanization in the region has led to the loss of native plants and animal communities
and only an occasional migratory flock of birds may be spotted. Animal and plant
species in the City consist mainly of domesticated pets and rodents as well as plants
used for landscaping purposes. The channelization of the Los Angeles River has also
resulted in the loss of riparian habitats. A review of the California Department of
Fish and Wildlife California Natural Diversity Database (CNDDB) Bios Viewer for the
South Gate Quadrangle (the City of Huntington Park is listed under the South Gate
Quadrangle) indicated that out of a total of 15 native plant and animal species, five are
either threatened or endangered. These species include:
      •	 The Coastal California Gnatcatcher is not likely to be found within the City
         due to the level of urbanization in the area and the lack of habitat suitable
         for the California Gnatcatcher. The absence of coastal sage scrub, the
         California Gnatcatcher’s primary habitat, further diminishes the likelihood of
         encountering such birds.
                                                 SECTION 4: RESOURCE MANAGEMENT        4-11

       •	 The least Bell’s vireo lives in a riparian habitat, with a majority of the species
          living in San Diego County. As a result, it is not likely that any least Bell’s
          vireos will be encountered within the City.
       •	 The southwestern willow flycatcher’s habitat consists of marsh, brushy fields,
          and willow thickets. These birds are often found near streams and rivers and
          are not likely to be found within the City due to the lack of marsh and natural
          hydrologic features.
       •	 The western yellow-billed cuckoo is an insect-eating bird found in riparian
          woodland habitats. The likelihood of encountering a western yellow-billed
          cuckoo is slim due to the level of urbanization present in the surrounding
          areas and the lack of riparian habitat.
       •	 California Orcutt Grass is found near vernal pools throughout Los Angeles,
          Riverside, and San Diego counties. As indicated previously, the City is located
          in the midst of an urban area and is completely developed. There are no
          bodies of water located in the City that would be capable of supporting
          populations of California Orcutt grass.
CULTURAL RESOURCES
The greater Los Angeles Basin was previously inhabited by the Gabrielino-Tongva
people, named after the San Gabriel Mission. The Gabrielino-Tongva tribe has lived
in this region for around 7,000 years. Prior to Spanish contact, approximately 5,000
Gabrielino-Tongva people lived in villages throughout the Los Angeles Basin. Villages
were typically located near major rivers such as the San Gabriel, Rio Hondo, or Los
Angeles Rivers. The Spaniards established missions in the area in the 1770’s and the
Gabrielino population started to decline. The Spaniards brought agriculture and cattle
into Los Angeles and the missions became the population centers in the region.
The City of Huntington Park’s initial development started with the establishment
of Rancho San Antonio in 1809 by Antonio Maria Lugo. The Lugo family owned
approximately 29,000 acres where their ranch was situated and maintained ownership
of the ranch throughout the 19th century. By the turn of the 20th century the ranch
dissolved and the land was distributed to various settlers and developers. Among
those developers were two men, A.L. Burbank and E.V. Baker, who subdivided a 100-
4-12   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

acre portion of the former ranch. The two men were instrumental in laying the City’s
foundation by granting railroad tycoon Henry Huntington right-of-way access through
their subdivision along Randolph Street in 1902. In addition, the City was renamed
Huntington Park.
Very little development was found in the Huntington Park area prior to 1896. During
that time, the Los Angeles River was not channelized and a few scattered single-
family homes were found in the area. The City of Huntington Park was incorporated
on September 1, 1906, with a population of 526 residents. The City developed as a
suburban community, providing a centralized location for workers employed in Los
Angeles and the surrounding industrial cities of Commerce, Vernon, and South Gate.
The City’s land use and development patterns were well established by the 1930’s and
a thriving downtown centered along Pacific Avenue was testament to the
area’s prosperity.
In 2006, the City of Huntington Park adopted a Historic Preservation Ordinance to
preserve and protect historic assets located in the City. The City included the following
criteria to determine eligibility for the designation of historic resources:
       •	 Historic Resource. Historic Resource is a building, structure, site, object,
           landscape, sign, or contributing member to a Historic District that is significant
           in American history, architecture, engineering, archeology, or culture and is
           designated by the City according to the following criteria:
              •	 Associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the
                  broad patterns of the history of the City, Region, State, or Nation;
              •	 Associated with the lives of persons who are significant in the history of
                  the City, Region, State, or Nation;
              •	 Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a Historic Resource property
                  type, period, architectural style, or method of construction, or that is a
                  representation of the work of an architect, designer, engineer, or builder
                  whose work is significant;
              •	 Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in
                  prehistory or history of the City, Region, State, or Nation.
       •	 Historic Designation. A Historic Resource designation may include
           significant public or semi-public interior spaces and features. The criteria used
           to determine if an interior is significant includes the following:
                                                   SECTION 4: RESOURCE MANAGEMENT          4-13

                                       •	 Historically the space has been open to the
                                           public;
                                       •	 The materials, finishes, and/or detailing are
                                           intact or later alterations are reversible;
                                       •	 The plan, layout, and features of the space are
                                           illustrative of its historic function;
                                       •	 Its form and features articulates a particular
                                           concept of design; or,
                                       •	 There is evidence of distinctive craftsmanship.
      •	 Historic Sign. A Historic Sign shall include all signs designated historically
          significant by the Historic Preservation Commission and such sign meets the
          criteria described in Section 9-3.1806(A)(3). All other regulations described in
          Title 9, Chapter 3, Article 12 of this Code shall also apply.
      •	 Historic District. A Historic District is an area that is geographically defined
          as possessing a concentration of Historic Resources or a thematically related
          grouping of properties, which contribute to each other and is designated
          by the City according to the procedures set forth by the National Register
          of Historic Places Bulletin #21: “Defining Boundaries for National Register
          Properties” and the following criteria:
              •	 The grouping of properties are unified by planned or physical
                 development or a significant and distinguishable entity of Citywide
                 importance; and,
              •	 The components of the properties may lack individual distinction but are
                 important as a collection representing one or more of a defined historic,
                 cultural, development, and/or architectural context(s).
Historic resources identified by the City are included in Table 4-1 provided on the
following page.
4-14  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Table 4-1: Historical Structures
                                 SECTION 4: RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 4-15
AIR QUALITY
The City of Huntington Park is located in the central portion of the South Coast
Air Basin of California (SCAB). The basin covers approximately 6,600 square miles,
encompassing Orange County and the non-desert portions of Los Angeles, Riverside,
and San Bernardino counties. The South Coast Air Basin is bounded by the Pacific
Ocean to the west and the San Gabriel, San Bernardino, and San Jacinto Mountains to
the north and east.
The South Coast Air Basin has a Mediterranean climate, characterized by warm
summers, mild winters, infrequent rainfall, moderate daytime onshore breezes, and
moderate humidity. Variations in rainfall, temperatures, and localized winds occur
throughout the South Coast Air Basin due to the presence of various mountains and
hills inland and the Pacific Ocean on the west. Rain also varies seasonally. Summers
are often dry and four to five months can pass with no rain. In the winter, occasional
storms often bring rain. Rainfall is lowest in the coastal plain and inland valleys, higher
in the foothills, and highest in the mountain areas. Winters are cold but frost is rare, as
4-16    HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
temperatures seldom fall below 28°F. The annual average daytime temperatures range
from 84°F in August to 67°F in January, with temperatures often reaching 100°F during
the summer months. Annual rainfall in Huntington Park is ten inches and occurs almost
exclusively from late October to early April.
During summer, sunshine provides the energy for photochemical reactions between
nitrogen oxides and reactive organic compounds which form ozone. Because of the
long time period required to form ozone in the atmosphere, ozone concentrations
are largely determined by transport patterns. With southwesterly winds occurring on
most days in Huntington Park, the ozone transport route into the City is from sources
to the west and southwest, and as far as the urban areas of Los Angeles. In turn, ozone
pollutants emitted in Huntington Park are most likely to contribute to ozone levels in
areas east of the City. Ozone concentrations in Huntington Park generally peak during
the afternoon, after the noon sunlight has occurred and after the transport of reactive
organic compounds from the Los Angeles area. Ozone levels are the greatest during
the summer and early fall, when abundant sunshine exists.
Ozone and other contaminants from urban areas in the region move eastward in the
South Coast Air Basin through the mountain passes and up the mountain slopes.
These emissions pass through the Beaumont Pass and into the Low Desert area. In the
winter, temperature inversions occur close to ground-level during the night and early
morning hours. Thus, carbon monoxide (CO) and nitrogen oxide concentrations are
highest during these times. CO transport is also limited by light wind speeds. Since
CO is produced primarily from automobile exhaust, the highest concentrations are
found in areas with heavy traffic.
Wind flow patterns affect air quality by directing pollutants downwind of their sources.
Local meteorological conditions (such as light winds and shallow vertical mixing) and
topographical features (such as surrounding mountain ranges) create areas of high
pollutant concentrations by hindering dispersal. Temperature inversions are created by
a semi-permanent subtropical high pressure cell over the Pacific Ocean that traps cool
air near the ground with warm air from the ocean. These inversions hamper dispersion
by trapping air pollutants in a limited atmospheric volume near the ground.
Air quality in the Southern California region is generally poor even with Federal, State,
and local pollution controls. Ambient air quality standards set by State of California Air
Resources Board and the Environmental Protection Agency to protect public health are
                                                SECTION 4: RESOURCE MANAGEMENT        4-17

frequently violated. Ozone levels are being exceeded in the region more frequently
than anywhere else in the nation.
Under predominant wind conditions, emissions generated in the City of Huntington
Park are dispersed to the east and northeast during the day, and slowly drift southwest
or south at night. Local emissions contribute to regional ozone concentrations
downwind, but can, under stagnant meteorological conditions, add to localized levels
of ozone and other pollutants. At the same time, local ozone concentrations are due
to nitrogen dioxide and reactive organic compounds from areas west and southwest
of the City. Levels of ozone exceed both National and State standards throughout
the Basin. The Basin exceeds this standard more frequently than any other area in
the United States and also records the highest peak readings. National and State
standards for carbon monoxide are exceeded in more densely populated Los Angeles
and Orange counties, but not in Riverside and San Bernardino counties.
The South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) is a regional agency
charged with the regulation of pollutant emissions and the maintenance of local air
quality standards. The SCAQMD samples ambient air at over 32 monitoring stations in
and around the Basin. Regulations on air pollution control focusing on the reduction of
industrial emissions have been expanded to include automobile emissions. Recently,
the regulations have included the use of alternatives to transportation, land planning,
and energy sources, rather than on expanding technological controls. These actions
are leading to greater participation by local governments in controlling air pollution.
BIKEWAYS
A bicycle master plan was prepared for the City and the final version was completed
on February 4, 2014. The bicycle master plan identified the streets that would be part
of the proposed bicycle network and categorized them according to class type. The
aforementioned class types and their corresponding streets are described below:
       •	 Class I – Bike Path. The two streets that are designated as Class I Bike Paths
          are Randolph Street and Salt Lake Avenue.
       •	 Class II – Bike Lane. State Street and the portion of Pacific Boulevard that
          extends through Downtown are classified as Class II Bike Lanes.
4-18   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

      •	 Class III – Bike Route. The streets that are designated as Class III Bike
          Routes include East 58th Street, Belgrave Avenue, Soto Street, the portion
          of Pacific Boulevard that extends north of Randolph Street, Malabar Street,
          Miles Avenue, Clarendon Avenue, Cottage Street, Gage Avenue, Zoe Avenue,
          Saturn Avenue, Albany Street (the bike route terminates at Chesley Park),
          Florence Avenue (this bike route begins at the Santa Fe Avenue and Florence
          Avenue intersection and extends west along Florence Avenue), Walnut Street,
          California Avenue, Santa Ana Street, Carmelita Avenue, and East 61st Street.
A striped bike lane on Randolph Street passes through Huntington Park, continues
through the City of Bell and connects to the Los Angeles River trail. An additional
Class I bikeway (trail dedicated exclusively for the use of bicyclists) extends along the
banks of the Los Angeles River channel. The Los Angeles River Bikeway will eventually
extend 52 miles from Canoga Park to Long Beach.
OVERVIEW OF OPEN SPACE AND PARK FACILITIES
Because of the developed character of the city, open space land is very limited.
Virtually all of the parcels in the City have been developed and the remaining vacant
parcels are limited to infill properties that are likely to be developed in the near term.
The City of Huntington Park contains more than 31 acres of total park space, including
a total of six parks and recreational facilities. The six park facilities are
described below:
      •	 Chesley Park is located at the corner of Zoe Avenue and Albany Street. The
          facility contains approximately 7,850 square feet of park space. Amenities
          include a playground, four grills, and picnic benches.
      •	 Robert Keller Park is located at 6550 Miles Avenue, between City Hall and
          the Police Department. The park is approximately two acres in size and
          contains a concession stand, playground, and a picnic area with benches
          and grills.
      •	 Freedom Park is located at the corner of Carmelita Street and 61st street
          at 3801 East 61st Street. Freedom Park contains approximately 2.5 acres of
          park space. Amenities include a recreation center, splash pad, two basketball
          courts, and a playground. This park also hosts an after-school program.
                                                  SECTION 4: RESOURCE MANAGEMENT         4-19

       •	 Salt Lake Park is the largest park
          facility in the City with a total of 23
          acres dedicated for open space and
          recreation. The park is located at the
          corner of Florence Avenue and Salt Lake
          Avenue at 3401 East Florence Avenue.
          The park fosters three recreational
          programs including a summer camp,
          youth and adult sports, and tiny tots.
       •	 Senior Citizen Park is a 0.75-acre park
          located at 6923 Salt Lake Avenue. The
          park provides the following amenities:
          a picnic shelter with grill, benches,
          electrical outlets, and horseshoes.
       •	 Raul R. Perez Memorial Park is a 4.47-acre park located at 6208 Alameda
          Street. The park provides a 4,488 square-foot community building, an indoor
          fitness room, a large room with kitchen for private events, a grass sports
          field with lights, outdoor basketball courts, a playground, a walking trail, and
          outdoor exercise equipment.
An additional park, Westside Park, was closed in 2008. In 2008 the City of Huntington
Park completed a Parks and Recreation Master Plan, which serves as the blueprint for
future park expansion, improvements, and policy decisions. The Parks and Recreation
Master Plan identified several key conditions that will be continued to be addressed in
the years to come. The City currently provides approximately 0.52 acres of parkland
space for every 1,000 residents, which is less than the statewide park acreage standards
of five acres of parkland for every 1,000 residents. The existing park facilities in the City
are shown in Exhibit 4-3.
4-20   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

STREET TREES AND LANDSCAPING
                            Title 7 (Public Works) Chapter 5 –
                            Street Trees of the City of Huntington
                            Park municipal code serves as the City’s
                            “Tree Ordinance.” The ordinance was
                            established with the intent on aiding
                            in the improvement and beautification
                            of the City’s commercial and business
                            areas, most notably Pacific Boulevard.
                            The ordinance also provides protection
                            for trees located in the public right-of-
                            way. Parkway trees are located along
                            Miles Avenue, Pacific Boulevard, and
                            Malabar Street. Many of the residential
                            street right-of-ways are lined with
                            street trees.
                          SECTION 4: RESOURCE MANAGEMENT          4-21

             Exhibit 4-3: Parks and Recreational Facilities Map
4-22 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
4.3 PLANNING VISION
The City of Huntington Park, with the implementation of the Resource Management
Element, seeks to promote an orderly pattern of quality future development to achieve
a complete and controlled balance of growth among land uses. The following issues
will be addressed with the implementation of the policies and programs contained in
the Resource Management Element:
      •	 To promote the maintenance and preservation of open space resources
         for recreation;
      •	 To promote the development and provision of passive open space
         resource conservation;
      •	 To promote the conservation and preservation of cultural resources for the
         benefit of future generations; and,
      •	 To promote the conservation and preservation of important natural resources.
The City’s resource management policies are outlined in the section that follows. The
policies are arranged under each of the issue areas discussed above. The following
policies will establish the policy framework for this Resource Management Element.
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ELEMENT POLICIES
ISSUE: REDUCE AIR POLLUTION
      •	 Resource Management Element Policy 1. The City of Huntington Park shall
         endorse regional and local air quality and transpor­tation management plans in
         order to reduce air pollution emissions and vehicular trips.
      •	 Resource Management Element Policy 2. The City of Huntington Park shall
         participate in regional and statewide measures to address global warming.
                                               SECTION 4: RESOURCE MANAGEMENT       4-23

     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 3. The City of Huntington Park shall
        encourage the improvement of existing, and the development of new shuttle
        and transit systems to reduce vehicular trips and air pollution.
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 4. The City of Huntington Park
        shall encourage the use of energy conservation devices in project design and
        construction to increase energy efficiency and decrease pollution emissions
        from energy production and use.
ISSUE: CONSERVE & PROTECT WATER RESOURCES
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 5. The City of Huntington Park shall
        protect groundwater resources from depletion and pollution.
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 6. The City of Huntington Park shall
        reduce water consumption by providing water conservation techniques and
        by using reclaimed water, water-conserving appliances, and drought-resistant
        landscaping when feasible.
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 7. The City of Huntington Park shall
        comply with Statewide measures that are designed to promote a reduction in
        water use.
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 8. The City of Huntington Park shall
        implement a water conservation ordinance that includes the installation of
        xeriscape and water-conserving plumbing fixtures.
ISSUE: ENERGY CONSERVATION
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 9. The City of Huntington Park shall
        encourage innovative site planning and building designs which minimize
        energy consumption by taking advantage of sun/shade patterns, prevailing
        winds, landscaping, and building materials.
     •	 Resource Management Element Policy 10. The City of Huntington Park
        shall establish, update, and implement building code requirements in
4-24 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

       accordance with State Title 24 energy and low impact development
       (LID) regulations.
    •	 Resource Management Element Policy 11. The City of Huntington Park
       shall promote the use of solar panels as a mean to reduce electricity usage.
    •	 Resource Management Element Policy 12. The City of Huntington Park
       shall promote the use of energy-efficient lighting throughout the City.
ISSUE: MAN-MADE AND NATURAL RESOURCES
    •	 Resource Management Element Policy 13. The City of Huntington Park
       shall promote the preservation of important historic resources in the City,
       including but not limited to, the ongoing implementation of the City’s Historic
       Preservation Ordinance.
    •	 Resource Management Element Policy 14. The City of Huntington Park
       shall comply with the requirements of AB-52 requiring consultation with local
       Native American tribes in the revised revision of new development proposals.
    •	 Resource Management Element Policy 15. The City of Huntington Park
       shall encourage the use of California native vegetation in the landscaping of
       larger developments.
    •	 Resource Management Element Policy 16. The City of Huntington Park
       shall strive to maintain parkway landscaping throughout the City.
ISSUE: OPEN SPACE, PARKS, & RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
    •	 Resource Management Element Policy 17. The City of Huntington Park
       shall provide an active and passive park system and recreational facilities,
       based on the distribution of population within the City so as to serve the
       needs of residents of all ages, economic levels, and physical conditions.
    •	 Resource Management Element Policy 18. The City of Huntington Park shall
       upgrade existing park facilities to improve park use and appearance and shall
                                             SECTION 4: RESOURCE MANAGEMENT         4-25

         utilize opportunities for joint use of public facilities for recreational purposes,
         such as schools, utility easements, and abandoned railroad right-of-ways.
      •	 Resource Management Element Policy 19. The City of Huntington Park
         shall encourage the development of common and private open space and
         recreational facilities within multi-family developments to increase
         recreational opportunities.
      •	 Resource Management Element Policy 20. The City of Huntington Park
         shall coordinate local open space development with regional open space
         opportunities to satisfy a wide range of recreational demands.
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS
The following programs will be implemented to ensure the City’s policies are realized:
      •	 Cultural Awareness. A cornerstone of this program will be the continued use
         of the Huntington Park home as a depository for the storage and collection of
         artifacts, photographs, books, and displays. The City will cooperate with local
         organizations (such as the local historical society, Chamber of Commerce,
         etc.) and individuals to acquire resource materials concerning local history and
         culture. These materials include books, photographs, artifacts, furniture, etc.,
         that may be displayed in the future. The City will continue to support cultural
         resource conservation and preservation efforts in Huntington Park.
             •	 Source of Funding: General Fund and Community Development Block
                Grant (CDBG).
             •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To establish and enhance to
                Huntington Park Home depository.
             •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
             •	 Implementation Schedule: The program will be established in 2017.
      •	 Cultural Resource Management. Should archaeological or paleontological
         resources be encountered during excavation and grading activities, all work
         would cease until appropriate salvage measures are established. The former
         Appendix K of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines
4-26 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

  shall be followed for excavation monitoring and salvage work that may be
  necessary. Salvage and preservation efforts will be undertaken pursuant to
  Appendix K requirements outlined in CEQA.
      •	  Source of Funding: Future development. 	
      •	  2016-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
      •	  Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
      •	  Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
          be continued.
•	 Energy Conservation. The City shall continue to enforce the energy
   conservation standards in Title 24 of the California Administrative Code, the
   Uniform Building Code, and other State laws on energy conservation design,
   insulation, and appliances. Energy needs shall be evaluated and conservation
   measures incorporated into new development in accordance with Appendix F
   of the State of California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines. Other
   measures that would reduce energy consumption during construction and
   subsequent operation of new development shall be encouraged. The City
   will continue to work with Southern California Edison and the Sempra Energy
   Company to promote energy conservation.
      •	  Source of Funding: General Fund and Future Development	
      •	  2016-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
      •	  Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
      •	  Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
          be continued.
•	 Historic Building Code. The City will investigate the feasibility of adopting
   alternate building code standards for historic structures, as authorized by
   the State Historical Building Code. The initial step will require City staff to
   amend the development code to include provisions for the maintenance,
   rehabilitation, and preservation of historic structures.
      •	 Source of Funding: General Fund.	
      •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To initiate this program following the
          adoption of the General Plan.
      •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
      •	 Implementation Schedule: The program will start in 2017.
                                         SECTION 4: RESOURCE MANAGEMENT            4-27

     •	 Park Development & Renovation Program. The City will continue to
        evaluate strategies to renovate and protect existing public open space from
        encroachment or conversion to other uses. Potential improvements will
        be programmed into the City’s Capital Improvements Program (CIP). This
        program will also evaluate the feasibility of new park development in the City.
        Huntington Park has an evident need for additional space for parks and open
        space. The Pritchard Field is slated for redevelopment as a means to provide
        additional active recreational resources to accommodate existing and future
        demand. Given physical and economic circumstances, it is impractical to
        plan for the acquisition and development of large-scale open space or park
        areas. In this light, it is beneficial to consider the implementation of a tot lot/
        mini park program to add more open space and recreational opportunities.
        This program also would be of value to the City’s transportation-dependent
        population.
            •	 Source of Funding: General Fund or other available funding.	
            •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.	
            •	 Responsible Agency: Community Services Department
            •	 Implementation Schedule:The program is ongoing and will
               be continued.
     •	 Parks and Recreation Program. There is a need to continue the existing
        level of service of parks and recreation for current and future residents.
        The Parks and Recreation Department is charged with the responsibility of
        conducting a diversified public recreation activities program for persons of
        all ages. There are four additional actions that will be beneficial in enhancing
        the services provided by the City. These actions include the following: 1.
        Adoption of a policy which states that the City’s park land standard is one-
        acre per 1,000 population; 2. Promote the use of joint use agreements to
        share facilities. 3. Conduct an outreach program to increase participation in
        local park and recreation resources by residents of certain neighborhoods
        and population groups such as the transportation-dependent; and 4. Publish
        a newsletter on a quarterly basis so that community residents are acquainted
        with the services provided by the City.
4-28 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

      •	 Source of Funding: General Fund.	
      •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To initiate this program following the
           adoption of the General Plan.	
      •	 Responsible Agency: Community Services Department
      •	 Implementation Schedule: The program will begin following the
           adoption of the General Plan.
•	 Park Watch/Adopt a Park. The City will consider the feasibility of
   implementing an adopt-a-park program along with a “park watch” program.
   Individual neighborhoods will be encouraged to become more involved with
   the operation, maintenance, and safety of their parks through an expanded
   neighborhood watch program. The first step of implementation will involve
   coordination with the Police Department to expand the scope of the
   neighborhood watch program to include the monitoring of local parks. The
   City will then establish a program by which individuals, organizations, and
   businesses can “adopt” a local city park. Qualifications for “park adoption”
   will be identified by the City Parks and Recreation Department. As part of the
   adoption process, individuals, organizations, and businesses may agree to
   assist in park maintenance, the financing of improvements, security, etc.
      •	   Source of Funding: General Fund.	
      •	   2016-2021 Program Objectives: The program will start in 2016.	
      •	   Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
      •	   Implementation Schedule: The program will start in 2016.
•	 Storm Water Pollution Prevention. This program is designed to prevent
   contaminants from entering the storm drain system. Key elements of this
   program are the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)
   requirements, which are administered through a County-wide permit. These
   requirements call for measures to be imposed during construction activities,
   handouts for residential uses, and best management practices (BMPs) for
   non-residential uses. The City shall also continue to implement projects to
   maintain storm water quality, such as street sweeping, catch basin
   grills, signs, etc.
                                          SECTION 4: RESOURCE MANAGEMENT       4-29

           •	 Source of Funding: General Fund and Developers.	
           •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.	
           •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development and Public
                Works Departments
           •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
                be continued.
     •	 Street Tree and Landscaping Program. To achieve a “sense of natural
        openness”, the City has instituted very successful programs involving street
        trees and landscaped railroad rights-of-way. This specialized street tree and
        landscaping exists along several City streets.
           •	 Source of Funding: General Fund and Community Development Block
                Grant (CDBG).	
           •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.	
           •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development and Public
                Works Departments
           •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
                be continued.
     •	 Water Conservation Ordinance. The City will continue to implement its
        water conservation ordinance. In addition, the City will review the ordinance
        to ensure that it promotes the use of xeriscape landscaping, water-conserving
        materials, and devices that reflect current technology. Finally, the City shall
        review, and as appropriate, develop water conservation programs for public
        facilities (civic center, parks, maintenance yards, etc.).
           •	 Source of Funding: General Fund and Community Development Block
                Grant (CDBG).	
           •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.	
           •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
           •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
                be continued.
4-30 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

4.4 PLANNING IMPLEMENTATION
The Resource Management Plan for the City of Huntington Park calls for maximum
protection of the local environment and available resources. The plan’s major
components address the conservation of the remaining resources and the provision
of parks and recreation facilities for City residents. The plan consists of programs
for preservation of significant resources and standards for development in areas with
identified resources. The plan also addresses parks, recreation facilities, and
open space.
PARK SERVICE STANDARDS
The park classifications include the following:
      •	 Mini-Parks are smaller parks that are typically between 2,500 square feet to
         under one acre in area. Mini-parks typically have a service area radius of ¼
         mile or less. These facilities typically include a small picnic area and tot-lot.
         Chesley Park is an example of a mini-park.
                                                 SECTION 4: RESOURCE MANAGEMENT           4-31

       •	 Neighborhood Parks are the basic type
          of park facility as they typically serve
          individual neighborhoods. According
          to National Recreation and Park
          Association (NRPA) standards, these
          facilities are ½-acre to five acres in area.
          Neighborhood parks have a service
          area radius of between ¼ mile to ½
          mile. The facilities typically provided by
          neighborhood parks may include game
          courts, athletic fields, picnic areas, and
          playgrounds. The majority of the City’s
          parks fall into this category.
       •	 Community Parks are larger parks that
          serve multiple neighborhoods. These parks typically have five acres or more
          in area and include a variety of facilities that may include game courts, athletic
          fields, picnic areas, playgrounds, and community facilities. These parks have
          a service area radius of between ½ mile to three miles. Salt Lake Park is the
          City’s only Community Park.
       •	 Special Facilities includes specialized facilities that may serve a single
          purpose (game court, swimming pool, etc.) that cannot be readily classified.
          Many of the amenities provided by the City’s parks fall into this category.
The NRPA has developed a generic classification system for park facilities as well as
corresponding standards applicable to the various types of parks. This classification
system is designed to apply to a broad range of communities and requires some
modification to make the park standards applicable to Huntington Park. The NRPA
standards classify parks according to their size, service area, and function. However,
there may be some difficulty in making a direct link between the NRPA standards and
activities that are presently available to Huntington Park residents. For example, the
acreage of a particular park may correspond with the recommended NRPA standards
for a neighborhood park, though its actual function (as characterized by its facilities
and use) may correspond more closely with that of a community park. In these
instances, it is more appropriate to place the park in a category that better describes
the park’s actual function.
4-32   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

THIS PAGE HAS BEEN INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.
                       SECTION 4: RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 4-33
HEALTH & SAFETY
       ELEMENT
5.1 INTRODUCTION
SCOPE OF HEALTH & SAFETY ELEMENT
The Health and Safety Element of the City of Huntington Park General Plan focuses
on public safety through prevention and preparedness. The implementation of the
programs outlined in this Element will assist in preventing or reducing the potential
for injury, damage and disruption resulting from natural or man-made catastrophes.
Public safety programs include procedures for the elimination or avoidance of hazards,
emergency preparedness, and emergency response. This Element also serves as the
framework for emergency preparedness planning that may be undertaken in the future.
Finally, the Health and Safety Element outlines the public safety issues that will need
to be considered as part of the implementation of land use and development policy
provided for in this General Plan.
5-2   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
The Health and Safety Element also establishes specific standards related to public
safety. These standards serve as guidelines for future planning and land use decisions.
The Health and Safety Element maps the location of known hazards, evacuation routes,
and indicates peak water supply requirements, minimum road widths, clearances
around structures, and other factors affecting safety procedures.
RELATIONSHIP TO GENERAL PLAN
The Health and Safety Element is consistent with other elements of the General Plan.
The Mobility and Circulation Element addresses transportation issues that relate to the
Health and Safety Element which promotes efficient traffic flow related to emergency
response and evacuation objectives. Concerns related to public safety must also be
considered in planning for future development in the City which, in turn, is the focus
of the Land Use and Sustainability Element. The Land Use and Sustainability Element
is often referred to as the “most important General Plan element.” The Health and
Safety Element, however, is concerned with the health and welfare of those persons
living, working, or visiting the City. The successful implementation of the Health and
Safety Element may result in a significant reduction in loss of life and injury.
According to the State’s planning laws, a Health and Safety Element (shall be required)
for the protection of the community from any unreasonable risks associated with
the effect of seismically induced surface rupture, ground-shaking, ground failure,
tsunami, seiche, and dam failure; slope instability leading to mud slides and landslides,
subsidence, and other geologic hazards known to the legislative body; flooding and
wild land and urban fires. The Health and Safety Element shall include the mapping
of known seismic and other geologic hazards. It shall also address evacuation routes,
peak load water supply requirements, and minimum road widths and clearances
around structures, as those items relate to identified fire and geologic hazards.
The City of Huntington Park Health and Safety Element fulfills the aforementioned
requirements. While the State law focuses on seismic risk, the Health and Safety
Element has a broader scope that considers a wide range of natural and man-made
hazards that could affect the City in the future. As stated previously, this Health and
Safety Element emphasizes the importance of emergency preparedness in reducing
the potential for loss of life, injury, and property damage. An additional objective of
the Health and Safety Element is to implement programs that will help to avoid the
creation of hazardous conditions. Finally, the Health and Safety Element underscores
the City’s commitment to provide the material and human resources needed to deal
with future emergencies.
                                                          SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY    5-3

5.2 PLANNING BACKGROUND
OVERVIEW OF SEISMIC HAZARDS
The City of Huntington Park is located on the northeastern portion of the Los Angeles
Basin. This basin is an alluvial plain bounded on the north by the Santa Monica
Mountains, on the northeast by Repetto Hills, and Puente Hills, on the south by the
Santa Ana Mountains and San Joaquin Hills and on the east by the Pacific Ocean. The
severity of earthquakes is normally classified according to their magnitude, or intensity.
Because the amount of destruction generally decreases with increasing distance from
the epicenter, earthquakes are assigned several intensities, but only one magnitude.
The destructiveness of an earthquake at a particular location is commonly reported
using the Richter scale (magnitude) or Mercalli scale (intensity).
The Modified Mercalli Scale (MM) employs a subjective classification system based
on observations of damage caused by past earthquakes. The scale has 12 levels of
damage, the higher the number, the greater the damage. For example, the City of
Huntington Park is predicted to experience ground-shaking with a MM intensity of
6.0 to 6.5 during a Magnitude 8.3 along the San Andreas Fault with a maximum MM
5-4  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
intensity 6.5 to 7.0. The intensity of seismic ground-shaking at any given location is a
function of several factors, but primarily the magnitude of the earthquake, the distance
from the epicenter to the planning area, and the local geologic and topographic
conditions. The recent Elysian Park and Northridge earthquakes did demonstrate,
however, that the ground intensities from these previously unknown blind thrust faults
could generate significant damage to both low-rise and high-rise structures which were
previously considered to be capable of withstanding the effects of strong
ground motion.
SEISMIC FAULTS IN THE AREA
The State of California, under the guidelines of the Alquist-Priolo Special Studies Act,
classifies earthquake faults according to the following criteria:
       •	 Active faults exhibit proven displacement of the ground surface within the
          last 11,000 years (Holocene);
       •	 Potentially active faults exhibit evidence of movement within the last 750,000
          to two million years.
       •	 Inactive faults have not moved in the last 11,000 years, as determined from
          direct geologic evidence, and are presumed to be inactive.
The State definition of an active fault is designed to gauge the surface rupture
potential of a fault, and is used to prevent development from being located directly
on the trace of an active fault. In general, potentially active faults are, relative to active
faults, less likely to be the origin of a damaging earthquake. In reality, however, there is
a gradation of seismic risk posed by potentially active and active faults.
There are no active or potentially active earthquake faults known to traverse the City
of Huntington Park, thus, no ground rupture hazards are expected in the City. The City
is, however, located within a seismically active region and is subject to ground-shaking
hazards associated with earthquake events in the region. Seismicity in the Los Angeles
area historically has been defined by earthquake events along the Newport-Inglewood,
San Fernando, San Jacinto and San Andreas faults. Other faults of concern in the area
include the Whittier fault, the Elysian Park Thrust, and the Santa Monica-Hollywood
fault, as shown in Exhibit 5-1.
                                                           SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY        5-5

                                    Exhibit 5-1: Regional Fault Map
5-6 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
The major faults within the Southern California region, their distance and direction
relative to the City of Huntington Park, the maximum credible earthquake postulated
for each fault, and the maximum probable earthquake for the faults identified in Table
5-1. The maximum credible earthquake is the largest magnitude event that appears
capable of occurring under the presently known tectonic framework. The maximum
probable earthquake is the maximum earthquake likely to occur during a
100-year interval.
Table 5-1: Major Faults
The major faults in the Southern California region are described below.
                                                        SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY   5-7
     •	 The Newport-Inglewood Fault Zone is located approximately 9.0 miles
        west of the City. The 1933 Long Beach Earthquake occurred on the Newport-
        Inglewood fault. A maximum credible earthquake of Magnitude 6.8 on the
        Newport-Inglewood fault has the potential of generating horizontal peak
        ground accelerations of about 0.2 to 0.3 g in the area. Ground-shaking could
        last approximately 22 seconds, with seismic Mercalli intensity values of VII to
        VIII. This type of earthquake would be particularly damaging to older low-rise
        structures located within the City.
     •	 The Palos Verdes Hills Fault is located 20 miles southwest of the City and
        is considered to be an active fault based on late Pleistocene and Holocene
        age displacements that have been interpreted along offshore segments of
        the fault in the San Pedro shelf. The fault is considered to be capable of
        generating a maximum credible earthquake of Magnitude 7.0 that would
        cause seismic intensities in the IX to X range. The Palos Verdes fault extends
        for a distance of approximately 60 miles from San Pedro Bay to the Santa
        Monica Bay. The Palos Verdes fault could result in greater damage than that
        anticipated from an earthquake on the San Andreas Fault due to its proximity
        to the City.
     •	 The Sierra Madre Fault Zone is located approximately 15 miles northeast
        of the City at the base of the San Gabriel Mountains and forms a prominent
5-8 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

   50-mile long east-west structural zone on the south side of the San Gabriel
   Mountains. The Sierra Madre fault system was responsible for the uplift of the
   San Gabriel Mountains by faulting in response to tectonic compression.
•	 The Whittier-Elsinore Fault Zone is located along the southern base of the
   Puente Hills approximately 9.0 miles east of the City of Huntington Park. This
   northwest-trending fault extends from the Whittier Narrows area continuing
   southeast across the Santa Ana River, past Lake Elsinore, into western Imperial
   County and then continuing on into Mexico. This fault is expected to be
   capable of generating a Magnitude 6.6 earthquake.
•	 The Santa Monica-Malibu Coast Fault System is an east-west trending
   fault system located along the southern margin of the western Santa Monica
   Mountains and into Santa Monica Bay. The nearest fault trace is located
   approximately 22 miles west of the City. Although there has been very little
   seismic activity along this fault system, the Malibu Coast fault segment has
   been characterized as active based on displaced soils. This displacement was
   estimated to have occurred about 5,000 years ago.
•	 The San Andreas Fault Zone is located approximately 37 miles to the north
   and northeast of the City at its nearest point. This fault zone extends from
   the Gulf of California continuing northward to the Cape Mendocino area
   where it continues northward along the ocean floor. The total length of the
   San Andreas Fault Zone is approximately 750 miles. This fault has been active
   during historic times including the 1906 (estimated Magnitude 8.0) earthquake
   in San Francisco and the 1857 Fort Tejon earthquake (estimated Magnitude
   7.9) where at least 250 miles of surface rupture occurred. The length of the
   fault and its active seismic history indicates that it has a very high potential
   for large-scale movement in the near future (Magnitude 8.0), and should be
   considered in land use planning for most areas of California.
•	 The San Jacinto Fault Zone is located approximately 44 miles northeast of
   the City and is part of the San Andreas Fault System. The two fault strands
   separate near the San Gabriel Mountains, where the San Jacinto fault
   extends southeastward to form the southwestern boundary of the San Jacinto
   Mountains and the San Timoteo Badlands. This fault is thought capable
                                                    SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY      5-9

          of generating a maximum credible earthquake of magnitude 7.0. Strong
          ground-shaking from this earthquake would last about 25 seconds, with MM
          intensity values in the VIII-IX range.
       •	 The Elysian Park Blind Thrust Fault is exposed for approximately two miles
          at Elysian Park but is not exposed over the rest of its trace toward the east.
          (Blind thrust faults are low-angle or low-lying faults occurring generally five to
          15 kilometers below the ground surface which have no surface manifestation).
          This fault underlies the urbanized portion of the Los Angeles Basin, including
          downtown Los Angeles, as inferred from geophysical and geomorphologic
          evidence and the clustering of deep earthquakes in the region. The Elysian
          Blind Thrust is located approximately five miles from the City of Huntington
          Park at its nearest point. The Elysian Park Fault was the source of the
          magnitude 5.9 earthquake near Whittier in 1987. This fault is thought to be
          capable of generating earthquakes of magnitude 7.2 to 7.6 and would result
          in intense ground-shaking in the entire Los Angeles basin.
       •	 The Torrance-Wilmington Fault is a newly postulated, blind thrust fault and
          fold system located under the Palos Verdes Peninsula. Although the location
          of the Torrance-Wilmington Fault System is not well defined, the fault and fold
          belt have been divided into several segments. It is estimated that if one of
          the segments ruptures, an earthquake of Magnitude 5 to 7.5, would occur. If
          two or more segments rupture simultaneously, an earthquake of a magnitude
          greater than 7.8 could occur.
The four largest recent earthquakes that have caused major damage in the Los
Angeles basin include the 1933 Long Beach (Magnitude 6.3), 1971 San Fernando
(Magnitude 6.4), the 1987 Whittier Narrows (Magnitude 5.9), and the 1994 Northridge
(Magnitude 6.7) earthquakes. The 1933 Long Beach earthquake occurred on the
southern segment of the Newport-Inglewood fault, from Newport Beach to Signal
Hill. The 1971 San Fernando earthquake occurred along the San Fernando segment
of the Sierra Madre fault zone. The Whittier Narrows earthquake occurred on the
Elysian thrust fault in 1987. Finally, the most recent major earthquake, the Northridge
earthquake, occurred on the Oakridge fault in the San Fernando Valley in January 1994.
Most injuries and property damage from a major earthquake impacting the City
will be caused by strong ground motion, especially structural damage to buildings.
The developed areas of Huntington Park consist mostly of low density and medium
5-10   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

density residential zones. Less extensive areas are devoted to low-rise commercial
development. Low-rise buildings (less than three stories) common in the City are
more likely to be damaged by a near-field earthquake, such as one occurring on the
Newport-Inglewood fault or the Hollywood fault.
The wood-frame construction used in the residential and some commercial
development in the City generally performs well during earthquakes. These buildings
may experience significant structural and nonstructural damage, but rarely collapse.
However, a trend in wood-frame construction in recent years, in particular in housing
construction, has been the split level and irregular floor plans. Earthquake intensities
of VIII in the Mercalli Scale may cause torsional racking of the foundation and wall
elements of irregular structures. Single-family residences built before the 1952
Building Code was implemented are more likely to slip off their foundations as a result
of strong ground motion associated with nearby earthquakes. Mobile homes are also
susceptible to slipping off their foundation.
Critical facilities are structures and parts of a community’s development that must
remain operational after an earthquake. In addition, those facilities that pose
unacceptable risks to public safety if severely damaged are also of critical concern.
Essential facilities such as medical centers, fire and police stations, emergency
operations centers, schools, and communication centers are also considered to be
critical facilities. High-occupancy facilities have the potential of resulting in a large
number of casualties or crowd control problems. This category includes the Civic
Center, churches, and large multi-family residential complexes. Dependent care
facilities that house populations with special evacuation considerations, such as pre-
schools and schools, group care homes, and nursing and convalescent homes are also
considered critical facilities.
The State, with the passage of the Garrison Act of 1969, has jurisdictional responsibility
to ensure that public schools are adequately constructed to seismic standards. The
Los Angeles County Fire Department is responsible for inspections of deficient
electrical, plumbing, mechanical, or fire safety fixtures in high-occupancy residential
and commercial facilities.
The California Department of Conservation, Oil, Gas, and Geothermal Division has
prepared Planning Scenarios for a major earthquake on the Newport-Inglewood and
San Andreas faults to assist in emergency response and recovery efforts. These reports
                                                         SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY       5-11

show the City of Huntington Park as having seismic intensities of eight and above, and
liquefaction hazards. The Long Beach Freeway and other infrastructure and utility lines
in the area would be subject to localized damage.
LIQUEFACTION RISK
Liquefaction may occur when loose, unconsolidated, saturated fine-to-medium-grained
sandy soils are subjected to ground vibrations during an earthquake. Liquefaction
occurs in areas where the ground water table is within 50 feet of the ground surface
when the Mercalli scale intensities are VII or greater. When these sediments are
shaken, a sudden increase in pore water pressure causes the soils to lose strength and
behave as liquid. Excess water pressure is vented upward through fissures and cracks
in the soil causing water-soil slurry to bubble onto the ground surface. These are
called sand boils, sand blows, or sand volcanoes. Liquefaction-related effects include
loss of bearing strength, ground oscillations, lateral spreading, and flow failures or
slumping. Structures constructed on soils that liquefy may sink or topple over as the
soil loses its bearing strength.
A study of earthquake hazards by the United States Geological Survey (USGS) indicates
that a majority of the City is subject to liquefaction, although the portion located north
of Gage Avenue, west of Pacific Boulevard, and east of Wilmington Avenue is not at
risk for liquefaction (refer to Exhibit 5-2). Areas containing shallow groundwater within
30 feet or less of the ground surface are susceptible to liquefaction hazards during
seismic shaking.
FLOODING AND INUNDATION HAZARDS
The City is located approximately 14 miles to the north of the Pacific Ocean and will
not be exposed to the effects of a tsunami. In addition, there are no surface bodies
of water located in the City; therefore, the risk of being impacted by a seiche is non-
existent. A seiche occurs when two waves traveling in opposite directions collide,
creating a larger standing wave.
A review of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood insurance map
obtained from the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works, indicated that
5-12   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
the City is located in Zone X. This flood zone has an annual probability of flooding of
less than 0.2% and represents areas outside the 500-year flood plain. Thus, properties
located in Zone X are not located within a 100-year flood plain.
The City of Huntington Park is located within the inundation paths of the Hansen
and Sepulveda Dams. Large areas downstream of the Hansen and Sepulveda Dams,
including the City of Huntington Park, are at risk of inundation in the event of dam
failure. The Hansen and Sepulveda Dams are operated by the Army Corps of Engineers
and were constructed primarily for flood control. The flood hazards associated with
dam failure will affect most areas south of the dams.
                                                         SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY  5-13
                                       Exhibit 5-2: Liquefaction Map
5-14 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
       •	 The Hansen Dam is located on the northern edge of the San Fernando Valley,
          approximately four miles west of Sunland. The inundation area of the Hansen
          Dam include areas along the Tujunga Creek and several communities in the
          valley, the City of Los Angeles, cities in south central Los Angeles, and areas
          along the Los Angeles and San Gabriel Rivers. The City of Huntington Park is
          located approximately 25 miles south of the dam but dam failure will affect the
          entire City of Huntington Park. Flood waters will arrive 17.75 hours after failure
          with a maximum depth of one foot approximately 21 hours after failure.
       •	 The Sepulveda Dam is located on the Los Angeles River near the intersection
          of the Ventura and San Diego Freeways near the City of Van Nuys. The
          probable maximum flood from the Sepulveda Dam is expected to last four
          days with a total volume of 163,200 acre-feet. The flood will affect areas along
          the Los Angeles River, and the cities of Los Angeles, Huntington Park, South
          Gate, Compton, Lynwood, Maywood, Huntington Park, Huntington Park, and
          Huntington Park Gardens. The flood waters are anticipated to reach the City
          approximately ten hours after failure. A maximum flood elevation of two feet
          is expected approximately 12 hours after failure.
FIRE HAZARDS
There are no open grass areas in or around the City which present brush fire or
wildfire hazards in the City of Huntington Park. The major risk involves structural fires
associated with older buildings in the City which may not be in compliance with the
more recent and stringent fire safety codes and regulations.
Furthermore, industrial uses may also be considered to have a greater risk for fire due
to the higher potential for use of flammable, explosive, and hazardous materials. The
industrial uses in Huntington Park are located within the western and northern portions
of the City.
                                                          SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY     5-15

HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
All businesses that handle hazardous materials are required by various Federal, State,
and local agencies to submit a business plan to their local administering agency (the
reportable quantities are 50 or more gallons of a liquid, 500 pounds or more or a solid,
or 200 cubic feet or more of a gas at standard temperature and pressure; quantities for
acutely hazardous materials vary according to the substance).
Every hazardous material handler is required to submit a business plan and an
inventory of hazardous substances and acutely hazardous materials to the Huntington
Park Police Department and the County Fire Department on a yearly basis. If the
hazardous materials inventory of a business should change, a revised business plan
must be submitted. Hazardous material users and generators in the City include
gasoline stations, auto repairs shops, printers and photo labs, clinics, dry cleaners,
schools, fire stations, and a variety of other commercial and industrial land uses. The
State of California defines a hazardous material as a substance that is toxic, ignitable or
flammable, or reactive and/or corrosive. An extremely hazardous material is defined as
a substance that shows high acute or chronic toxicity, carcinogenicity, bio-accumulative
properties, persistence in the environment, or is water-reactive (California Code of
Regulations, Title 22).
The primary concern associated with the release of a hazardous material relates to the
public health risks of exposure. Toxic gases are a primary concern, since a gaseous
toxic plume is more difficult to contain than a solid or liquid spill and a gas can impact
a larger segment of the population in a shorter time span. Releases of hazardous
materials may also occur during a natural disaster, such as during an earthquake.
Improperly-stored containers of hazardous substances may overturn or break, pipelines
may rupture, and storage tanks may fail. Containers may also explode when subjected
to high temperatures, such as those generated by a fire. If two or more chemicals
which are reactive when combined come in contact as a result of a spill, the hazard may
be compounded.
 The Uniform Fire Code includes criteria designed to minimize the risk of an accident.
These guidelines are to be followed when storing, using, or transporting hazardous
materials, and include secondary containment of substances, segregation of chemicals
to reduce reactivity during a release, sprinkler and alarm systems, monitoring, venting
and auto shutoff equipment, and treatment requirements for toxic gas releases.
5-16  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
EMERGENCY RESPONSE
The City of Huntington Park contracts its fire services through the Los Angeles County
Fire Department. The Los Angeles County Fire Department operates two fire stations
in the City: Fire Station 164, located at 6301 South Santa Fe Avenue, serves as the
area’s battalion headquarters (Huntington Park is serviced by Los Angeles County Fire
Department-Battalion 13); and Fire Station 165, located at 3255 Saturn Avenue.
LAW ENFORCEMENT AND CRIME
Police protection for the City is provided
by the Huntington Park Police Department.
The Huntington Park Police Department
(HPPD) consists of 72 sworn personnel and
45 civilian employees for a total of 117 full-
time employees. The department also
has 25 part-time employees. The City of
Huntington Park has had police protection
since it’s incorporation in 1906. The HPPD was
relocated twice, once in 1933 following the
Long Beach earthquake, and a second time in
1950 upon the completion of the Civic Center. In addition, the City operates a 22 bed
Type I Jail which houses unsentenced prisoners prior to their transfer to the custody
of the Los Angeles County Sheriff. According to the City, the average police response
times were four minutes and 23 seconds for emergency calls, 11 minutes and 23
seconds for high priority calls, and 17 minutes and 19 seconds for non-emergency calls.
The greatest perceived threat to health and safety for many residents in the City is not
associated with the aforementioned natural and man-made hazards. While there is
certainty that a major and damaging earthquake will affect the City within the next ten-
to-twenty-year planning period governed by this General Plan, the greatest perceived
risk to health and safety is related to crime. Police protection and law enforcement
services are provided by the City of Huntington Park Police Department. Crime
statistics obtained for the City of Huntington Park also indicate an overall decrease
in the number of reported crimes. However, certain types of crime continue to be of
serious concern in the City. Table 5-2 shows crime incidence between 1995 and 2014.
                                                         SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY   5-17

     Table 5-2: Crime Statistics for Huntington Park 1995-2014
5-18 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
HEALTH CARE SERVICES AND EMERGENCY SHELTERS
Primary health care is provided by the St. Francis Medical Center in Lynwood; Downey
Community Hospital; U.S.C. Medical Center and the Los Angeles Community
Hospital in East Los Angeles; Martin Luther King, Jr. Hospital in Los Angeles; Rio
Hondo Memorial Hospital in Downey; Rancho Los Amigos Medical Center in Downey;
and Community Hospital of Huntington Park. A number of structures have been
designated as emergency shelters by the Emergency Preparedness Commission for
the cities in Los Angeles County.
FIRE PROTECTION STANDARDS - FIRE FLOW
To ensure emergency water supply
throughout the City, new construction
is required to meet specific fire flow
standards. Fire flows for individual
structures are calculated according
to size of the structure (floor area),
type of construction (wood, non-
combustible, fire-resistance), building
height, presence of sprinkler systems,
distance between buildings, and
type of use. The Los Angeles County
Fire Department’s Fire Prevention Bureau determines the minimum flows for new
construction based on building plans and developers are responsible for providing
adequate fire flows. This ensures that hydrant capacity is available to meet fire
emergency needs of all developments. The City of Huntington Park follows the County
Fire Department Fire Code standards for fire flows and emergency access roads. Fire
flows of 1,000 gallons per minute (gpm) to 5,000 gpm at 20 pounds per square inch
(psi) of residual pressure for a duration of two to five hours is needed at residential and
commercial uses, with hydrants every 300 to 600 feet, based on the type of occupancy.
The water system must be capable of supplying adequate quantities of water for
firefighting purposes, in addition to the daily supply for domestic demand in the area.
Adequate reservoir capacity is determined by the availability of water for peak day
supply plus fire flow requirements. Generally, peak day supply is twice the average day
demand and total fire flow requirements are estimated by the population of the area.
                                                          SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY     5-19

                                       Exhibit 5-3: Critical Facilities
5-20 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
CHARACTERISTICS OF NOISE
Community noise levels are typically measured in terms of the A-weighted decibel
(dBA). A-weighing is a frequency correction that correlates overall sound pressure
levels with the frequency response of the human ear. Additional units of measurement
have been developed to evaluate the longer term characteristics of sound. One of
the more common noise measurements uses statistical samples in terms of percentile
noise levels. For example, the L10 noise level represents the noise level that is
exceeded 10% of the time. The L50 noise level represents the median noise level; half
of the time, noise exceeds this level, and half of the time noise is less than this level.
The L90 noise level represents the background noise level experienced during 90%
of the time. The equivalent noise level (Leq) is a single-number representation of the
fluctuating sound level in decibels over a specified period of time.
Community Noise Equivalent Level (CNEL) is the noise measurement that represents
an average of all measured noise levels obtained over a specified period of time.
The CNEL scale includes an additional 5.0 dB adjustment to sounds occurring in the
evening (7:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.) in addition to the 10.0 dB adjustment to sounds
occurring in the late evening and early morning hours (between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00
a.m.). Representative noise sources and sound levels are shown in Exhibit 5-4.
NOISE SOURCES IN THE CITY
The major sources of noise in the City consist of vehicular traffic traveling along the
City’s major arterial routes and trains utilizing the Alameda Corridor. Noise from trains
using the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe (AT&SF), Union Pacific (UPRR) and Southern
Pacific (SPRR) rail lines are a secondary source of mobile noise.
The UPRR line along the western section of the City affects residential uses at the
western end of the City. The SPRR along Randolph Street also affects residential uses,
although the SPRR line along Alameda Street is not located near any residential use.
Residential areas contribute resident gatherings and activities, vehicles, and operating
household equipment to the ambient noise environment. Schools create their own
type of noise from buses, students, school activities, maintenance, and outdoor games.
                                                          SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY      5-21

     Exhibit 5-4: Typical Noise Structures and Loudness Scale
                            Source: Blodgett Baylosis Environmental Planning
            Serious Injury
                                    Sonic boom
                 Pain
                                    Jet take off at 200 feet
                                    Music in night club interior
                                    Motorcycle at 20 feet
                                    Power mower
              Discomfort            Freight Train at 50 feet
                                    Food blender
                                    Electric mixer, light rail train horn
                                    Portable fan, roadway traffic at 50 feet
           Range of Typical
            Noise Levels            Dishwasher, air conditioner
                                    Normal conversation
                                    Refrigerator, light traffic at 100 feet
                                    Library interior (quiet study area)
             Threshold of           Rustling leaves
               Hearing
5-22 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
NOISE SENSITIVE LAND USES
Hospitals and convalescent homes, churches, libraries, schools, and child care facilities
are considered noise sensitive uses and are best located away from noise sources.
Noise sensitive land uses in the City include the City’s schools, Huntington Park
Convalescent Hospital, the library, parks, and residential areas. These uses are subject
to vehicular and stationary noise in the surrounding area. Residential developments
and mobile home parks are located along the City’s major thoroughfares and may be
subject to vehicular noise throughout the day. Some residences are also located near
the railroad tracks and are exposed to train noise during certain times of the day and
night. Noise sensitive receptors are shown in Exhibit 5-5.
COMMUNITY NOISE SURVEY
                                    A community noise survey was conducted as part of
                                    the Noise Element’s update in 1996 to document the
                                    existing noise environment. Twelve locations were
                                    selected for the survey. Noise along transportation
                                    corridors are highest along major roadways and
                                    decrease as the distance from the roadways (noise
                                    source) increases. Thus, they may be shown as
                                    contours representing equal noise exposures
                                    along the roadway. The noise contours provide a
                                    visualization of estimates of sound level. The noise
                                    measurement results are representative samples of
                                    urban residential, commercial, and industrial areas.
                                    These noise measurement results may be used as a
                                    general guideline or indication of noise levels within
                                    the community. The noise measurements survey
                                    sheets are included in the Appendices.
                                    The City of Huntington Park roadway noise contour
                                    data were generated with the Federal Highway
                                    Administration’s Highway Traffic Noise Prediction
                                    Model, U.S. Department of Transportation (1978).
                                    Model input data included existing average daily
                                                         SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY    5-23

traffic levels; day/evening/night percentages of autos, medium, and heavy trucks;
vehicle speeds; ground attenuation factors; and roadway widths. The distance from
the roadway centerline to the roadway’s 60, 65, and 70 dB CNEL contours for the
existing conditions are provided in the Appendices. Pacific Boulevard, Florence
Avenue, State Street, Santa Fe Avenue, Slauson Avenue, Soto Street, and Gage
Avenue are the major generators of noise within Huntington Park. The I-710 freeway
also generates traffic noise within the City. As shown, traffic noise levels dominate the
ambient noise environment along Gage, Florence, and Eastern Avenues, and the I-710
Freeway. These noises affect residences, trailer parks, a convalescent home, and other
noise sensitive uses located along major roadways.
TRAIN NOISE
Trains create individual noise impacts lasting several minutes
during each pass. Noise from passing trains is dependent on
the number of trains, speed, type of tracks, grade crossings,
track curves, and train horns, and the type of trains. The
following railroad right-of-ways are located in and around
the City: Union Pacific (UPRR), Southern Pacific (SPRR), and
Atchison Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad (AT&SF). Noise may
also emanate from the Alameda Corridor, which extends
through Alameda Street. The UPRR tracks along Salt Lake
Avenue are used by approximately seven trains daily, with the
majority of train trips occurring between 7:00 a.m.
and 7:00 p.m.
AIRPORT NOISE
The City of Huntington Park is not located within the noise impact areas of nearby
airports, although there are several commercial airports serving the Huntington Park
area: the Long Beach Airport, the Compton Airport, and the Los Angeles International
Airport in Los Angeles. (over-flights on approach) from these airports are sources of
aircraft noise in the City of Huntington Park.
5-24   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Exhibit 5-5: Noise Sensitive Land Uses
                                     SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY 5-25
5.3 PLANNING VISION
HEALTH & SAFETY ELEMENT POLICIES
The City of Huntington Park, with the implementation of the Health and Safety
Element, seeks to protect the health and safety of those persons living and working
in the City. The following issues will be addressed with the implementation of the
policies and programs contained in the Health and Safety Element:
      •	 To ensure that every effort is made to promote emergency preparedness;
      •	 To promote land use and noise compatibility; and,
      •	 To minimize the impact of noise on local residents and businesses.
The City’s health and safety policies are outlined in the section that follows. The
policies are arranged under each of the issue areas discussed above. The following
policies will establish the policy framework for this Health and Safety Element.
ISSUE: SEISMIC HAZARDS
      •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 1. The City of Huntington Park shall
         continue to implement the City’s seismic hazard abatement program for
         existing un-reinforced buildings.
      •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 2. In areas with liquefaction potential, the
         City of Huntington Park shall require review of soils and geologic conditions,
         and if necessary, on-site borings, to determine liquefaction susceptibility of
         the proposed site.
      •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 3. The City of Huntington Park shall
         maintain and periodically review emergency procedures for earthquakes in the
         City’s Disaster Response Plan.
5-26  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 4. The City of Huntington Park shall
       promote earthquake preparedness within the community by participation
       in quake awareness programs, including distribution of brochure materials
       in Spanish and English. The City will encourage property owners to anchor
       buildings to their foundations, bolt water heaters to walls, and implement
       other preventive measures.
ISSUE: FLOODING
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 5. The City of Huntington Park shall work
       with the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works to identify and
       construct needed local and regional storm drain improvements to relieve local
       flooding problems in Huntington Park.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 6. The City of Huntington Park shall support
       the Army Corps of Engineers to expand the capacity of the Rio Hondo and
       Los Angeles River channels.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 7. The City of Huntington Park shall prepare
       and maintain a master drainage plan.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 8. The City of Huntington Park shall require
       local drainage-related improvements to be implemented as part of new
       development approvals.
ISSUE: FIRE
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 9. The City of Huntington Park shall enforce
       building code requirements for new construction that ensure provision of
       adequate fire protection.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 10. The City of Huntington Park shall
       maintain mutual aid agreements with surrounding jurisdictions for
        fire protection.
                                                     SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY   5-27

     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 11. The City of Huntington Park shall
        maintain an ongoing fire inspection program to reduce fire hazards associated
        with older buildings, critical facilities, public assembly facilities, and industrial
        and commercial buildings.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 12. The City of Huntington Park shall
        maintain and periodically review procedures for managing fire emergencies in
        the City’s Disaster Response Plan.
ISSUE: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 13. The City of Huntington Park shall locate
        new and existing land uses involved in production, storage, transportation,
        handling, and/or disposal of hazardous materials a safe distance from other
        land uses that may be sensitive to such activities.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 14. The City of Huntington Park shall
        coordinate with Los Angeles County in sponsoring regular household
        hazardous waste disposal programs to enable residents to bring backyard
        pesticides, cleaning fluids, paint cans, and other common household toxics to
        a centralized collection center for proper disposal.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 15. The City of Huntington Park shall
        cooperate with the County in local implementation of applicable portions of
        the Los Angeles Hazardous Waste Management Plan.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 16. The City of Huntington Park shall
        consult with companies operating underground pipelines, as well as the Public
        Utilities Commission and Office of Pipeline Safety, to determine the likelihood
        of explosion or rupture in case of accident or earthquake and shall ensure
        that the Fire Department and other disaster response agencies have access to
        route, depth, and shut-off information about each line.
5-28 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

ISSUE: EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 17. The City of Huntington Park shall
       maintain and regularly update the City’s Disaster Response Plan.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 18. The City of Huntington Park shall hold
       emergency drills to test the effectiveness of emergency pre­paredness plans.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 19. The City of Huntington Park shall
       periodically inspect emergency shelters to ensure that equipment and
       supplies are available and operational.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 20. The City of Huntington Park shall
       sponsor and support bilingual public education programs on emergency
       preparedness and disaster response. The City will distribute information about
       emergency planning to community groups, schools, churches, and
       business associations.
ISSUE: TRANSPORTATION NOISE
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 21. The City of Huntington Park shall ensure
       the inclusion of noise mitigation measures in the design of new roadway
       projects in Huntington Park.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 22. The City of Huntington Park shall
       enforce City, State, and Federal noise standards, especially those for mufflers
       and modified exhaust systems.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 23. The City of Huntington Park shall
       monitor noise from buses and other heavy vehicles in residential areas. If
       necessary, the City will consider alternate circulation routes for those
       types of vehicles.
    •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 24. The City of Huntington Park shall
       discourage through-traffic in residential neighborhoods.
                                                       SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY   5-29

ISSUE: NOISE & LAND USE
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 25. The City of Huntington Park shall ensure
        acceptable noise levels near schools, hospitals, convalescent homes, and
        other noise-sensitive areas.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 26. The City of Huntington Park shall
        establish standards for all types of noise not already governed by local
        ordinances or preempted by State or Federal law.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 27. The City of Huntington Park shall
        require noise-reduction techniques in site planning, architectural design, and
        construction where noise reduction is necessary.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 28. The City of Huntington Park shall
        discourage and, if necessary, prohibit the location of noise-sensitive land uses
        in noisy environments.
ISSUE: NON-TRANSPORTATION CONTROL MEASURES
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 29. The City of Huntington Park shall review
        the City’s existing noise ordinances and revise them as necessary to better
        regulate noise-generating uses. The City will ensure strict enforcement.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 30. The City of Huntington Park shall
        consider adoption of a comprehensive City Noise Ordinance to regulate
        hours of operation and control excessive noise from lawn blowers, trimmers,
        construction activity, street sweepers, machinery, and other disturbances.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 31. The City of Huntington Park shall
        reduce noise generated by building activities by requiring sound attenuation
        devices on construction equipment.
     •	 Health & Safety Element Policy 32. The City of Huntington Park shall
        establish and maintain coordination among the agencies involved in
        noise abatement.
5-30 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

HEALTH AND SAFETY PROGRAMS
The following programs will implement the policies identified in the previous section.
      •	 Community Hazardous Waste Education Program. The City will implement
         an education program for households and small businesses regarding
         identification and disposal of potential hazardous wastes, including machine
         oils, pesticides, etc.
            •	 Source of Funding: General Fund.
            •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
            •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development Department and Los
                Angeles County Fire Department.
            •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
                be continued.
      •	 Disaster Response Database. In the event of a major earthquake or other
         major disaster, persons living or working in the City may need to be self-
         sufficient for up to 72 hours before the results of any major relief efforts are
         realized. Under this program, a database will be created to identify medical
         professionals, heavy equipment operators, and volunteers trained in first
         aid and search-and-rescue. The database would identify other volunteers
         that would staff emergency collection centers, distribution centers, and
         otherwise assist in the recovery efforts. This information, and the appropriate
         procedures, would then be incorporated into the City’s emergency multi-
         hazard mitigation plan.
            •	 Source of Funding: General Fund.
            •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To establish new database.
            •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development Department and
                Huntington Park Police Department.
            •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
                be continued.
      •	 Emergency Preparedness Plan. The City currently maintains a Multi-
         Hazard Functional Plan that outlines responsibilities and procedures the
         City will follow in the event of an emergency or city-wide disaster. Specific
         emergency functions and operations, available resources (fire stations,
                                                         SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY       5-31

        emergency shelters, hospitals and clinics, resource persons, etc.), and mutual
        aid agreements are described in the Plan. The City shall regularly update its
        Multi-Hazard Functional Plan for Emergency Operations. The City originally
        adopted a Civil Defense and Disaster Plan in 1972 and this Plan was updated
        in February 1983. The Huntington Park Police Department has adopted
        procedures for dealing with hazardous spills on the highway.
            •	 Source of Funding: General Fund.
            •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To update the existing Multi-Hazard
               Functional Plan.
            •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
            •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
               be continued.
     •	 Environmental Review. The City shall continue to evaluate the environmental
        impacts of new development and provide mitigation measures prior to
        development approval, as required by the California Environmental Quality
        Act (CEQA). Environmental review shall be provided for major projects, as
        well as those that will have the potential to adversely impact the environment.
        Land use and development are among the issue areas that will be addressed
        in the environmental analysis. In compliance with CEQA, the City shall also
        assign responsibilities for the verification of the implementation of mitigation
        measures that may be recommended as part of the environmental
        review process.
            •	 Source of Funding: General Fund and individual development
               applications.
            •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To continue with the ongoing
               environmental review of new projects.
            •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
            •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
               be continued.
     •	 Fire Prevention. The City shall continue to work with the Fire Department
        to promote fire prevention and fire safety programs. The City shall also
        encourage periodic inspections of existing structures by the fire department
        for compliance with fire safety standards and practices. All new development
        plans must be submitted to the fire department for review and comment
5-32 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

   during the plan check process. This review must be completed for the
   development process to continue. New development must conform to any
   and all applicable standards and regulations.
       •	 Source of Funding: General Fund and Development Fees.
       •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
       •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development Department and Los
          Angeles County Fire Department.
       •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
          be continued.
•	 Fire Safety Development Review Program. Certain design standards
   have been established by the City of Huntington Park and the LACFD to
   ensure that site planning and building design consider public safety and fire
   prevention. These standards include requirements governing emergency
   access, roadway widths, clearance around structures, location of
   fire hydrants, etc.
       •	 Source of Funding: General Fund and Development Fees.
       •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
       •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development Department and Los
          Angeles County Fire Department.
       •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
          be continued.
•	 Hazardous Materials Control. The City shall continue to cooperate with
   County, State, and Federal agencies involved in the regulation of hazardous
   materials’ storage, use, and disposal. The City shall work with the fire
   department in requiring hazardous materials users and generators to identify
   safety procedures for responding to accidental spills and emergencies. The
   LACFD shall also work with local law enforcement officials in regulating the
   transport of hazardous materials through the City. The City will continue
   to promote the safe disposal of “hazardous and toxic substances” used in
   private households through the support of “Hazardous Materials Collections”
   conducted at specific locations and times within Huntington Park. The City
   will continue to collect and maintain up-to-date records concerning the type,
   location, owners, and responsible persons for properties which involve the
   handling of hazardous materials and wastes.
                                                 SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY     5-33

            •	 Source of Funding: General Fund and Development Fees.
            •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
            •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development Department and Los
               Angeles County Fire Department.
            •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
               be continued.
     •	 Seismic Safety Program. The City enforces the seismic retrofit requirements
        of the State of California Uniform Building Code. These standards apply to
        bracing systems, wall anchors, and the filling in of excess openings. The City
        has adopted an Earthquake Hazard Reduction Ordinance to address ground-
        shaking hazards in the City. Department personnel are trained to use the
        Emergency Response Handbook.
            •	 Source of Funding: General Fund and Development Fees.
            •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
            •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development Department and Los
               Angeles County Fire Department.
            •	 Implementation Schedule: The program is ongoing and will
               be continued.
     •	 Land Use and Noise Guidelines. The City will adopt guidelines which
        consider noise as an early factor in planning future residential developments.
        In addition, the City will require that the State’s Noise Insulation Standards be
        applied to all new single-family and condominium conversion projects. An
        acoustical analysis should be required for all new residential and condominium
        conversion projects within the 60 dB CNEL contour of the freeway, arterials,
        and rail lines within the City. This analysis should indicate the existing and
        projected CNELs on the site and the method(s) by which the noise is to be
        controlled or reduced to no more than 65 dB within the exterior living space,
        and no more than 45 dB within the interior living space of the project. This
        latter standard requires that the City extend the application of the State’s
        Noise Insulation Standards to all new single family and condominium
        conversion projects. Currently, they only apply to all new multi­family units
        (apartments, motels, etc.).
            •	 Source of Funding: General Fund.
            •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To update the Zoning Code to
5-34 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

          established new land use and noise compatibility requirements.
       •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
       •	 Implementation Schedule:The program will commence following the
          adoption of the General Plan.
•	 Noise Reduction in New Development. Noise should be considered early
   in the development of new residential or noise-sensitive construction. The
   location and orientation of the residential buildings may be configured to
   minimize or eliminate a noise problem for a site adjacent to the freeway,
   arterials, or rail lines. Other effective noise reduction tools include the use of
   berms, sound reducing walls, and generous setbacks.
       •	 Source of Funding: General Fund.
       •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To continue to implement the review
          of new projects.
       •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
       •	 Implementation Schedule: The program will continue as new
          development occurs.
•	 Noise Control Ordinance and Enforcement. The City will consider the
   adoption of an appropriate ordinance which will place a limit on the level of
   noise produced by residential, commercial and industrial activities that may
   intrude on adjacent properties. Noise emanating from residential, commercial
   and industrial uses is regulated by the City’s Municipal Code. However,
   acceptable dBA ranges have not been designated for these uses. The City
   will implement a review process concerning its policies and regulations
   affecting noise every five years or as new technological developments warrant,
   per State guideline requirements. The City will also support the enforcement
   of regulations (such as the State Vehicle Code noise standards) for all
   privately-owned, City-owned, and City-operated automobiles, trucks, and
   motorcycles operating within Huntington Park.
       •	 Source of Funding: General Fund.
       •	 2016-2021 Program Objectives: To update the Zoning Ordinance
          (Noise Control) within 12 months of the General Plan’s adoption.
       •	 Responsible Agency: Community Development Department
       •	 Implementation Schedule: The program will commence following the
          General Plan’s adoption.
                                                     SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY    5-35

5.4 PUBLIC SAFETY PLAN
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS PROGRAM
The City originally adopted a Civil Defense and Disaster Plan in 1972 and this Plan
was updated in February 1983. The Huntington Park Police Department has adopted
procedures for dealing with hazardous spills on the highway. These procedures
are based on the California Highway Patrol’s and the Federal Department of
Transportation’s Emergency Response Materials. To ensure emergency water supply
throughout the City, new construction is required to meet specific fire flow standards.
Fire flows for individual structures are calculated according to size of the structure (floor
area), type of construction (wood, non-combustible, fire-resistive), building height,
presence of sprinkler systems, distance between buildings, and type of use.
FIRE PROTECTION STANDARDS FIRE FLOW
The Los Angeles County Fire Department’s Fire Prevention Bureau determines the
minimum flows for new construction based on building plans and developers are
responsible for providing adequate fire flows. This ensures that hydrant capacity is
available to meet fire emergency needs of all developments. The City of Huntington
Park follows the County Fire Department Fire Code standards for fire flows and
5-36   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Table 5-3: Fire Standards
emergency access roads. Fire flows of 1,000 gallons per minute (gpm) to 5,000 gpm at
20 pounds per square inch (psi)of residual pressure for a duration of two to five hours
is needed for residential and commercial uses, with hydrants every 300 to 600 feet,
based on the type of occupancy. The fire standards outlined above are subject to the
following conditions:
     •	 Fire flow increases with building size (square feet) and/or lot coverage: 20 psi
        and 600 feet hydrant spacing is required for single-family dwelling, and 20 psi
        and 300 feet hydrant spacing is required for all other occupancies.
                                                        SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY    5-37

       •	 Road width increases where parallel parking allowances, hydrant
          requirements, or serial fire suppression requirements, or aerial fire suppression
          requirements indicate the need.
       •	 Minimum 20 feet private road width is permitted only if life safety is not
          jeopardized, topography, or lot shape/dimensions are constraints, and the Fire
          Department grants discretionary approval.
       •	 A paved access is required if any portion of the first floor building exterior
          is more than 150 feet from a public vehicle access (private driveway, bridge,
          alley).
       •	 Final fire flow will be based on the size of the building, its relationship to
          adjacent structures and the type of construction.
FIRE PROTECTION STANDARDS PEAK LOAD WATER SUPPLY
The water system must be capable of supplying adequate quantities of water for
firefighting purposes, in addition to the daily supply for domestic demand in the area.
Adequate reservoir capacity is determined by the availability of water for peak day
supply plus fireflow requirements. Generally, peak day supply is twice the average day
demand and total fire flow requirements are estimated by the population of the area.
FIRE PROTECTION STANDARDS EMERGENCY ACCESS
The provision of adequate roadway widths will facilitate emergency response during
a disaster. The City supports fire access standards that have been established by the
County Fire Department to ensure access for firefighting equipment to all areas
of the City.
5-38   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

THIS PAGE HAS BEEN INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.
                            SECTION 5: HEALTH & SAFETY 5-39
HOUSING
ELEMENT
6.1 INTRODUCTION
SCOPE OF THE HOUSING ELEMENT
The State of California requires that all local governments (both cities and counties)
prepare and maintain housing elements to identify strategies to conserve, rehabilitate,
and provide housing to meet the existing and future needs of the community. Specific
requirements concerning the scope and content of housing elements have been
established by the State Legislature. The Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD) is the State Agency that is responsible for ensuring State housing
law being implemented at the local level. The responsibility of HCD involves reviewing
and certifying housing elements prepared by local governments. The State housing
element requirements are designed to address the following concerns:
      •	 Local governments must recognize their responsibility in contributing to the
         attainment of the State’s housing goals.
6-2  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

      •	 Local governments must prepare and implement housing elements that are
          coordinated with State and Federal efforts in providing opportunities
          for new housing.
      •	 Local governments must cooperate with other agencies and governments to
          address regional housing needs.
      •	 This Housing Element also evaluates the current Regional Housing Needs
          Assessment (RHNA) developed by the Southern California Association of
          Governments (SCAG) and indicates how the City intends to accommodate
          the future housing demand identified by the RHNA. The RHNA calls for an
          additional 895 units to be provided during the 2013-2021 planning period.
While the City’s development patterns were well established in the decades preceding
the Second World War, the availability of housing remains one of the key planning
issues in the community. New higher density development has occurred over the past
several decades. The challenges the City will face in the coming years include
the following:
      •	 The availability of land for new housing development in the City is limited/
          Huntington Park is fully developed and any new housing construction will
          consist of infill development.
      •	 The majority of the City’s land area is already developed as residential. The
          challenge in the future will be to retain the balance between the residential
          neighborhoods and the commercial and industrial areas.
      •	 The character of the City’s housing stock has undergone significant changes
          in the past five decades. Neighborhoods that were once largely single-family
          following the Second World War have undergone redevelopment to much
          higher densities.
      •	 The elimination of redevelopment has had a dramatic impact on the City’s
          ability to raise revenue for new housing programs and to assemble parcels for
          new residential development.
                                                                  SECTION 6: HOUSING    6-3

This Element consists of the following three sections:
      •	 The Introduction provides an overview of the Housing Element and describes
         the statutory authority related to its implementation.
      •	 The Background Report in this section describes the demographic, housing,
         socioeconomic, and employment characteristics of Huntington Park.
         The background analysis also describes the market, governmental, and
         environmental constraints that may affect housing production in the City
         during the 2013-2021 planning period.
      •	 The Housing Plan indicates those citywide goals and programs that will
         conserve and maintain existing housing in Huntington Park in addition to
         promoting the development of new housing. This section also indicates how
         Huntington Park will meet its RHNA obligations housing objectives.
The primary source of information used in the compilation of demographic, housing,
and socio-economic information for the City includes data collected by the U.S.
Bureau of the Census. These statistics are collected every ten years as part of the
national census. The most recent census was completed in 2010. The U.S. Bureau
of the Census divided the United States into geographical units to assist in the
enumeration and interpretation of the census data. The largest of these units is the
Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area, or SMSA, which corresponds to the larger, more
populous regions in the United States. The City of Huntington Park is located within
the Los Angeles-Long Beach SMSA, which corresponds to Los Angeles County. A
number of additional sources were referred to and relied upon in the preparation of
the Housing Element including the following:
      •	 The State Department of Finance (DOF) Demographic Research Unit was a
         source of population and housing information. The DOF publishes population
         and housing estimates for California cities and counties on an annual basis.
      •	 The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) is mandated
         under State law to prepare population, housing, and employment projections
         that are to be used in the development of the region’s Growth Management
         Plan. These projections are used in the determination of the City’s Regional
         Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA).
6-4  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

       •	 Land use and housing condition surveys were conducted during the
          preparation of this Housing Element.
       •	 Finally, the current Five-Year Housing Assistance Plan was also reviewed and
          pertinent statistical data used.
RELATIONSHIP TO GENERAL PLAN
State law requires that local general plans be internally consistent. In other words,
policies and programs contained in this Housing Element must be reflected in the
other Huntington Park General Plan Elements. The Land Use Element is particularly
important in the implementation of housing policy as the Land Use and Sustainable
Development Element designates land for residential development and establishes
permitted densities and intensities of development.
The policies contained in other elements of the Huntington Park General Plan will have
a direct bearing on the community’s quality of life, the amount and variety of open
space, the protection of natural and cultural resources, the maintenance of acceptable
noise levels in residential areas, and the development of programs to ensure the safety
of residents in the event of a disaster. This Housing Element’s conformity to the other
elements in the Huntington Park General Plan has been assured through the
following activities:
       •	 The City reviewed the policies and implementing programs that were included
          in the other General Plan Elements to ensure that they do not conflict with the
          policies that are contained in this Housing Element.
       •	 This Housing Element also recognizes the overall development capacity levels
          identified in the Land Use Element. The Land Use Element is also referred
          to 	in the identification of the appropriate locations for new
          housing development.
       •	 This Housing Element continues to promote the implementation of the
          Downtown Specific Plan that calls for both mixed use development and
          senior housing.
                                                                    SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-5

      •	 This Housing Element continues with the Single Room Occupancy Overlay
         Zone as a means to provide for alternative types of residential living
         opportunities to help meet the needs of the community.All Single Room
         Occupancy (SRO) facilities allowed under this overlay zoning district shall be
         developed/operated in compliance with the provisions/standards contained
         in Chapter 3, Article 1 (Single Room Occupancy Facilities of the Zoning
         Ordinance. Single Room Occupancy (SRO) facilities are also allowed at up to
         400 units per acre.
      •	 This Housing Element continues with the Senior Citizen Housing Overlay Zone
         as a means to provide for senior citizen housing at up to 225 dwelling units
         per acre, generally located in high-rise developments with shared open space,
         meeting facilities, and reduced parking requirements.
      •	 This Housing Element continues with the Affordable Housing Overlay
         Zone. The purpose of this zoning district is to facilitate the development of
         affordable family housing at densities up to seventy (70) dwelling
         units per acre.
In addition to the above, this Housing Element will be reviewed by the City on an
annual basis with the General Plan to ensure the continued conformity between this
Housing Element and the General Plan.
6-6  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

OVERVIEW OF THE CITY OF HUNTINGTON PARK
The City of Huntington Park was incorporated on September 1, 1906, with a
population of 526 residents.1 The City developed as a suburban community, providing
a centralized location for workers employed in Los Angeles and the surrounding
industrial cities of Commerce, Vernon, and South Gate. The City’s land use and
development patterns were well established by the 1930’s. A thriving downtown
centered along Pacific Avenue was testament to the area’s prosperity.2 A map of the
City is provided in Exhibit 6-1.
As the post World War II era progressed, the City began to experience a shift in its
demographics character. In addition, the decline of the manufacturing sector in the
area also contributed to the economic transition that affected the region. According to
the most recent State of California Department of Finance estimates for January 2015,
the City’s population was 59,312 persons.3 Key development and land use patterns
are summarized in the following paragraphs.4
         •	 The City of Huntington Park contains a variety of uses; however, the
             most prominent land use in the City is residential. Extensive residential
             development of varying densities is observed east of Seville Avenue,
             extending east to the City’s easternmost boundary, north to the City’s
             northernmost boundary, and south to the City’s southernmost boundary.
             Residential land uses are also located west of Pacific Avenue and extend as far
             west as Regent Street.
         •	 Commercial development is found along the major roadways that traverse
             the City including Slauson Avenue, Pacific Boulevard, Gage Avenue, Santa
             Fe Avenue, and Florence Avenue. In addition, small pockets of commercial
             development occupy the frontages along many of the residential streets. The
             heaviest concentration of commercial uses is located in the City’s downtown
             area along the Pacific Boulevard corridor which functions as the City’s central
             business district.
1 City of Huntington Park. History of Huntington Park. http://www.hpca.gov/index.aspx?nid=99	
2 Ibid.
3 State of California Dept. of Finance. Table E-5 City/County Population and Housing Estimates, Revised January 1, 2015.
4 Blodgett Baylosis Environmental Planning. Field Survey (the field surveys were completed during vMay and June of 2015).
                                                                                               SECTION 6: HOUSING         6-7

             Exhibit 6-1: A Map of the City of Huntington Park
6-8 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
•	 The City’s industrial areas are located within the northern and western portion
   of the City. Industrial land uses extend from the City’s northern border with
   Vernon along Slauson Avenue and 52nd Street, and westerly to the City’s
   border with unincorporated Los Angeles County along Wilmington Avenue.
   The City’s main industrial district is generally bounded by Santa Fe Avenue,
   Pacific Boulevard, and the City of Vernon to the east and Randolph Street to
   the south.
•	 Alameda Street, a major north-south arterial route, passes through the
   western portion of the City. The Alameda Corridor, a 20-mile long rail cargo
   expressway, extends through the center of Alameda Street. The portion of the
   Alameda Corridor that traverses the City is located within the 33-foot deep
   Mid-Corridor Trench.
                                                           SECTION 6: HOUSING    6-9

PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AND COMMUNITY OUTREACH
Community outreach and engagement, the process where the public participates and
provides input in decision making, is pivotal in the success and sustainability of public
projects. A successfully community outreach effort is integral to building consensus
amongst elected officials, staff, government and the public. Community engagement is
required by state law whenever a general plan is amended; the governing jurisdiction
makes diligent effort to include all economic groups in the process. It is with this
understanding that Tierra West Advisors (“Tierra West”) has taken a ‘boots on the
ground’ approach in executing community outreach efforts for the City of Huntington
Park’s Focused General Plan Update for Circulation, Land Use, and Housing Elements.
There are many crucial reasons to involve the public in the general plan process or in
any other planning process. Some include:
      •	 Providing valuable information leading to more informed policy development
         by decision-makers.
      •	 Insuring the plan’s successful implementation by building a base of long-term
         support with the public.
      •	 Reducing the likelihood of conflict and drawn-out battles by addressing public
6-10  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

   concerns during the general plan process rather than on a case-by-case basis in the
   future.
Public participation can have extremely positive impacts on the entire community,
including:
      •	 Educating the public about community issues.
      •	 Increasing the public’s ability and desire to participate in the community.
      •	 Enhancing trust in government by strengthening the relationship between
         elected officials, government staff, and the public.
      •	 Working towards community consensus and creating a vision for the future.
      •	 Laying the groundwork for community revitalization and increased investment
         in the community.
      •	 Obtaining public input regarding plan policies and community issues
         and objectives.
      •	 Providing the public with opportunities to evaluate alternative plans and to
         participate in developing and choosing a plan that works for their community.
      •	 Informing decision-makers about public opinion.
A general plan process is a valuable opportunity to focus on current issues in the
community. The following are some important points that Tierra West carefully
considered in strategizing a public participation process for PlanHP (the Focused
General Plan Update project name):
      •	 It is critical to understand the issues that are important to different segments
         of the community, including residents, business owners, and elected decision-
         makers. We want to ensure that all stakeholder groups feel that they have an
         opportunity to give input early in the process.
      •	 The process should be simple and transparent; participants should be
         updated frequently as the process moves forward.
      •	 The process should be as engaging, interactive, and fun as possible.
                                                                 SECTION 6: HOUSING    6-11

All affected stakeholders were represented in the public participation process.
Stakeholder groups involved in the Huntington Park General Plan process
have included:
       •	  Community and neighborhood groups;
       •	  Utility and public service providers;
       •	  Educational institutions;
       •	  Industry and business;
       •	  Civic and community service organizations;
       •	  Non-governmental organizations;
       •	  Religious communities; and,
       •	  Other public agencies.
The City sought to engage the complete range of community interests, such as
environmentalists, developers, the elderly, youth, lower-income residents, special
needs populations, and business owners. We believe that inclusive representation is
critical in the outreach process. The process must be open and accessible to the entire
community. PlanHP has collaborated with a variety of stakeholder groups so that their
members feel comfortable participating in the process. Partnerships are valuable
ways to build community awareness and enthusiasm for a general plan process. Civic
groups can encourage their members to participate, hold informational meetings, and
distribute information.
6-12   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Early in the General Plan Update process, Tierra West held a number of meetings with
Communities For a Better Environment (CBE), a respected community organization
located in Huntington Park. Founded in 1978, Communities for a Better Environment is
one of the preeminent environmental justice organizations in the nation. The mission
of CBE is to build the people’s power in California’s ethnically diverse and low-income
communities to achieve environmental health and justice by preventing and reducing
pollution and building green, healthy and sustainable communities and environments.
CBE’s community organizing engages and educates low-income communities of color
to build the power to influence environmental decisions that affect their lives. Through
door-knocking, community meetings, school groups, political education, and other
approaches, CBE’s programs empowers communities to fight local pollution sources
and work for greener, healthier communities through support of initiatives like Green
Zones and locally-controlled alternative energy sources. PlanHP made a series of
presentations to both of the prominent youth and adult advocate groups
organized by CBE:
       •	 Youth For Environmental Justice (Youth EJ). One of the unique
          components of CBE is their youth program, Youth for Environmental Justice.
          Since 1997, Youth for Environmental Justice (Youth EJ) has been organizing
          youth in Southeast Los Angeles around the issues of environmental and
          social justice. Youth EJ is committed to empower youth to take action to
          get educated and involved in their communities for their future. It does this
          through consciousness raising, organizing, and leadership development.
          Youth for Environmental Justice has Youth Action Clubs that meet at lunch
          in Huntington Park High School, South Gate High School, South East High
          School, International High School and Banning High School.
                                                                 SECTION 6: HOUSING    6-13

      •	 United Residents of South East LA (URSELA). URSELA is the adult
          community advocacy group of CBE. URSELA is comprised of concerned
          residents of Huntington Park, South Gate, Bell, Maywood, and unincorporated
          Los Angeles County. URSELA works on different environmental issues in the
          surrounding communities, ranging from environmental propositions during
          the electoral process and fighting polluters to environmental health policy on
          a regional and statewide level.
PlanHP used several methods to help identify community issues and concerns and to
identify residents’ opinions about the strengths and weaknesses of their community,
including an insightful community survey. A survey can help identify issues to be
addressed by the general plan and areas where residents would like more information.
Surveys can be designed to provide statistically accurate data or more qualitative
responses. The PlanHP team worked to distribute information on the survey in a
variety of ways, including:
      •	  Direct Mailing;
      •	  Including them in community newsletters;
      •	  Printing them in local newsletters;
      •	  Leaving them in city hall or county offices, coffee shops, and other community
          gathering places;
      •	 Posting them on the City website;
      •	 Enabling residents to access the survey online; and,
      •	 Hosting community events where attendees could fill out the survey.
The PlanHP community engagement program was designed to include several
stakeholder groups, such as residents, business owners, community organizations,
churches, schools, and others. Our team’s Outreach/Engagement Objectives
have included:
      •	  Educating the public about the City and the General Plan Update;
      •	  Obtain public input;
      •	  Develop an overall vision;
      •	  Generate consensus while alleviating concerns;
      •	  Engaging key stakeholders to foster long-term involvement; and,
      •	  Obtain input from stakeholders.
6-14  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-1
Community Visioning is an inclusive planning process wherein a community creates a
shared vision for its future and begins to make it a reality. A General Plan provides a
guide for community plans, policies, and future actions in the community. The General
Plan Update process for the City of Huntington Park included a holistic series of
community engagement workshops that focused on the following key characteristics:
      •	 Understanding the whole community – The General Plan process has
          promoted an understanding of the whole community and the full range of
          issues shaping its future. It also attempted to engage the participation of the
          entire community and its key stakeholders groups.
      •	 Reflecting core community values – The General Plan Update process has
          identified the community’s core values – those deeply held community beliefs
          and ideals shared by its members. Such values inform the idealistic nature of
          the community’s vision and goals.
      •	 Addressing emerging trends and issues – The process explored the
          emerging trends driving the community’s future and the strategic issues they
          portend. Addressing such trends promoted greater foresight, adding rigor
          and realism to the community’s vision.
      •	 Envisioning a preferred future – The engagement process produced a
          statement articulating the community’s preferred future. The statement
          represents the community’s desired “destination” – a shared image of where it
          would like to be in the upcoming generation.
      •	 Promoting local action – the General Plan Update will also provide detailed
          implementation strategies and polices. This document serves as the
          community’s roadmap, moving it in the direction of its vision in the
          near-term future.
In an effort to achieve these key outreach goals, Plan HP hosted a series of public
workshops, conducted focus groups with community workshops, worked with the
students of schools within the community, presented before Neighborhood Councils,
Council Office, and held interdepartmental meetings with City Staff to analyze and
discuss our results. Tierra West held roundtable meetings on 10/8 and 10/26 to review
planning, background information, and initial strategy for the Community Outreach/
Engagement elements of the project. The consulting team attended the City’s annual
6-16  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Halloween Festival, where team members provided educational project materials,
greeted community members, and solicited feedback from attendees on some key
community issues.
An ongoing emphasis was made to invoke separate strategies for engaging both the
Huntington Park youth and senior groups. The consultant team attended the Youth
Commission meeting at the Parks and Recreation Center on 11/2, and also met with
Marquez High School staff in November to discuss parent/student involvement in
the process. The team also continued planning efforts for a stand-alone Huntington
Park Community Engagement event, which will identify key community issues and
present initial alternatives to solving those issues within the General Plan Update. We
have been working iteratively with Communities for a Better Environment (CBE), a
local environmental health and justice organization with a long history of community
outreach involvement in Huntington Park. They will continue to be involved in our
engagement and their local reach will be invaluable when diagnosing key
community issues.
The consultant team and the City completed a crucial community outreach workshop
in Huntington Park for PlanHP. The team partnered with Communities for a Better
Environment (CBE), a Huntington Park-based organization focusing on environmental
justice and community advocacy. The group has a strong local presence in Huntington
Park, with a devoted young group (YouthEJ) and adult group (United Residents of
Southeast Los Angeles). CBE produced an important community document in 2012,
“Brown To Green Vision for Huntington Park,” which emphasized revitalization of
several underutilized industrial areas in the City. Their longevity and respect within
the community made them an important partner for PlanHP, and their office space on
Pacific Avenue in Huntington Park was perfect for our April 20, 2016 public
outreach meeting.
After input from Huntington Park City Council Members Graciela Ortiz and Karina
Macias, PlanHP launched a Youth Plan Huntington Park (YPHP) program in further
educate and involve the local youth in the General Plan Update process. Its goal was
to assemble a group of students who are interested in learning more about community
outreach, planning, and administering surveys. After learning more about updating
the General Plan and PlanHP, these students became ambassadors for the effort,
helping to collect input for the process from their family, classmates, and peers. They
met weekly over the course of five weekends, and made a final presentation to City
                                                                 SECTION 6: HOUSING    6-17

Council on May 28, 2016, when they are provided certificates from the Mayor for their
advocacy efforts. The consulting team member (Tierra West) led a series of interviews
and meetings with local stakeholders. The consulting team continued meeting with
individuals and groups including City Department Directors and Staff, members of the
6-18  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
City Council, members of City commissions, business community leaders, Chamber of
Commerce representatives, and residents. Meetings and interviews were conducted
with important stakeholders such as:
      •	 Huntington Park Mayor Karina Macias
      •	 Huntington Park Vice Mayor Graciela Ortiz
      •	 Other members of the City Council
      •	 Huntington Park City Manager Edgar Cisneros
      •	 Huntington Park Library staff
      •	 Huntington Park Director of Parks and Recreation
      •	 Marquez High School staff
      •	 Communities for a Better Environment (CBE) staff
      •	 CBE Youth for Environmental Justice (YouthEJ)
      •	 CBE United Residents of South East LA (URSELA)
Websites allow for digital information and idea-sharing between the City and
participants and among participants themselves. It is also a good way to keep people
up-to-date on the project process. Many jurisdictions use their city or county website
to post information about the general plan process, such as progress, meeting dates
and times, and supporting materials. For PlanHP, Tierra West and City Staff decided to
create a separate website specifically for the general plan process. Online technology
offers the opportunity for community members to share ideas and ask questions and
can allow for a greater number of people to participate without having to attend
meetings or workshops. For example, any community who may not have been able to
attend a PlanHP public workshop were able to easily access the same survey online.
E-mail newsletters have also been used to send meeting reminders and updates to
the public, as well as to receive input on planning issues. The consulting team, in
close collaboration with City staff, launched PlanHP.com in Summer 2015. The site
provides 24-hour access to project information for residents and stakeholders in the
City of Huntington Park. The design is clean, modern, minimalist, bilingual (English
and Spanish), and easy to navigate. Its main purpose is to 1) educate public about
the project, 2) advocate involvement in upcoming meetings, and 3) elicit feedback
(through email newsletter signups, polls, and surveys). The web programmers tested
the requisite plug-ins and widgets needed for the Online Poll and Online Survey
functionality of the site. These elements are working properly and are now ready to
compile responses from users.
                                                               SECTION 6: HOUSING    6-19

6-20 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 203
Government Code, Section 65589.7, requires the City to provide water and sewer
purveyors with the opportunity to participate in the Housing Element’s development.
This cooperation is important so that housing production can be coordinated with
infrastructure plans. The City of Huntington Park is served by four water companies
which obtain their supply of water from two sources: groundwater from local wells and
water supplied by the Metropolitan Water District. The four water companies are
listed below.
       •	 Maywood Mutual Water Company. The Maywood Mutual Water Company
          serves the northeastern portion of the City. The service boundaries extend
          east to west from Maywood Avenue to the City’s border with Maywood, and
          north to south from Slauson Avenue to Randolph Avenue. Approximately 70%
          of the Maywood Mutual Water Company’s costumers reside in
          Huntington Park.
       •	 Walnut Park Mutual Water Company. The Walnut Park Mutual Water
          Company serves the odd-numbered side of Walnut Street (addresses 2901-
          3501 Walnut Street).
       •	 Golden State Water Company. The City of Huntington Park is located within
          the Central Basin West service area of the Golden State Water Company.
          Golden State Water Company serves the western portion of the City. The
          service boundaries extend from Slauson Avenue to the north to Florence
          Avenue to the south, and from the City’s western border with Florence-
          Graham to the west to Alameda Street to the east.
       •	 Severn Trent Services. Severn Trent is the City’s main provider of water and
          operates multiple wells in the City, including Well Numbers 12, 14, and 17.
The Water Master Plan acknowledges for these purveyors indicate that water service
for low income households within the service area must be prioritized. Historical
data indicates the Main Basin and Central Basin have been well managed for the full
period of the adjudications, resulting in a stable and reliable water supply. There are
no contemplated basin management changes, other than increasing direct use of
recycled water and the planned use of recycled water for groundwater replenishment
in the Main Basin to reduce the need to import water from other regions. Therefore,
the groundwater supplies are deemed reliable. Following the adoption of this Housing
Element, the City will continue to work with water and sewer providers to coordinate
housing and infrastructure plans.
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING    6-21

6.2 BACKGROUND FOR PLANNING
This section provides an overview of the demographic, housing, and socioeconomic
characteristics of the City of Huntington Park. The information contained in this
section indicates those trends that have occurred in the City in the years following
incorporation. This section of the Element considers the following:
      •	 Population Characteristics includes an analysis of population growth trends,
         age characteristics, and ethnicity of the City’s residents;
      •	 Housing Unit Characteristics focuses on trends in residential development,
         housing unit types, and housing tenure;
      •	 Household Characteristics provides an overview of the key socioeconomic
         characteristics germane to housing need;
      •	 Housing Constraints indicates those factors that may affect the development
         of new housing in the City.
6-22  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
In 2015, the City’s population was estimated to be 59,312 persons. The City
experienced its most rapid growth during the 1920’s when the City added an additional
20,078 residents. The most recent 2010 Census indicated the City’s population was
58,114 persons at the time the Census was taken (the most recent California State
Department of Finance [DOF]) estimates place the City’s current population at 59,312
persons. In recent years since the 2000 Census, the City’s population growth has
experienced a slight decline. The City’s population trend is shown in Table 6-1 and
illustrated in Exhibit 6-2.
                                                               SECTION 6: HOUSING   6-23

       Exhibit 6-2: City of Huntington Park Population Trends
6-24 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table 6-1: Population Trends 1910-2015
The overall increase in the City’s population since the 1970’s was due to both an
increase in the average household size and new residential construction. Table 6-2
compares the trends in the average household size for Los Angeles County with those
of the City for the years 1990 through 2013. As indicated in Table 6-2, the average
household size for the City is significantly higher compared to Los Angeles County
as a whole. In Huntington Park, the average household size between 1990 and 2013
increased from 4.00 to 4.04 persons per unit.
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING  6-25

                                 Table 6-2: Population Trends 1910-2015
POPULATION AGE CHARACTERISTICS
Census data was reformatted in Table 6-3 to
depict the age statistics arranged according to
specific age categories (preschool-aged, school-
aged, young adults, etc). Table 6-3 charts the
age characteristics of the City’s population for
the years of 2000 and 2013. As is evident from
the examination of Table 6-3, the age cohorts
that experienced the greatest rates of decline
consisted of the school-aged children (5 to 19
years of age) and the working adults (25 to 54
years of age). The age characteristics for the
City’s population are shown in Exhibit 6-3.
In 2000, the median age of the City’s population
was 25.6 years. According to the most recent
2013 American Community Survey data, the
City’s median age was 29.2 years of age.
Corresponding statistics for Los Angeles County
were 32 years of age and 35.1 years of age for
2000 and 2013, respectively.
6-26   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Table 6-3: Age Characteristics 2000-2013
                                         SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-27
      Exhibit 6-3: City of Huntington Park Age Characteristics
        Age of City’s Population - 2000 Age of City’s Population - 2013
6-28 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

RACE AND ETHNICITY
Approximately 72.5% of the City’s population was classified as white while 0.6% was
classified as African-American, 0.7% as Asian, 0.6% as American Native or Alaskan, and
1.3% consisting of two or more races. Hispanics are considered an ethnic group rather
than a racial group. Hispanics may include persons from a variety of races including
Caucasians, African-Americans, and even Asians. Hispanics accounted for 97.8% of the
City’s total population.
Table 6-4: Race and Ethnicity: 2013
HOUSING UNIT CHARACTERISTICS
According to the 2010 Census, there were 15,151 housing units in the City. The most
recent DOF estimates identified 15,178 housing units in the City as of January 1, 2015.
Table 6-5 summarizes housing types derived from the 2010 U.S. Census statistics and
the 2015 State Department of Finance Housing estimates for the City of Huntington
Park. The housing unit types are also illustrated in Exhibit 6-4.
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING   6-29

                              Table 6-5: Housing Characteristics: 2015
HOUSING TENURE
Table 6-6 indicates housing tenure statistics for 2000 and 2013. The percentage
of owner-occupied units in Huntington Park has declined slightly since 2000 when
approximately 27.4% of the housing units were classified as owner-occupied.
Approximately 26.8% of the units in Huntington Park are owner-occupied according to
the 2013 U.S. Census estimates.
6-30  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Exhibit 6-4: City of Huntington Park Housing Unit
Characteristics: 2000-2013
      2000 Housing Units           2013 Housing Units
Table 6-6: Housing Tenure in Huntington Park: 2000-2013
                                            SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-31
HOUSING AGE, CONDITION, AND OVERCROWDING
The most widely referred to variable is related to the age of the housing unit. The use
of this information is based on the premise that the older the units, the more likely they
are to require some form of repair or maintenance. This is not always the case since
many older units have undergone extensive renovation and/or remodeling. As a result,
the housing unit age data should not be exclusively used to determine the overall
condition of housing in the City. Table 6-7 depicts the 2010 U.S. Census statistics
indicating the age of the housing units within the City.
                               Table 6-7: Age of Housing Stock in 2013
6-32   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Housing units that were constructed prior to 1960 are generally considered to be
potential candidates for rehabilitation since the structures are approaching fifty years
in age. As indicated in Table 6-7, a total of 9.948 units were constructed prior to 1960.
This represents 66% of the total housing units in the City.
There are a number of other Census indicators that are useful in identifying potential
dilapidated units. These indicators include units without heating, units lacking
conventional plumbing, or units lacking complete kitchen facilities. The latter variable
may also be an indicator of bootleg units constructed illegally or legal second units.
According to the 2013 ACS Survey, 91 units (0.6%) lacked plumbing and 150 units (1%)
lacked kitchen facilities. Overcrowding may also be a contributor to the deterioration
of housing units.
A household is considered to be overcrowded if the number of persons residing in
the unit exceed 1.01 persons per room. A household is severely overcrowded if the
number of persons residing in the unit exceed 1.51 persons per room. Table 6-8
provides a breakdown in the number of overcrowded units that were identified in
the most recent 2013 ACS, broken down by housing tenure. Of the 14,455 occupied
housing units identified in the 2013 Census estimate, 2,804 units were identified as
being overcrowded (19.4% of the City’s total number of occupied units) and 2,959
units (20.5% of the total occupied units in the City) were identified as being severely
overcrowded. Household overcrowding, rates has decreased from 63% of all renters
in 2000 to 48% a decade later (as documented by the 2007-2011 ACS). Severe
overcrowding (greater than 1.5 persons per room) impacts 27% of renters in the City.
The greatest concentration of overcrowded units include several neighborhoods
with concentrations of severe renter overcrowding (over 45%): north of Florence
immediately east of Santa Fe; the neighborhood on either side of State bound by
Gage and Saturn; both sides of Pacific bound by Randolph and Slauson; and the
northernmost portion of the city directly to the east of Santa Fe.
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING      6-33

    Table 6-8: Large Family and Overcrowded Housing Units in
                                                         Huntington Park - 2013
HOUSEHOLD INCOME
The 2013 median household income in Huntington Park was $36,397. The median
household income for the State was $61,094. According to the 2013 Census, 27% of
the families living in the City had annual incomes that were below the poverty level.
Of this total, 39.6% were under the age of 18 years. Table 6-9 summarizes the annual
household income statistics for the City based on the 2013 Census estimates.
SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS
Special housing needs groups are those households that contain the elderly,
handicapped, large families, overcrowded households, female heads of households,
and persons in need of emergency shelter. Pursuant to the Housing Element
Legislation, a housing element must include an analysis of special housing needs. That
is to say the housing needs of such groups as handicapped, elderly, large families,
farm workers, and families with female heads of households need to be considered. In
addition, an analysis of overcrowded households is also required though this analysis
was included in a previous section.
6-34   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table 6-9: Household Income in 2013
SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS - LARGE FAMILIES
According to the HCD’s definition, the term “large family” refers to a family containing
five or more persons. According to the 2010 Census, a total of 1,776 large family
(45.2% of the total renter occupied households) households lived in owner-occupied
units. The same Census figures also indicated that 3,359 large family households
(31.5% of the total renter occupied households) lived in rental units. This overcrowding
is exacerbated by the large number of renter households in the City as well as the age
of the City’s housing stock.
                                                               SECTION 6: HOUSING     6-35

SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS - FEMALE HEAD OF HOUSEHOLDS
In 2013, there were 3,804 female-headed households, representing 26.3% of the
total number of households in Huntington Park. Of this total, 2,218 or 15.3% of
the total female-headed households in the City included minors, 18 years of age
or less. This number bears importance in relation to social service needs, such as
child care, recreation programs, and health care, which are of special concern to
these households. For purposes of comparison, approximately 15.2% of the total
households in Los Angeles County were female-headed households.
SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS - PERSONS IN NEED OF
EMERGENCY SHELTER
There are two categories of need that should be considered in discussing the
homeless: 1) transient housing providing shelter and usually on a nightly basis; and,
2) short-term housing, usually including a more comprehensive array of social services
to enable families to re-integrate themselves into a stable housing environment.
The issue of homelessness emerged as a major issue in the 1990’s during the
severe economic recession that Southern California was undergoing at that time.
Homelessness was further exacerbated by the closing of mental institutions and the
recent housing dislocation associated with the great recession that began in 2008.
While the Southern California economy is improving, housing costs are once again
rising in response to the growing demand. As a result, homelessness within the larger
Southern California region continues to be a problem. Various circumstances that may
lead to homelessness include the following:
       •	 Single adult transients passing through the City on the way to some
          other destination;
       •	 Seasonal and/or migrant homeless individuals seeking seasonal employment
          in the City;
       •	 The chronically homeless, single adults, including non-institutionalized,
          mentally disabled individuals, alcohol and drug abusers, elderly individuals
          with insufficient incomes, and others who voluntarily, or are forced, due to
          financial circumstances, to live on the streets.
6-36  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

      •	 Minors who have run away from home;
      •	 Low-income families that are temporarily homeless due to financial
         circumstances or are in the process of searching for a home (single-parent
         families, mostly female-headed, are especially prevalent in this group); and,
      •	 Women (with or without children) that are escaping domestic violence.
A citywide housing condition survey was conducted by the preparers of this Housing
Element during August and September of 2016. This survey involved a windshield
survey of every street in the City of Huntington Park. During this survey, the location
and extent of homeless persons were also noted. The surveys identified between
three and ten homeless individuals on each day the survey was conducted. The
majority of these homeless individuals were observed in the Civic Center. Statistical
methods were also used to forecast the balance of the County’s homeless population.
The survey considered the following:
      •	 Unsheltered homeless people, including those found on streets, in vehicles, in
         makeshift shelters (such as tents), and encampments;
      •	 Sheltered homeless people occupying emergency shelters, transitional
         housing, domestic violence shelters, and those using vouchers to stay in
         hotels or motels; and,
      •	 A count of homeless people occupying short-stay institutions such as
         hospitals, residential rehabilitation facilities, and jails was completed.
The Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority (LAHSA) is a joint powers authority
of the City and County of Los Angeles, created in 1993 to address the problems of
homelessness in Los Angeles. The LAHSA is responsible for funding and coordination
of homeless services and housing assistance to support the homeless population of
men, women and children in the City and County of Los Angeles. LAHSA is the lead
agency in the HUD-funded Los Angeles Continuum of Care (which includes 85 cities
and the unincorporated areas of Los Angeles County, excluding the cities of Glendale,
Long Beach and Pasadena), and coordinates and manages more than $132 million
annually in federal, state, county and city funds for programs providing shelter, housing
and services to homeless persons. Since 2005, LAHSA has coordinated six biennial
Greater Los Angeles Homeless Counts. Beginning 2016, the Point-In-Time Count
occurs annually.
                                                                     SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-37

The City of Huntington Park was included in East Los Angeles County (SPA 7). The 2015
survey identified 3,571 homeless persons. Of this total, 907 homeless persons were
“sheltered and 2,664 persons were “unsheltered.” The 2016 survey identified 3,469
homeless persons. Of this total, 987 homeless persons were “sheltered and 2,482
persons were “unsheltered.” Included in the Permanent Supportive Housing count is
Huntington Park’s recently opened Mosaic Gardens which includes 34 beds in 23 units.
The project was developed by LINC Housing with the assistance of Federal HOME
dollars from the City of Huntington Park. Mosaic Gardens in Huntington park includes
15 units that are reserved for households where at least one member has an open
and active case with the Los Angeles Department of Mental Health, meets Transition
Aged Youth designation (including persons between 18-24 years of age), and meets
homeless requirements. The Mosaic Gardens is located at 6337 Middleton Street.
SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS - FARM WORKER HOUSING
Because of the extensive amount of agricultural activity in the State, the Housing
Element law requires the consideration of farm worker housing needs. Currently, there
are no farm worker households residing in Huntington Park.
SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS - ELDERLY AND HANDICAPPED
The most recent 2010 Census indicated that 1,718 senior households in Huntington
Park representing 19.4% of the total households in the City. Senior-headed households
living in rental units accounted for 7.9% of the total rental households in the City.
Senior-headed owner-occupied housing units accounted for 5.2% of the total
occupied units in the City. According to the Census, there were 7,188 residents in
the City that had a disability (this figure represents approximately 19.7% of the City’s
total population). Of this total, 913 persons with a disability were 20 years of age or
younger. Working aged persons (21 years to 64 years in age) with a disability totaled
5,167 persons. Finally, seniors (65 years or older) with a disability totaled 1,108 persons.
The Los Angeles County Department of Health Services (LACDHS) is the major
provider of health care for more than two million residents in the County without health
insurance. The LACDHS provides hospital and outpatient care, programs and clinics,
emergency medical services and rehabilitative services. Through its university affiliates
(UCLA and USC), the County hospitals conduct postgraduate medical education for
6-38   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

interns, residents, and fellows. The Department operates four acute care hospitals,
a rehabilitation hospital, a multi-specialty ambulatory care center, six comprehensive
health centers, and nine health centers. Additionally, the LACDHS operates two
trauma centers, two pediatric trauma centers, four emergency rooms, and a state-of-
the art burn center.
The City of Huntington Park is located within the service area of the South Central Los
Angeles Regional Center for Persons with Developmental Disabilities, Inc. (SCLARC),
which is a private, non-profit, community based organization. The SCLARC contracts
with the State Department of Developmental Services (DDS) to coordinate services
for individuals with developmental disabilities and their families. According to the
SCLARC, there are currently 310 consumers being served by the regional center. Key
services offered by the SCLARC include the following:
      •	 Adult Day Program. The Adult Development Center (ADC) includes various
          community programs for adults that are in the process of acquiring self-
          help skills. These programs focus on the development and maintenance
          of functional skills required for self-advocacy, community integration,
          employment, and self-care.
      •	 Sheltered Workshops. Participants may also participate in a sheltered, five-
          day per week workshop and perform as if they are working at a regular job for
          which they receive monetary compensation.
      •	 Behavior Management Day Programs. These programs serve adults
          with severe behavior disorder and/or dual diagnosis who, because of their
          behavior problems, are not appropriate for any other community-based
          day program.
      •	 Residential Placement. Residential direct support professionals provide
          services to children and adults who are unable to reside in the family home.
          Temporary placements are utilized in unusual circumstances that may occur
          in emergencies or whenever appropriate placements are not available. There
          are also intermediate care facilities for the developmentally disabled and
          skilled nursing care on an extended basis. Most SCLARC consumers placed in
          residential facilities are eligible for SSI/SSA benefits, as well as Medi-Cal.
                                                                    SECTION 6: HOUSING   6-39

      •	 Supported Living. Adults with developmental disabilities, regardless of the
         degree of the disability, have the right to live in homes of their choice as long
         as they are provided with services that will ensure and enhance their success
         with integration into mainstream society. Supported living services consist of
         services to adults with developmental disabilities that choose to live in homes
         they themselves own or lease in the community.
      •	 Independent Living Training. Independent living services is a six-month
         service available to persons 18 years of age and older who are not enrolled in
         school and have demonstrated potential for living on their own with a minimal
         amount of supervision. Training is provided in all areas of home management
         (budgeting, housekeeping, cooking, etc.) and should not be confused with
         the activities of daily living (bathing, grooming, toileting, etc.).
      •	 Supported Employment. Supported employment programs provide
         support to adults who are interested in competitive employment. Supported
         employment programs are funded by the Department of Rehabilitation.
The City of Huntington Park requires that all new residential developments comply
with California building standards (Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations)
and Federal requirements for accessibility. Other City efforts designed to promote
reasonable accommodation include the following:
      •	 Procedures for Ensuring Reasonable Accommodations. Minor building
         improvements, such as ramps, rails, and wheelchair lifts, may be handled
         through an administrative review process to evaluate such development
         requirements applicable to housing for persons with disabilities.
      •	 Efforts to Remove Regulatory Constraints for Persons with Disabilities.
         The State has removed any City discretion for review of small group homes for
         persons with disabilities (six or fewer residents). The City of Huntington Park
         does not impose additional zoning, building code, or permitting procedures
         other than those allowed by State law. There are no constraints on housing for
         persons with disabilities caused or controlled by the City.
      •	 Retrofitting Requirements. The City also allows residential retrofitting to
         increase the suitability of homes for persons with disabilities in compliance
6-40  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

          with accessibility requirements. In addition, the City works with applicants who
          need special accommodations in their homes to ensure that application of
          building code requirements does not create a constraint.
       •	 Information Regarding Accommodation for Zoning, Permit Processing,
          and Building Codes. The City implements and enforces the current California
          Building Code. The City provides information to all interested parties
          regarding accommodations in zoning, permit processes, and application of
          building codes for housing for persons with disabilities.
This Housing Element references an existing program that includes the provision of a
new Reasonable Accommodation Program. Under this program, the City will continue
to implement a reasonable accommodation ordinance to provide exception in zoning
and land-use regulations for housing for persons with disabilities. The procedures
related to the program’s implementation are ministerial in nature with minimal or no
processing fee. Improvements may be approved by the Community Development
Director as long as a number of findings may be made. First, the request for
reasonable accommodation must be used by an individual with a disability protected
under fair housing laws. Second, the requested accommodation is necessary to
make housing available to an individual with a disability protected under fair housing
laws. Third, the requested accommodation would not impose an undue financial or
administrative burden on the City. Finally, the requested accommodation would not
require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the City’s General Plan and
 Zoning Ordinance.
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY - HOUSING COSTS IN THE CITY
Housing costs in the City, while lower when compared to some other Southern
California communities, are still relatively high when considering the prevailing wages
that local residents typically earn. Table 6-10 summarizes the housing values.
                                                                 SECTION 6: HOUSING     6-41

            Table 6-10: Housing Values in Huntington Park (2015)
More recent home sales data for the City is provided by Zillow.com. According to
home sales data collected in March 2017, a total of 38 units were for sale of sold. The
average asking price was approximately $542,000 and ranged in the asking price of
between $208,000 and $870,000. Table 6-11 indicates the Fair Market Rent (FMR)
data for Los Angeles County between 1980 and 2013. The data shown in Table 6-11
indicates that rents for two, three, and four bedroom units steadily increased through
the mid-1990s where a one year decline was registered. Rents in the latter 1990s and
the early 2000s continued to increase. The HUD-formulated FMR schedule serves as a
guide for the maximum rents allowable for those units receiving Section 8 assistance.
HUD uses the Consumer Price Index (CPI) and the Census Bureau housing survey data
to calculate the FMRs for each area.
6-42  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table 6-11: HUD Fair Market Rents Los Angeles-Long
Beach SMSA
                                         SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-43
            Table 6-11: HUD Fair Market Rents Los Angeles-Long
                                                     Beach SMSA (continued)
Surveys of rents in the City were also conducted during the 2015 Census. Table
6-12 indicates the average monthly rents for those units identified in the survey. The
median rent in the City according to the 2010 Census was $1,053 per month.
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY - OVERPAYMENT FOR HOUSING IN
HUNTINGTON PARK
Table 6-13 summarizes 2010 Census figures that indicate the percentage a household
paid for housing in 2009 (as indicated in the 2010 Census). As indicated previously,
those households that paid more than 30% of their monthly gross income for rent or a
mortgage are considered to be overpaying for housing.
6-44  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table 6-12: Contract Rents in Huntington Park (2015)
Table 6-13: Overpayment 2010
                                          SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-45
Table 6-14 provides a breakdown of the housing cost affordability standards for
various housing unit types based on the number of bedrooms. The housing cost
affordability standards are identified according to the following income categories:
       •	 Very-Low incomes refer to those household incomes that are 50% of the Los
          Angeles County median;
       •	 Low incomes refer to those household incomes that are between 50% and
          80% of the Los Angeles County median; and,
       •	 Moderate incomes refer to those households that are between 80% and 120%
          of the Los Angeles County median household income.
The figures shown in Table 6-14 indicate the rents and mortgage payment thresholds
for various housing unit sizes for the aforementioned income categories.
Table 6-15 indicates the household income ranges for the various income categories
(very low, low, and moderate) as well as the median household income. These figures
are arranged according to the number of persons that comprise a household. As is
evident from examination of Table 6-15, the income limits increase as the number of
persons living in a household increase. For example, a household with one person
is considered to be low income if the annual household income is $39,050 while
a household containing five persons is considered to be low income if its annual
household income is $60,200. The information included in Table 6-15 may be used to
determine what percentage of a household’s income will be expended on a monthly
basis for housing. For example, a household consisting of three persons with an
annual income of $23,450 ideally should not spend more than $645 per month. This
figure represents 30% of that household’s annual income.
6-46   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Table 6-14: Housing Affordability Standards in
(dollars/month)
                                          SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-47
    Table 6-15: Annual Income Limits for the Los Angeles-Long
                                                                      Beach SMSA
The Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) data are used by HOME
and CDBG jurisdictions to prepare their consolidated plans. Data showing housing
problems and the availability of affordable housing are available through the CHAS
website for all counties, places, and CDBG/HOME jurisdictions. The CHAS data
concerning overpayment for housing in the City of Huntington Park is summarized
in Table 6-16. The table indicates the overpayment for extremely low income
households (<30% of the County median), very low income households (30% to 50% of
the County median), low income households (50% to 80% of the County median), and
all of the households in the City. The households that are overpaying for housing are
further identified by tenure (owner-occupied and renter-occupied households). Finally,
the table indicates senior households and large-family households that are overpaying
for housing.
6-48   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table 6-16: Overpayment for Housing in Huntington Park
                                         SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-49
     Table 6-16: Overpayment for Housing in Huntington Park
                                                (continued)
6-50 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table 6-16: Overpayment for Housing in Huntington Park
(continued)
                                         SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-51
GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS - PROCESSING PROCEDURES
The City works closely with developers to expedite approval procedures so as not
to put any unnecessary timing constraints on development. For a typical project, an
initial pre-consultation meeting with the Community Development Department, Public
Works, and the Fire Department is arranged to discuss the development proposal.
Then a tentative parcel map application or a description of project must be filed with a
site plan, which is first reviewed by the planning department and other agencies, such
as public works, for consistency with City ordinances and General Plan guidelines.
The City also encourages the joint processing of related applications for a multiple-
family project. For example, a request for a rezoning may be reviewed in conjunction
with the site plan, a tentative tract map, and any variances. Such procedures save
time, money, and lowers the cost to the developer. As indicated previously, the City
works closely with developers to expedite approval procedures so as not to put any
unnecessary timing constraints on development. In addition, the City makes full use of
the CEQA Infill Housing Exemption.
For a typical housing project, an initial pre-consultation meeting with the Community
Development Department, Public Works, and the Fire Department is arranged to
discuss the development proposal. After the project is approved, the building
department performs plan checks and issues building permits. Throughout the
construction of a multiple-family development, the Building Department will perform
building checks to monitor the progress of the project. This process does not put
an undue time constraint on most developments because of the close working
relationship between City staff, developers, and the decision-making body. The
developer must also determine if the proposed project is a “Priority Project” and
subject to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit’s
6-52    HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan (SUSMP) requirements. If the project is
subject to these requirements, it must meet SUSMP requirements prior to issuance of
grading and building permits. In addition, school fees must be paid to school districts
prior to issuance of building permits. School fees for Los Angeles School District is
$4.00 per livable square-foot, the fee varies between school districts.
Table 6-17 identifies the typical processing time most common in the entitlement
process. It should be noted that each project does not necessarily have to complete
each step in the process (i.e., small scale projects consistent with General Plan and
Zoning designations do not generally require Environmental Impact Reports [EIR],
General Plan Amendments, Rezones, or Variances).
Table 6-17: Permit Review Timelines for the City of
Huntington Park
                                                                 SECTION 6: HOUSING   6-53
Table 6-18 compares the City’s plan check fees with those of the neighboring cities. As
indicated in the table, the City’s fees are not substantially greater than that compared
to other cities in the area.
                           Table 6-18: Comparison of Plan Check Fees
The City of Huntington Park Housing and Community Development Division is
responsible for ensuring that all new construction is performed and completed in a
safe and proper manner using the correct materials and methods. Permits are required
for any changes, including electrical, plumbing, or building changes to any property.
Applicants and/or contractors are required to bring their plans to City Hall where a
plan checker or building inspector will examine the plans for approval. The building
permit provides evidence that the contractor has complied with the Building Code and
the City has approved the proposed construction. Table 6-19 estimates the building
fees for a typical residential development.
6-54  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Table 6-19: Typical Planning and Processing Fees
The City’s permit fees are based on the valuation of the proposed project that utilizes
the Los Angeles County fee schedule. The fees shown in Table 6-19 are applicable
to both single-family and multiple-family development. The processing fees are well
under 1% of the total development cost. Assuming a 1,000 square-foot unit, the total
development fees (including school district fees) would be approximately $4,879 per
unit. This assumes 20 electrical fixtures, five plumbing fixtures, one sewer connection,
and one thousand square feet of floor area. The permit fees account for approximately
2.2% of a residential unit costing $225,000. Permit fees and approval time frames do
not pose a constraint to the development of housing in Huntington Park. The City
employs a plan check process that applies to all residential development including
multi-family housing. Plan check for the processing of building permits typically
require seven to ten working days, depending on the City’s work load. The City of
Huntington Park has adopted the 2016 California Building Code (CBC) with 2017 Los
Angeles County Amendments, which establishes the minimum standards for
new construction.
There are no extraordinary regulations applied by the City that would hinder future
                                                                 SECTION 6: HOUSING   6-55

housing development. The entitlement process for discretionary permits, a zone
change, general plan amendment, tract map, and conditional use permit application
typically require 60 to 90 days to receive final approval. Zone changes and general
plan amendments are first heard by the City Council (which also acts as the Planning
Commission). For the majority of these cases, the City Council will review the item and
render a decision within 90 days of application submittal.
OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS
For a typical single-family home there are no off-site fees related to the construction
of new infrastructure, park fees, or Mello-Roos fees. The City may require that
damaged ROW be replaced/repaired though the basic street system and supporting
infrastructure has been installed as part of the area’s historic development. The City’s
requirements for off-site improvements related to multiple-family developments
are not overly or unnecessarily restrictive. The density, setback, and other standards
regulating development within Huntington Park are consistent with those being used
by other surrounding communities and will not inhibit the development of a range of
housing types within the City. The City has not imposed any moratoria, open-space
requirements, or prohibitions against multi-family housing that would potentially
inhibit the development of new housing. The City will continue to review the general
development standards such as street width, parking lanes, and sidewalks.
LAND USE CONTROLS - BASE ZONE DISTRICTS
The Huntington Park Zoning Code and Zoning Map are the primary implementation
ordinances of the land use element. The zoning map and ordinance indicates the
specific land uses allowed in the City and establishes regulations and standards for
use and development. The City’s Zoning Code consists of eight base zone districts
that include the following: R-L, R-M, R-H, C-P, C-N, C-G, MPD, and OS.5 Five zones,
R-L, R-M, and R-H, C-P, and C-N are applicable to residential development. The
R-L (Residential, Low) zone generally applies to single-family detached residential
development. The R-M (Residential, Medium) zone generally applies to higher density
single-family residential development, duplexes, and lower density multiple-family
developments. Finally, the R-H (Residential, High) zone applies to higher density
multiple-family developments. 6
5 City of Huntington Park Municipal Code. Title 9 Zoning. 	
6 City of Huntington Park Municipal Code. Title 9 Zoning, Chapter 4, Zoning Districts, Article 1 Residential Zones.	
6-56     HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Table 6-20: City of Huntington Park Zoning Ordinance,
Base Zone Districts
LAND USE CONTROLS - OVERLAY ZONE DISTRICTS
In addition to the aforementioned base zone districts, the City of Huntington Park
Zoning Code includes a number of overlay zones. Special regulations or incentives are
included in the overlay zone to facilitate certain regulations in the geographic area that
is subject to the overlay zone. The overlay zones included in the City of Huntington
Park Zoning Code are outlined below:
         •	 Medium Density Overlay Zone. The purpose of this overlay zoning district
             is to provide for multi-family residential units up to 17.424 units per acre
             within the underlying commercial zoning district. The Medium Density
             Overlay zoning district identifies parcels that are suitable for the development
             of medium density housing, either as the primary use on the parcel or in
             conjunction with other permitted uses.7
         •	 Senior Citizen Housing Overlay Zone. The purpose of this overlay zoning
             district is to provide for senior citizen housing at up to 225 dwelling units per
             acre, generally located in high-rise developments with shared open space,
7 City of Huntington Park Municipal Code. Title 9 Zoning, Chapter 4, Zoning Districts, Article 5 Overlay Zones.	
                                                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-57

             meeting facilities and reduced parking requirements. Single Room Occupancy
             (SRO) facilities are also allowed at up to 400 units per acre.8	
         •	 Single Room Occupancy Overlay Zone. The purpose of this overlay zoning
             district is to provide for alternative types of residential living opportunities
             to help meet the needs of the community. All Single Room Occupancy
             (SRO) facilities allowed under this overlay zoning district shall be developed/
             operated in compliance with the provisions/standards contained in Chapter 3,
             Article 1 (Single Room Occupancy Facilities).9
         •	 Affordable Housing Overlay Zone. The purpose of this zoning district is
             to facilitate the development of affordable family housing at densities up to
             seventy (70) dwelling units per acre. Senior citizen housing at a density of 225
             units per acre and single room occupancy (SRO) facilities at a density of 400
             units per acre is also permitted.
The City’s overlay zones are summarized in Table 6-21.
              Table 6-21: City of Huntington Park Zoning Ordinance,
                                                 Special and Overlay Zones for Housing
8 Ibid.	
9 City of Huntington Park Municipal Code. Title 9 Zoning, Chapter 4, Zoning Districts, Article 5 Overlay Zones.	
6-58     HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

LAND USE CONTROLS - SPECIFIC PLAN
The purpose of a specific plan is to provide a policy and regulatory bridge between
the City of Huntington Park General Plan and individual project-level development.
Specific plans are designed to provide specific land use regulations and development
guidelines that govern the land use and development standards for a particular
geographic area. The City has adopted a single specific plan, the Downtown Specific
Plan (DTSP) that is applicable to the central business district or downtown.10 The DTSP
builds upon and refines economic development strategies developed specifically for
the downtown area focusing on beautification of public spaces and streetscapes and
storefront. An overall goal of the DTSP is the orderly development of downtown area
consistent with the City’s General Plan along with the community’s vision for the area.
The DTSP covers an area of approximately 85 acres in the City of Huntington Park’s
Downtown. The DTSP area extends from Randolph Street in the north to Florence
Avenue in the south. The eastern boundary is generally Seville Avenue, except for an
area that extends along Zoe Avenue to Miles Avenue, and the western boundary is
Rugby Avenue. Pacific Boulevard occupies the central portion of the DTSP area and
is considered the City’s Central Business District. The DTSP divides the downtown
area into four Districts (refer to Exhibit 6-5). Within each District there is particular
vision for future development. Land use and development standards, as well as
design guidelines, give direction for each of these Districts to achieve the future state
envisioned by the community.11 The four Districts are as follows:
        •	 District A – Gateway. District A encompasses parcels at the intersections of
             Randolph Street with Pacific Boulevard and Rita Avenue, and Florence Avenue
             with Rugby Avenue, Pacific Boulevard, Rita Avenue, and Seville Avenue.
        •	 District B – Festival. District B encompasses all parcels fronting on Pacific
             Boulevard, except those parcels at the intersections with Randolph Street and
             Florence Avenue contained in District A as described above.
        •	 District C – Neighborhood. All parcels between Rugby Avenue and Seville
             Avenue that are not included in District A or District B are part of District C,
             except for select parcels at the intersection of Seville Avenue and Zoe Avenue.
10 RRM Design Group. Downtown Huntington Park Specific Plan. Plan dated August 4, 2008.	
11 City of Huntington Park Municipal Code. Title 9 Zoning, Chapter 4, Zoning Districts, Article 5 Overlay Zones.	
                                                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-59

     •	 District D – Zoe [Avenue]. District D encompasses those parcels bordering
        Zoe Avenue from the alley separating Rita Avenue and Seville Avenue to the
        intersection with Miles Avenue.
6-60 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Exhibit 6-5: Map of the Downtown Specific Plan (DTSP)
                                        SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-61
Specific land uses and development that is permitted in the R-L, R-M, and R-H zone
districts are listed below in Table 6-22.
   Table 6-22: Housing Types Permitted Under the Zone Districts
Residential development standards in the residential zone districts are summarized
below in Table 6-23.
6-62   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table 6-23: Residential Development Standards
NON-GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT
Three market factors are cited by State law as a necessary part of the constraints
analysis: 1) land cost; 2) construction costs; and, 3) financing availability. Housing costs
as a constraint on affordability must be examined in light of the rental and ownership
costs within the means of various economic segments. State law identifies four
economic segments: Very low-income; Low-income; Moderate-Income; and High-
Income. The annual income limits of these four groups are further defined by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development in reference to the median income
for Los Angeles County and household size.
NON-GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS - MARKET
CONSTRAINTS
Affordable housing costs are computed on a basis of 30% of monthly income. The
affordable ownership costs, or purchase price of a home, are calculated on the basis of
the rule of thumb of 2.5 times the annual household income. These affordable housing
costs then can be compared to the prevailing costs in Huntington Park to confirm the
existence of market constraints. A household is generally considered to be overpaying
for housing if it is paying more than 30% of its gross monthly income for housing.
                                                                  SECTION 6: HOUSING     6-63
One of the major problems facing households in the City of Huntington Park, and
the broader regional housing market, is affordability. This problem is related to the
match between household income and the size and cost of owning or renting a
home. The Census data indicated that for owner-occupied housing units, median
mortgage and selected monthly service costs in 2010 were $1,829. In 2010, owner-
occupied households (50.7%) expended more than 35% of their income for housing.
These housing expenditures reflected the sum of mortgages, real estate taxes,
insurance, association fees, and utilities. Monthly payments for homeowners more
than quadrupled in the ten years between 1980 and 2010, and the percentage of
households paying 30% or more for housing nearly doubled during this same period.
For renters, the median gross rent per month increased from $211 in 1980 to $979 in
2010. This dollar amount refers to the contract rent (i.e., monthly rent agreed to, or
contracted for) plus the estimated average cost of utilities if paid for by the renter.
This definition was used by the Census in an attempt to eliminate differentials due
to varying practices in rent structuring. According to the most recent Census, a total
of 3,309 renter-occupied households (47.8%) paid in excess of 30% of their monthly
incomes for housing.
Although private financing is generally available at market rates, low- and moderate-
income households usually need below market rate financing to enable them to repair
existing homes or purchase resale or new housing units. Also, all potential developers
of housing projects are provided information on the various Los Angeles County
financing programs available for low-income rental construction or rehabilitation
projects. Additionally, a survey of local banking institutions completed as part of
this Housing Element’s preparation revealed that redlining does not appear to be
occuring in Huntington Park. In fact, a number of banks have established programs
to encourage lower-income residents to purchase homes, and to improve homes that
they already own.
NON-GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS - LAND PRICES
Land costs are a major contributor to overall housing production prices. The balance
of the City’s housing production will occur in the infill areas. In these areas, the land
costs are, in part, associated with the costs of the single-family dwellings now on
the sites. Land prices for new residential construction range from $20 to $25 per
6-64  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

square-foot. The practical effect of land prices relates primarily on infill sites that are
underutilized. Consequently, the land costs (i.e., resale homes) would need to be
adjusted to per-unit land costs based on the existing density.
NON-GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS - CONSTRUCTION
COSTS
Construction costs include the materials and labor necessary to build the structure.
These costs will vary widely depending on the quality features (e.g., size, roofing,
carpeting, etc.) that are incorporated in the structure. The cost for the construction of
a single-family home is in the area of $50 to $75 per square-foot.
NON-GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS - ENVIRONMENTAL
CONSTRAINTS
Every hazardous material handler is required to submit a business plan and an
inventory of hazardous substances and acutely hazardous materials to the Huntington
Park Police Department and the Los Angeles County Fire Department on a yearly
basis. If the hazardous materials inventory of a business should change, a revised
business plan must be submitted. Hazardous material users and generators in the
City include gasoline stations, auto repairs shops, printers and photo labs, clinics, dry
cleaners, schools, fire stations, and a variety of other commercial and industrial
land uses.
The State of California defines a hazardous material as a substance that is toxic,
ignitable or flammable, or reactive and/or corrosive. An extremely hazardous material
is defined as a substance that shows high acute or chronic toxicity, carcinogenicity, bio-
cumulative properties, persistence in the environment, or is water reactive (California
Code of Regulations, Title 22). The Uniform Fire Code includes criteria designed to
minimize the risk of an accident. These guidelines are to be followed when storing,
using, or transporting hazardous materials, and include secondary containment of
substances, segregation of chemicals to reduce reactivity during a release, sprinkler
and alarm systems, monitoring, venting and auto shut-off equipment, and treatment
requirements for toxic gas releases.
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING        6-65
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS - SEISMICITY
Major faults in the region include the Whittier Elsinore, Norwalk, Newport Inglewood,
Santa Monica, Sierra Madre, Palos Verdes, and San Andreas Faults. According to the
Los Angeles County Safety Element, no known or suspected active fault traces pass
through or are located near the City. There are no designated Alquist-Priolo Special
Studies Zones found within the City. The City is located within an area that may be
subject to liquefaction hazards. However, the level of risk within the City is no greater
than that anticipated for the region.
The four largest recent earthquakes that have caused major damage in the Los
Angeles basin include the 1933 Long Beach (Magnitude 6.3), 1971 San Fernando
(Magnitude 6.4), the 1987 Whittier Narrows (Magnitude 5.9), and the 1994 Northridge
(Magnitude 6.7) earthquakes. The 1933 Long Beach earthquake occurred on the
southern segment of the Newport-Inglewood fault, from Newport Beach to Signal
Hill. The 1971 San Fernando earthquake occurred along the San Fernando segment
of the Sierra Madre fault zone. The Whittier Narrows earthquake occurred on the
Elysian thrust fault in 1987. Finally, the most recent major earthquake, the Northridge
earthquake, occurred on the Oakridge fault in the San Fernando Valley in January
1994. A study of earthquake hazards by the United States Geological Survey (USGS)
indicates that the Huntington Park area has moderate to high potential for liquefaction.
Areas containing shallow groundwater within 30 feet or less of the ground surface are
susceptible to liquefaction hazards during seismic shaking.
The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act’s main purpose is to prevent the
construction of buildings used for human occupancy on the surface trace of active
faults.12 A list of cities and counties subject to the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault
Zones is available on the State’s Department of Conservation website. The City of
Huntington Park was not included in the list; therefore, no risk from potential fault
rupture is expected.13 However, the City is located in an area that is at risk for ground
shaking. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) determined that if a
7.2 earthquake were to strike to Newport Inglewood Fault, Huntington Park would
experience very strong to severe ground shaking. Huntington Park is located in a
12 California Department of Conservation. What is the Alquist-Priolo Act http://www.conservation.ca.gov /cgs/rghm/ap/Pages/main.
aspx. 	
13 California Department of Conservation. Table 4, Cities and Counties Affected by Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zones as of
January 2010.	
6-66    HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

liquefaction zone. Liquefaction is the process by which the ground soil loses strength
due to an increase in water pressure following seismic activity. The liquefaction risk is
no greater for the project site than it is for the surrounding areas and cities; therefore,
the potential impacts regarding liquefaction are anticipated to be less than significant.
Conformity to the most current State and City building codes will reduce the impacts
of ground shaking to levels that are less than significant. Lastly, the potential for
landslides is non-existent since the site and surrounding areas are generally level. The
potential impacts are expected to be less than significant with adherence to the most
stringent and pertinent build code requirements.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS - FLOODING AND
INUNDATION
According to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood insurance
map obtained from the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works, the City is
located in Zone X (refer to Exhibit 3-5). This flood zone has an annual probability of
flooding of less than 0.2 percent and represents areas outside the 500-year flood plain.
Thus, properties located in Zone X are not located within a 100-year flood plain.14
Large areas downstream of the Hansen and Sepulveda Dams, including the City of
Huntington Park, are at risk of inundation in the event of dam failure. The Hansen and
Sepulveda Dams are operated by the Army Corps of Engineers and were constructed
primarily for flood control. The flood hazards associated with dam failure will affect
most areas south of the dams.
The Hansen Dam is located on the northern edge of the San Fernando Valley,
approximately four miles west of Sunland. The inundation area of the Hansen Dam
include areas along the Tujunga Creek and several communities in the valley, the City
of Los Angeles, cities in south central Los Angeles, and areas along the Los Angeles
and San Gabriel Rivers. The City of Huntington Park is located approximately 25
miles south of the dam but dam failure will affect the entire City of Huntington Park.
Flood waters will arrive 17.75 hours after failure with a maximum depth of 1 foot
approximately 21 hours after failure.
14 FEMA. Flood Zones, Definition/Description. http://www.fema.gov/floodplain-management/flood-zones	
                                                                                         SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-67
The Sepulveda Dam is located on the Los Angeles River near the intersection of the
Ventura and San Diego Freeways near the City of Van Nuys. The probable maximum
flood from the Sepulveda Dam is expected to last four days with a total volume of
163,200 acre-feet. The flood will affect areas along the Los Angeles River, and the cities
of Los Angeles, Huntington Park, South Gate, Compton, Lynwood, Maywood, and Bell
Gardens. The flood waters are anticipated to reach the City approximately ten hours
after failure. A maximum flood elevation of 2 feet is expected approximately 12 hours
after failure.
INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRAINTS - WATER SYSTEM
The City of Huntington Park is served by four water companies, which obtain their
supply of water from two sources: groundwater from local wells and water supplied by
the Metropolitan Water District. The four water companies are listed below.15
        •	 Maywood Mutual Water Company – The Maywood Mutual Water Company
             serves the northeast portion of the City. The service boundaries extend east
             to west from Maywood Avenue to the City’s border with Maywood, and north
             to south from Slauson Avenue to Randolph Avenue. Approximately 70% of
             the Maywood Mutual Water Company’s costumers reside in Huntington Park.
        •	 Walnut Park Mutual Water Company – Walnut Park Mutual Water Company
             serves the odd side of Walnut Street (addresses 2901-3501 Walnut Street).
        •	 Golden State Water Company – The City of Huntington Park is located within
             the Central Basin West service area of the Golden State Water Company.
             Golden State Water Company serves the western portion of the City. The
             service boundaries extend from Slauson Avenue to the north to Florence
             Avenue to the south, and from the City’s western border with Florence-
             Graham to west to Alameda Street to the east.
        •	 Severn Trent Services – Severn Trent is the City’s main provider of water and
             operates multiple wells in the City, including Wells Number 12, 14, and 17.
15 City of Huntington Park.	
6-68    HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRAINTS - SEWERS
The City of Huntington Park Public Works Department maintains the City’s sewer
system. Sewage generated by the City is conveyed to regional sewage treatment
facilities maintained and operated by the Los Angeles County Sanitation District.
Wastewater collected by the LACSD is conveyed to the Joint Water Pollution Control
Plant located at 24501 Figueroa Street in Carson. This treatment plant provides
primary and secondary treatment for approximately 280 million gallons per day (mgd)
and has a total permitted capacity of 400 mgd. Thus, a remaining capacity of 120 mgd
is available for future development in the region.
INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRAINTS - STORM DRAINAGE
There is minimal flood risk in the City of Huntington Park (Zone X), as indicated in the
Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Flood Insurance Rate Program. The Los
Angeles River Channel is a 500-foot wide concrete channel that is designed to handle
the storm water runoff from the Los Angeles area. The river is located north and east
of the City approximately 1.90 miles to the east. The maintenance of the river is the
responsibility of the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works, Flood Control
District.16 Flooding and inundation hazards are described in the Safety Element. The
majority of the storm drains in the City are owned and maintained by the Los Angeles
County Flood Control District that connects directly to the Los Angeles River to the
east. There are storm drains along the major arterials.
INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRAINTS - UTILITIES AND
COMMUNICATIONS
Natural gas service to the City is provided by the Southern California Gas Company
(a subsidiary of SEMPRA Energy) and electricity is provided by the Southern California
Edison (SCE) Company. Southern California Gas Company serves more than 21 million
residents throughout Central and Southern California. Electrical power service to the
City is provided by Southern California Edison (SCE). SCE maintains overhead and
underground lines in the City to serve the energy demands of local residents and
businesses.
16 Los Angeles Department of Public Works. Flood Zone Determination Website. http://dpw.lacounty.gov/wmd/floodzone/	
                                                                                          SECTION 6: HOUSING         6-69

PUBLIC HOUSING AND THE RISK OF CONVERSION
Huntington Park has an active history of supporting affordable housing development.
The City has facilitated the development of eight residential developments, and the
acquisition/rehabilitation of six projects with long-term affordability covenants on all or
some of the units. These projects include: Concord Huntington Park, Seville Gardens,
Casa Rita, Rugby Senior Apartments, Casa Bonita, Rita Court, Santa Fe Village,
and Casa Bella (new construction), and Bissell Apartments, Bissell II, Bissell III, 6700
Middleton Street, 6822 Malabar Street, and the Mosaic Gardens projects (acquisition/
rehabilitation). These 14 projects provide a total of 557 affordable units, including 361
very low income (30% MFI), 149 low income (50% MFI) units, and 47 moderate income
(80% MFI) units. Of the total 557 units, 361 are senior units, 185 are family units, and 11
are family, transitional age youth units.
The City’s affordable projects are financed through a variety of funding sources,
including tax credits and HOME funds, which require long-term affordability controls.
None of these projects are at risk of conversion to market rate for at least 15 years. In
6-70  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

1999, the 162-unit Concord Huntington Park development pre-paid its HUD mortgage
and converted to market rate. However, the City utilized a Multifamily Mortgage
Revenue Bond to maintain project affordability for an additional 30 years.
The Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) program, formerly the Section 8 program, is
HUD’s largest program that helps low-income families, the elderly, and the disabled
find affordable decent, safe, and sanitary housing in the private market. Participants
receive federally subsidized vouchers that they can use to rent the home or apartment
of their choosing, provided that it meets the requirements of the program and
agreement of the landlord. The funding assistance is provided to the family or
individual, the voucher holder, and can move with the family or individual rather than
being tied to the property or unit.
The Housing Authority of the County of Los Angeles (HACoLA) is the local public
agency providing Housing Choice Vouchers within Huntington Park. According to
a special data run conducted by HACoLA for the City, as of September 2014, there
were a total of 458 Huntington Park households receiving tenant-based Housing
Choice Vouchers. Nearly 90% of the City’s Section 8 recipients are of Hispanic origin,
consistent with the ethnic make-up of the City’s population, which is 97% Hispanic.
Elderly households comprise approximately two-thirds of the City’s Section 8 recipients
(295 households), indicative of several large senior housing complexes with significant
numbers of Section 8 tenants. The City also has a high proportion of disabled
households receiving Section 8 (265 households), although many of these households
are also likely to be seniors. There are no public housing projects located within
Huntington Park.
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING   6-71

6.3 PLANNING VISION
The City of Huntington Park, with the implementation of the Housing Element, seeks
to promote an orderly pattern of quality future development to achieve a complete
and controlled balance of growth among land uses. The following objectives will be
realized through the implementation of the policies and programs contained in the
Housing Element:
      •	 To promote the conservation of housing within the City while;
      •	 To provide for the development of new housing in the City of
         Huntington Park;
      •	 To continue to identify adequate sites for new residential in the City;
      •	 To strive to remove those constraints that may impede new housing
         development in Huntington Park; and,
      •	 To ensure that fair and equal housing practices are observed at all times.
6-72  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

The City’s Housing Element policies are outlined in the section that follows. The
policies are arranged under each of the issue areas discussed above. The following
policies will establish the policy framework for the Housing Element.
HOUSING ELEMENT POLICIES
ISSUE AREA: HOUSING CONSERVATION
      •	 Housing Element Policy 1. The City of Huntington Park shall promote the
         maintenance of the existing housing units and shall require property owners
         to maintain their housing so the units are safe, healthful, and aesthetically
         pleasing.
      •	 Housing Element Policy 2. The City of Huntington Park shall minimize
         housing displacement and require expeditious and equitable relocation in the
         event units are demolished.
      •	 Housing Element Policy 3. The City of Huntington Park shall vigorously
         oppose any public agency initiative that would result in the removal of existing
         housing units without the provision of replacement housing.
      •	 Housing Element Policy 4. The City of Huntington Park, where possible,
         shall work with property owners to bring any illegal additions or building
         construction up to the current Building Code and other health and safety
         code requirements.
ISSUE AREA: DEVELOPMENT OF NEW HOUSING
      •	 Housing Element Policy 5. The City of Huntington Park shall encourage an
         adequate supply of dwelling units to meet the needs of all income groups
         through its General Plan.
      •	 Housing Element Policy 6. The City of Huntington Park shall promote the
         development of new owner-occupied housing units to meet the housing
         demand for moderate and upper income households.
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING     6-73

     •	 Housing Element Policy 7. The City of Huntington Park shall continue to
        cooperate with other public agencies and NGOs as a means to maintain and
        preserve the existing emergency and transitional housing in certain areas of
        the City.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 8. The City of Huntington Park shall ensure that new
        higher-density residential projects are kept at a scale (number of units, height,
        etc.) compatible in design with adjacent residential areas.
ISSUE AREA: IDENTIFICATION OF ADEQUATE SITES
     •	 Housing Element Policy 9. The City of Huntington Park shall assist
        developers in the identification of land suitable for housing developments for
        medium- and lower-income families and individuals.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 10. The City of Huntington Park shall explore
        opportunities for new residential development within those areas of the City
        occupied by vacant and obsolete commercial and industrial uses.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 11. The City of Huntington Park shall work to ensure
        that potential sites for residential development, located in those areas that
        were previously occupied by non-residential land uses, are investigated to
        determine whether or not previous on-site uses present potential health risks.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 12. The City of Huntington Park shall implement
        new land use designations, such as Mixed Use, for key areas of the City that
        could accommodate such development.
ISSUE AREA: REMOVAL OF GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
     •	 Housing Element Policy 13. The City of Huntington Park shall continue to
        review and streamline administrative procedures for processing development
        permits and establish finite time limits for such approvals so as to minimize the
        time, costs, and uncertainty associated with development.
6-74 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

     •	 Housing Element Policy 14. The City of Huntington Park shall periodically
         review and update development codes and standards to minimize their
         impact on new development.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 15. The City of Huntington Park shall explore
         innovative strategies that will facilitate the planning and design review process
         while providing clear and consistent direction to housing developers and
         property owners.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 16. The City of Huntington Park shall continue to
         cooperate with other public agencies and the adjacent cities in identifying
         strategies to promote and facilitate new housing construction.
ISSUE AREA: EQUAL HOUSING
     •	 Housing Element Policy 17. The City of Huntington Park shall ensure that
         all persons with special housing needs, such as the elderly and handicapped,
         have an adequate choice of suitable dwelling units.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 18. The City of Huntington Park shall ensure
         adequate housing and high quality community services for all persons
         regardless of income, age, race, sex, marital status, or ethnic background.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 19. The City of Huntington Park shall vigorously
         oppose those prejudices, practices, and market behaviors that result in
         housing discrimination.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 20. The City of Huntington Park shall cooperate
         with other public agencies involved in the enforcement of laws aimed at
         promoting access to housing (fair housing laws) and non-discrimination.
HOUSING PROGRAMS
Federal funds play a crucial role in implementing the Consolidated Plan. Local private
and non-federal funds are usually insufficient to meet the heavy demand for housing
and services in our community. Agencies receiving CDBG and HOME funds use those
                                                                  SECTION 6: HOUSING   6-75

funds as a commitment to receiving other funding sources. Likewise, the City also
leverages other resources among the formula grant programs. For example, the
HOME program is matched by a variety of sources, including: private investment,
public investment, and tax credits. The HOME Program requires a match of every
dollar drawn; however, the City remains exempt from meeting this mandate. Since
its inception, the City of Huntington Park has received a 100% match reduction, and
expects to receive such a reduction until otherwise indicated by HUD. Huntington
Park’s primary source of funds used to address the community’s housing needs are
HOME and Section 8. CDBG funds are directed almost entirely towards community
development activities. Huntington Park’s priority non-community development
needs include unmet community facility, infrastructure, public service, economic
development, and planning needs. Identified needs and priorities reflect the results of
input from various City departments, as well as input from agency consultations and
the citizen participation process.
PROGRAM #1 - HUNTINGTON PARK CODE ENFORCEMENT
Under this program, the City will continue proactive enforcement of existing Municipal
Code provisions relating to the appropriate use and development of properties
throughout the City. The Code Enforcement Program is designed to bring properties
up to City Code requirements and to clean up and improve unsightly or unsafe
properties. Under this program, City Code Enforcement personnel will continue to
refer property owners cited for Code violations to the housing rehabilitation assistance
programs as a means to provide financial assistance to qualifying households.
The majority of the Code violations in the City were related to property maintenance
and outdoor storage. No additional funding and/or staffing will be required or are
anticipated with this program’s continued implementation. The code enforcement
efforts will be linked with the housing rehabilitation programs in that property
owners of substandard units receiving code violation notices will also be informed of
rehabilitation programs. Under this Housing Element, the program will be continued
over the entire planning period applicable to this Housing Element update. This
program’s implementation strategy is summarized below:
6-76   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

       •	 Source of Funding. General Fund and Community Development Block Grant
          (CDBG).
       •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
       •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community Development
          Department.
       •	 Implementation Schedule. The program is ongoing and will be continued.
PROGRAM #2 - EMERGENCY SHELTER
Angeles Homeless Count for the Los Angeles County/City Continuum of Care (LA
CoC) as part of the national effort required by HUD to enumerate the homeless
population. For purposes of reporting homeless count data to HUD, all Continua of
Care use a “literal homeless” definition: “Men, women, and children who are:
       •	 Sleeping in places not meant for human habitation, including on the street, in
          parks, along rivers, in backyards, unconverted garages, cars and vans, along
          freeways or under overpasses, and the like; or
       •	 Sleeping in emergency shelters, safe havens, or transitional housing programs
          and were homeless upon entry to the program.”
As required by SB-2, the City will provide for an Emergency Shelter Program
that includes the identification of a geographic area where such facilities will be
permitted by right. The City will continue to inform those special service agencies
and organizations of the grants through mailing and brochures. The implementation
strategy is summarized below:
       •	 Source of Funding. General Fund.
       •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
       •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
          Development Department.
       •	 Implementation Schedule. The program is ongoing and will be continued.
                                                               SECTION 6: HOUSING    6-77

PROGRAM #3 - EQUAL HOUSING
The City will continue to refer equal housing-related complaints to the Fair Housing
Council of Los Angeles County which acts as an independent third-party to
discrimination complaints. The City will make available literature on the Program at
the Huntington Park City Hall, Chamber of Commerce, Library, City of Huntington Park
website and other areas that the Community gathers information.
This program is currently in existence. Therefore, additional funding and/or staffing
will not be required or are anticipated with this program’s continued implementation.
This program will be continued over the entire planning period applicable to this
element. The City will continue to provide these services to Huntington Park residents
and will advertise the availability of this program through brochures. Brochures
describing the services of Fair Housing are available in the Community Development
Department. Further marketing of the services available from Fair Housing will occur
through informational pieces in the City-wide newsletter and through information
provided on the City’s official website. This program’s implementation strategy is
summarized below:
       •	 Source of Funding. General Fund.
       •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
       •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
          Development Department.
       •	 Implementation Schedule. The program is ongoing and will be continued.
PROGRAM #4 - HOUSING REHABILITATION
The City will continue this program which is supported through the Community
Development Block Program (CDBG). The City of Huntington Park provides qualified
City homeowners assistance with their property maintenance through two Federally
funded programs: The Housing Rehabilitation Program and the Handyworker Program.
The Housing Rehabilitation Program provides grants to low- and moderate-income
homeowners. The single-family residential homeowners who qualify can receive a
maximum of $15,000 for eligible improvements and mobile home owners may be
granted a maximum of $8,000. The City’s Housing Rehabilitation Program offers
homeowners the opportunity to make repairs and improvements. This program’s
implementation strategy is summarized below:
6-78  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

      •	 Source of Funding. Community Development Block Grant (CDBG).
      •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
      •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community Services Department.
      •	 Implementation Schedule. The program is ongoing and will be continued.
PROGRAM #5 - LAND USE AND ZONING CONFORMITY
The City of Huntington Park will continue to review the Zoning Ordinance to ensure
that the development standards are consistent with those identified in the Land Use
Element. The City will initiate appropriate changes to the Zoning Map to ensure
conformity between the Land Use Element and Zoning Map. The City will also update
its General Plan in coming months to ensure the land use designations conform to the
State’s density requirements.
No additional funding and/or staffing will be required or are anticipated with this
program’s continued implementation. Under this Housing Element, the program will
be continued over the entire planning period. This program’s implementation strategy
is summarized below:
      •	 Source of Funding. General Fund.
      •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: Not Applicable.
      •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
         Development Department.
      •	 Implementation Schedule. The City’s Zoning Ordinance will undergo an
         annual review.
                                                               SECTION 6: HOUSING   6-79

PROGRAM #6 - REVIEW OF GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
AND THE ZONING ORDINANCE
This program is an existing program that will be continued through the 2013-2021
Planning Period. In 2012, the City reduced its plan check fees by 23%-58% plus its
building permit fees by 23%. This program involves the comprehensive review of the
City’s Zoning Ordinance. The review will also include development standards related
to building height, setbacks, and Density Bonus requirements for qualified affordable
housing. The zoning requirements will be revised to ensure that it conforms to the
Density Bonus requirements outlined in Government Code Section 65915. This section
requires the City to undertake the following:
       •	 The City must adopt an ordinance to implement the requirements of Section
          65915 regarding Density Bonuses.
       •	 The City must adopt a procedure to waive or modify development standards
          which preclude or interfere with the effect of the Density Bonus.
       •	 The Zoning Ordinance revision will eliminate the definition of “family” as part
          of the current revision.
       •	 The development standards for the residential zones will be reviewed to make
          sure they do not serve as a constraint to residential development.
       •	 The Zoning Ordinance must be revised to address single room occupancy
          (SRO) housing and supportive housing.
 This program’s implementation strategy is summarized below:
       •	 Source of Funding. General Fund.
       •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
       •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
           Development Department.
       •	 Implementation Schedule. The review will be completed by the fourth
           quarter of 2015.
6-80   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

PROGRAM #7 - TRANSITIONAL HOUSING
Transitional housing is a type of supportive housing used to facilitate the movement
of homeless individuals and families to permanent housing. A person may live in a
transitional housing unit for up to two years while receiving supportive services that
enable independent living. The City will continue to permit the existing Huntington
Park Shelter, which includes a transitional housing facility, to operate.
The City intends to comply with State law regarding the provision of transitional
housing. The existing Huntington Park Salvation Army Shelter located in the City
includes a transitional housing facility. The following will be applicable to
transitional housing:
      •	 Transitional housing will be subject to the same permitting procedures as
          that required for other permitted uses for the zone without undue special
          regulatory requirements.
      •	 The residential zones are in close proximity to transportation service providers,
          schools, parks, and other public services and facilities.
      •	 Parking requirements, fire regulations, and design standards for transitional
          housing will be the same as that required for the corresponding residential
          zone districts. As a result, the applicable development standards will not
          impede the efficient use of the site as transitional housing.
The implementation strategy is summarized below:
      •	 Source of Funding. Community Development Block Grant (CDBG).
      •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
      •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
          Development Department.
      •	 Implementation Schedule. The review will be completed by the fourth
          quarter of 2015.
                                                                  SECTION 6: HOUSING   6-81

PROGRAM #8 - ACCESSORY (SECOND) UNIT ORDINANCE
This new Second Unit Ordinance permits the construction of second units pursuant
to the City’s Zoning Code as required in Section 65852.2 of the State of California
Government Code. The current Zoning Ordinance provides for a “guest house or
accessory use.” However, the City’s Zoning Ordinance will need to be updated to
conform to current State requirements. This program provides for the preparation,
adoption, and subsequent implementation of a new Second Unit Ordinance that is
required under State law. The Ordinance will enable owners of single-family properties
to construct accessory units. The Ordinance will also enable the City to establish
development standards for such units.
The implementation of this program will begin with the preparation and review of the
new Second Unit Ordinance that will be included in the City’s Zoning Ordinance. Once
the ordinance meets all pertinent State and local requirements, it will be adopted
by the City Council. Finally, the Second Unit Ordinance will be advertised on the
City’s website and printed handouts will be prepared and provided at the Planning
Department counter. This program’s implementation strategy is summarized below:
       •	 Source of Funding. General Fund.
       •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: The City will revise its Zoning Ordinance
          consistent with State law.
       •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
          Development Department.
       •	 Implementation Schedule. The City’s Zoning Ordinance will be amended by
          the end of 2014 to provide for the Second Unit Ordinance.
6-82   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

PROGRAM #9 - DENSITY BONUS
The City is required under State law to have adopted density bonus regulations in
its Zoning Ordinance. This new program provides for the incorporation of density
bonuses and other incentives in the City’s Zoning Ordinance to developers who
construct projects with qualifying percentages of affordable housing units. The City
has adopted a “Density Bonus Ordinance (Section 9-3.203 [Allowable Bonuses] that
contains the following elements:
      “The following list outlines the development bonuses that may be allowed by
      the Commission, based on the number and extent of amenities, public facilities,
      and other positive development characteristics, outlined above and/or by the
      Commission, that are included in a project.
             1.	 Increased allowable floor area ratio (FAR);
             2.	 Increased building height;
             3.	 Reduced building setback requirements;
             4.	 Increased lot coverage percentage;
             5.	 Reduced parking requirements;
             6.	 Increased density;
             7.	 Reduction of fees; and
             8.	 Other development bonuses as determined by the Commission.
      The amount of development bonus shall be determined by the Planning
      Commission in accordance with reasonable standards or criteria such as by
      Community Development Department or City policy, ordinance, or a special
      nexus or fiscal impact study as part of the project application.”
As indicated previously, the Density Bonus Law (found in California Government Code
Sections 65915—65918), is a State mandate. A developer who meets the requirements
of the State law is entitled to receive the density bonus and other benefits. In addition
to the density bonus, the City is also required to provide one or more “incentives”
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING     6-83

or “concessions” to each project which qualifies for the density bonus. Cities and
counties are required to grant a Density Bonus and other incentives or concessions to
housing projects that contain one of the following:
       •	 At least 5% of the housing units are restricted to very low-income residents;
       •	 At least 10% of the housing units are restricted to lower income residents;
       •	 At least 10% of the housing units in a for-sale common interest development
          are restricted to moderate-income residents;
       •	 The project donates at least one acre of land to the City or County for very
          low-income units, and the land has the appropriate general plan designation,
          zoning permits and approvals, and access to public facilities needed for
          such housing;
       •	 The project is a senior citizen housing development (no affordable units
          required); and,
       •	 The project is a mobile-home park age-restricted to senior citizens (no
          affordable units required).
The amount of the Density Bonus is set on a sliding scale, based upon the percentage
of affordable units at certain prescribed income levels. In addition to the Density
Bonus, the City is also required to provide one or more ‘incentives’ or “concessions”
to each project which qualifies for the Density Bonus (except that market rate senior
citizen projects with no affordable units, and land donated for very low-income
housing, do not appear to be entitled to incentives or concessions). A concession or
incentive is defined as:
       •	 A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code or
          architectural design requirements, such as a reduction in setback or minimum
          square footage requirements;
       •	 Approval of mixed use zoning; or
       •	 Other regulatory incentives or concessions which actually result in identifiable
          and financially sufficient cost reductions.
6-84  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

The number of required incentives or concessions is based on the percentage of
affordable units in the project:
      •	 For projects with at least 5% very low-income, 10% lower income or 10%
          moderate-income units, one incentive or concession is required;
      •	 For projects with at least 10% very low-income, 20% lower income or 20%
          moderate-income units, two incentives or concessions are required; and,
      •	 For projects with at least 15% very low-income, 30% lower income or 30%
          moderate-income units, three incentives or concessions are required.
The City is required to grant the concession or incentive proposed by the developer
unless it finds that the proposed concession or incentive is not required in order to
achieve the required affordable housing costs or rents, or would cause a public health
or safety problem, cause an environmental problem, harm historical property, or would
be contrary to law. Financial incentives, fee waivers and reductions in dedication
requirements may be, but are not required to be, provided by the City.
The City’s existing Density Bonus does include provisions related to the granting of
Density Bonuses for affordable housing (refer to Subsection 13, Affordable housing;
(Also see Subsection 9-4.103.E). The City will then promote the program by providing
brochures describing the program and its benefits, and making them available at
the counter and information desk in City Hall. Promotion of this program will be
accomplished by verbally communicating information regarding housing bonuses to
housing developers as they are assisted by the Planning Department at the public
counter or over the telephone. Under this Housing Element, the program will be
continued over the entire planning period applicable to this Housing Element update.
This program’s implementation strategy is summarized below:
      •	 Source of Funding. General Fund.
      •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: The City will advertise this program through
          handout materials and communication with developers.
      •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
          Development Department.
      •	 Implementation Schedule. The program is a new program. The new
          Affordable Housing Density Bonus Ordinance will be adopted by the end of
          2014. The brochure materials and handouts will be provided by the end of the
          second quarter of 2015.
                                                               SECTION 6: HOUSING     6-85

PROGRAM #10 - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION HOUSING
The State now requires all cities to maintain a “reasonable accommodation
ordinance” to ensure that a city’s zoning and development requirements do not
hinder the implementation of housing improvements that aid disabled persons.
These improvements may include ramps, wider doorways, hand rails, etc. The City of
Huntington Park does not have any such constraints though this commitment needs
to be established through an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance that addresses
reasonable accommodation. This program is a new program that will be implemented
during the 2013 through 2021 planning period. Not all of the disability categories
require physical alterations to the housing unit to better accommodate the disabled
resident. However, many residents will benefit from specific improvements that would
better accommodate a disabled person.
The City of Huntington Park has adopted a “Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance’
that is included in Section 9-3.1901 in the City of Huntington Park Municipal Code. The
stated purpose is to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation
in regulations and procedures to ensure equal access to housing, and to facilitate the
development of housing. The purpose of this section is to provide a procedure under
which a disabled person may request a reasonable accommodation in the application
of zoning requirements. Under this program, the City will continue to review the
Ordinance to ensure it meets current State requirements. The review related to the
implementation of the Ordinance will be ministerial in nature with minimal or no
processing fee. Improvements may be approved by the Community Development
Director as long as a number of findings may be made. First, the request for
reasonable accommodation must be used by an individual with a disability protected
under fair housing laws. Second, the requested accommodation is necessary to
make housing available to an individual with a disability protected under fair housing
laws. Third, the requested accommodation would not impose an undue financial or
administrative burden on the City. Finally, the requested accommodation would not
require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the City’s General Plan
and Zoning Ordinance.
6-86   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

       •	 Source of Funding. General Fund.
       •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: Facilitate the development, maintenance
           and improvement of housing for persons with disabilities; reduce processing
           time for reasonable accommodation requests by 50 percent.
       •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
           Development Department.
       •	 Implementation Schedule.The Zoning Ordinance revision will be completed
           by the second quarter of 2014.
PROGRAM #11 - ENERGY CONSERVATION
Under this program, the City will review the City’s Zoning Ordinance and subdivision
requirements, as well as other applicable codes, to promote energy conservation
in housing rehabilitation and in the construction of new housing. This program will
supplement existing City efforts in the enforcement of the State’s construction codes
requiring energy efficiency in new construction. The City of Huntington Park will adopt
a “Green City” ordinance in conformance to current State requirements. This program
will ensure that developers and/or architects incorporate certain State-mandated
energy and water conserving equipment in any new development. The City’s website
will be expanded to include a “Green City” section that will refer users to a wide range
of initiatives from other energy and water providers that will be effective in helping
to conserve these resources. The programs will include rebates from other energy
providers for energy conserving refrigerators, water heaters, and other household
appliances. The key elements of this program include the following:
       •	 The City will encourage and support cost-effective energy technologies
           (passive solar space heating and cooling and water conservation) in the review
           of new residential development. The City shall permit the installation of
           photovoltaic/solar and solar water heating systems on new
           residential construction.
       •	 The City will establish an information kiosk in Civic Center near the planning
           counter that will include brochures and handouts promoting energy
           conservation from local utility providers. In addition, the City’s website will be
           updated to publicize the availability of the various rebate programs and tax
           incentives that will reduce the cost of installing energy-saving devices.
                                                                   SECTION 6: HOUSING      6-87

      •	 City of Huntington Park will update the Zoning Ordinance and subdivision
         requirements and other applicable codes to promote energy conservation in
         housing rehabilitation and in the construction of new housing.
      •	 The City shall support ongoing programs from SCE and Sempra Energy
         that promote energy conservation. The programs sponsored by the utility
         providers include rebates for energy conserving refrigerators, water heaters,
         and other household appliances.
      •	 The City will review the Zoning Ordinance to ensure that there are no
         requirements that are overly restrictive concerning the installation of solar
         panels. The City will then amend the Zoning Ordinance to ensure that solar
         panels are permitted in all Zone Districts.
      •	 Title 24 of the California Building Code requires phasing out older, less energy
         efficient toilets by replacing them with toilets that use only 1.6 gallons per
         flush. The City will continue to ensure that this requirement is
         being implemented.
      •	 The City shall promote water conservation (drought-tolerant landscaping,
         water conserving plumbing fixtures, etc.) in the review of new development.
No additional funding and/or staffing will be required or are anticipated with this
program’s continued implementation. Under this Housing Element, the program will
be continued over the entire planning period. This program’s implementation strategy
is summarized below:
      •	 Source of Funding. General Fund.
      •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: The City will revise its ordinance consistent
         with State law and advertise it through handout materials available at
         the public counter through the City’s web page and through periodic
         advertisements in the City newsletter.
      •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
         Development Department.
      •	 Implementation Schedule.The program is ongoing and will be continued.
6-88  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

PROGRAM #12 - SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY HOUSING
The State requires all cities to update their zoning ordinances to provide for SRO
housing. A single-room occupancy (SRO) development may serve as an important
source of affordable housing for lower-income individuals, seniors, and persons
with disabilities. A SRO unit usually is small ranging in size from 200 square feet to
350 square feet. Many of the older SROs have been lost due to deterioration, hotel
conversions, and demolition.
The City has adopted a SRO Ordinance (Title 9, Chapter 3, Article 13 [Single Room
Occupancy Facilities]). The purpose of this Article is to provide location, development,
and operational standards for SRO facilities. The key elements of the SRO Ordinance
include the following:
      “Single room occupancy (SRO) facilities, allowable only in the SRO Overlay
      District and within specified Districts in the Huntington Park Downtown Specific
      Plan (DTSP) subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit, shall be located/
      developed/operated in the following manner:
             •	 The parcel upon which the single room occupancy facility is to be
                established shall conform to all standards of the R-H and the Huntington
                Park Downtown Specific Plan (DTSP) zoning districts, as applicable.
             •	 SROs shall not be located within 250 feet of a parcel which has a school
                for children, adult bookstore or theater, bar or liquor store; and existing
                motels, hotels or apartments shall not be permitted to convert to SROs.
             •	 SROs shall be located within one-quarter mile of a bus stop or transit
                station.
             •	 SROs shall not exceed a maximum density of seventy (70) units per gross
                acre in the DTSP or 400 units per gross acre in the SRO Overlay District.
             •	 Off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with Article 8 of this
                Chapter (Off-Street Parking Standards). Secured bicycle or motorcycle
                spaces shall be provided at a minimum ratio of one space for each ten
                (10) tenants. A permanent, continuously available temporary parking/
                loading area shall be provided adjacent to the main entrance.
                                                                  SECTION 6: HOUSING     6-89

              •	 The design of a SRO project shall coordinate with and complement the
                 existing architectural style and standards of the surrounding land uses.
                 If a design theme has been established in the proposed area, the theme
                 should be reflected in the design and scale of the SRO project;
              •	 Exterior common areas and/or open courtyards should be provided
                 throughout the project. These areas should be designed to provide
                 passive open space with tables, chairs, planters or small garden spaces
                 to make these areas useful and functional for the tenants. Exterior
                 common areas, including parking areas, shall be illuminated with a
                 minimum of two (2) footcandles by low pressure sodium lighting from
                 dusk to dawn. The exterior lighting shall be stationary and directed away
                 from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.”
This program will involve the updating of the SRO Ordinance as required during this
planning period. The implementation elements are outlined below:
        •	 Source of Funding. General Fund (for the rezoning).
        •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: The City will amend the Zoning Ordinance
           as required by State law.
        •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
            Development Department.
        •	 Implementation Schedule.Within 12 months of Housing Element Adoption.
PROGRAM #13 - SUPPORTIVE HOUSING
The State requires all cities to update their zoning ordinances to provide for supportive
housing. Supportive housing refers to permanent rental housing that also provides a
wide array of support services that are designed to enable residents to maintain stable
housing and lead more productive lives. Supportive housing is most often targeted
to persons that have greater risk factors such as mental illness or drug dependence
that could ultimately lead to prolonged homelessness. The types of support services
that may be provided include medical and mental health care, vocational and
employment training, substance abuse counseling, childcare, and independent living
skills training. Most supportive housing is constructed and managed by non-profit
housing developers in partnership with non-profit service providers. However, the
State requires that local governments take a proactive role in facilitating the review and
6-90    HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

approval process. As a result, the City will be required to amend its Zoning Ordinance
to permit such housing in its residential zone districts. Such housing is already located
in the City though this program will enable the Huntington Park Planning Department
and other City agencies to better track and monitor such uses.
The State requires this Housing Element to identify zones that allow supportive
housing development and demonstrate that zoning, local regulations (standards
and the permit process) encourage and facilitate supportive housing. Supportive
housing may include a single family detached unit or an apartment building. The
City of Huntington Park will permit supportive housing within all of the residential
Zone districts. The City will comply with all State requirements governing supportive
housing. The implementation strategy is summarized below:
      •	 Source of Funding. Community Development Block Grant (CDBG).
      •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: The City will amend the Zoning Ordinance
          as required by State law.
      •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
          Development Department.
      •	 Implementation Schedule.Within 12 months of Housing Element Adoption.
REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
This section of the City of Huntington Park Housing Element compares the housing
need projections developed by the Southern California Association of Governments
(SCAG) as part of the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA), with historic
population, housing, and employment growth in the City. The projections were
derived from population, housing, and employment figures developed by SCAG as
part of the earlier planning process undertaken to develop the RHNA. The authority
to determine housing needs for the various income groups for cities within the
region has been delegated to the Southern California Association of Governments
(SCAG), pursuant to Section 65584 of the Government Code. The housing needs are
categorized according to income groups. The income categories include Very low,
Low, Moderate, and Above moderate-income households, and the incomes of the
selected income groups are based upon percentages of the median household income
for the larger Los Angeles County region. The RHNA housing need for Huntington
Park is categorized according to the following income groups:
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING     6-91

      •	 The Very-Low-income households are those households whose income does
         not exceed 50% of the median household income for the greater Los Angeles
         area. The City’s RHNA for this category is 216 units.
      •	 The Low-income households earn from 51% to 80% of the median. The City’s
         RHNA for this category is 128 households.
      •	 The Moderate-income groups earn from 81% to 120% of the median and the
         City’s RHNA for this category is 149 households.
      •	 The Above-Moderate households earn over 120% of the median income and
         the City’s RHNA for this category is 402 households.
The total projected construction need for Huntington Park during the 2014 to 2021
planning period is 895 units. Table 6-24 illustrate the distribution of the projected
housing needs for the four income categories.
  Table 6-24: RHNA Allocation for Huntington Park 2014-2021
The HCD indicates that the projected need for extremely low-income households
may be calculated by assuming that such households represent 50% of the very low-
income households. In other words, the future house need for extremely low-income
households in Huntington Park is projected to be 5 units. The State Legislature also
requires local governments to consider the projected needs for extremely low-income
households. As indicated previously, those households that have incomes of 30% of
6-92  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

the County median would fall into this category. Based on a 2010 Los Angeles County
median income ($61,632), an extremely low-income household would have a median
annual income of $18,490 or less.
LAND AVAILABLE TO ACCOMMODATE RHNA HOUSING NEED
The City of Huntington Park is fully developed and, as a result, any new residential
development will consist of infill development within properties that are currently
vacant or underutilized. New residential development may also occur within
residentially zoned properties where the existing land uses are non-residential at the
present time. The Land Use Element contains two residential land use categories and
a single category each for commercial, industrial, open space, and institutional.
      •	 Residential, Low-Density. This land use designation contemplates lower
         density residential development, including single-family homes, within those
         properties that are so designated. The maximum development density is 8.71
         dwelling units per acre. (One unit per parcel is permitted with a minimum lot
         size of 5,000 square feet.) This designation is limited to properties improved
         with existing single-family (detached) dwelling units.
      •	 Residential, Medium-Density. This land use designation permits higher
         density residential development that includes multiple-family development
         (town homes, condominiums, and apartments). The maximum development
         density is 21.78 units per acre. The corresponding zone districts include R-1,
         R-2, R-3, and C-3R zones.
The primary infill housing strategy focuses on the identification of a specific area of the
City that could be developed in residential uses. Three available sites were identified
as potential candidates that would enable the City to accommodate its RHNA
allocation. The sites are identified in Appendix A.
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING      6-93

QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
Table 6-25 indicates the department responsible for overseeing the administration
and/or implementation of the aforementioned programs. Table 3-4 also indicates
the funding source for the program, the schedule for the program’s implementation,
and finally, where appropriate, the number of units that will be assisted through the
implementation of the housing program.
              Table 6-25: 5-Year Housing Program Implementation
                                                                 Matrix, 2014-2012
6-94  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Table 6-25: 5-Year Housing Program Implementation
Matrix, 2014-2012 (continued)
                                        SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-95
      THIS PAGE HAS BEEN INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.
6-96 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
HOUSING
ELEMENT
6.1 INTRODUCTION
SCOPE OF THE HOUSING ELEMENT
The State of California requires that all local governments (both cities and counties)
prepare and maintain housing elements to identify strategies to conserve, rehabilitate,
and provide housing to meet the existing and future needs of the community. Specific
requirements concerning the scope and content of housing elements have been
established by the State Legislature. The Department of Housing and Community
Development (HCD) is the State Agency that is responsible for ensuring State housing
law being implemented at the local level. The responsibility of HCD involves reviewing
and certifying housing elements prepared by local governments. The State housing
element requirements are designed to address the following concerns:
      •	 Local governments must recognize their responsibility in contributing to the
         attainment of the State’s housing goals.
6-2  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

      •	 Local governments must prepare and implement housing elements that are
          coordinated with State and Federal efforts in providing opportunities
          for new housing.
      •	 Local governments must cooperate with other agencies and governments to
          address regional housing needs.
      •	 This Housing Element also evaluates the current Regional Housing Needs
          Assessment (RHNA) developed by the Southern California Association of
          Governments (SCAG) and indicates how the City intends to accommodate
          the future housing demand identified by the RHNA. The RHNA calls for an
          additional 895 units to be provided during the 2013-2021 planning period.
While the City’s development patterns were well established in the decades preceding
the Second World War, the availability of housing remains one of the key planning
issues in the community. New higher density development has occurred over the past
several decades. The challenges the City will face in the coming years include
the following:
      •	 The availability of land for new housing development in the City is limited/
          Huntington Park is fully developed and any new housing construction will
          consist of infill development.
      •	 The majority of the City’s land area is already developed as residential. The
          challenge in the future will be to retain the balance between the residential
          neighborhoods and the commercial and industrial areas.
      •	 The character of the City’s housing stock has undergone significant changes
          in the past five decades. Neighborhoods that were once largely single-family
          following the Second World War have undergone redevelopment to much
          higher densities.
      •	 The elimination of redevelopment has had a dramatic impact on the City’s
          ability to raise revenue for new housing programs and to assemble parcels for
          new residential development.
                                                                  SECTION 6: HOUSING    6-3

This Element consists of the following three sections:
      •	 The Introduction provides an overview of the Housing Element and describes
         the statutory authority related to its implementation.
      •	 The Background Report in this section describes the demographic, housing,
         socioeconomic, and employment characteristics of Huntington Park.
         The background analysis also describes the market, governmental, and
         environmental constraints that may affect housing production in the City
         during the 2013-2021 planning period.
      •	 The Housing Plan indicates those citywide goals and programs that will
         conserve and maintain existing housing in Huntington Park in addition to
         promoting the development of new housing. This section also indicates how
         Huntington Park will meet its RHNA obligations housing objectives.
The primary source of information used in the compilation of demographic, housing,
and socio-economic information for the City includes data collected by the U.S.
Bureau of the Census. These statistics are collected every ten years as part of the
national census. The most recent census was completed in 2010. The U.S. Bureau
of the Census divided the United States into geographical units to assist in the
enumeration and interpretation of the census data. The largest of these units is the
Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area, or SMSA, which corresponds to the larger, more
populous regions in the United States. The City of Huntington Park is located within
the Los Angeles-Long Beach SMSA, which corresponds to Los Angeles County. A
number of additional sources were referred to and relied upon in the preparation of
the Housing Element including the following:
      •	 The State Department of Finance (DOF) Demographic Research Unit was a
         source of population and housing information. The DOF publishes population
         and housing estimates for California cities and counties on an annual basis.
      •	 The Southern California Association of Governments (SCAG) is mandated
         under State law to prepare population, housing, and employment projections
         that are to be used in the development of the region’s Growth Management
         Plan. These projections are used in the determination of the City’s Regional
         Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA).
6-4  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

       •	 Land use and housing condition surveys were conducted during the
          preparation of this Housing Element.
       •	 Finally, the current Five-Year Housing Assistance Plan was also reviewed and
          pertinent statistical data used.
RELATIONSHIP TO GENERAL PLAN
State law requires that local general plans be internally consistent. In other words,
policies and programs contained in this Housing Element must be reflected in the
other Huntington Park General Plan Elements. The Land Use Element is particularly
important in the implementation of housing policy as the Land Use and Sustainable
Development Element designates land for residential development and establishes
permitted densities and intensities of development.
The policies contained in other elements of the Huntington Park General Plan will have
a direct bearing on the community’s quality of life, the amount and variety of open
space, the protection of natural and cultural resources, the maintenance of acceptable
noise levels in residential areas, and the development of programs to ensure the safety
of residents in the event of a disaster. This Housing Element’s conformity to the other
elements in the Huntington Park General Plan has been assured through the
following activities:
       •	 The City reviewed the policies and implementing programs that were included
          in the other General Plan Elements to ensure that they do not conflict with the
          policies that are contained in this Housing Element.
       •	 This Housing Element also recognizes the overall development capacity levels
          identified in the Land Use Element. The Land Use Element is also referred
          to 	in the identification of the appropriate locations for new
          housing development.
       •	 This Housing Element continues to promote the implementation of the
          Downtown Specific Plan that calls for both mixed use development and
          senior housing.
                                                                    SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-5

      •	 This Housing Element continues with the Single Room Occupancy Overlay
         Zone as a means to provide for alternative types of residential living
         opportunities to help meet the needs of the community.All Single Room
         Occupancy (SRO) facilities allowed under this overlay zoning district shall be
         developed/operated in compliance with the provisions/standards contained
         in Chapter 3, Article 1 (Single Room Occupancy Facilities of the Zoning
         Ordinance. Single Room Occupancy (SRO) facilities are also allowed at up to
         400 units per acre.
      •	 This Housing Element continues with the Senior Citizen Housing Overlay Zone
         as a means to provide for senior citizen housing at up to 225 dwelling units
         per acre, generally located in high-rise developments with shared open space,
         meeting facilities, and reduced parking requirements.
      •	 This Housing Element continues with the Affordable Housing Overlay
         Zone. The purpose of this zoning district is to facilitate the development of
         affordable family housing at densities up to seventy (70) dwelling
         units per acre.
In addition to the above, this Housing Element will be reviewed by the City on an
annual basis with the General Plan to ensure the continued conformity between this
Housing Element and the General Plan.
6-6  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

OVERVIEW OF THE CITY OF HUNTINGTON PARK
The City of Huntington Park was incorporated on September 1, 1906, with a
population of 526 residents.1 The City developed as a suburban community, providing
a centralized location for workers employed in Los Angeles and the surrounding
industrial cities of Commerce, Vernon, and South Gate. The City’s land use and
development patterns were well established by the 1930’s. A thriving downtown
centered along Pacific Avenue was testament to the area’s prosperity.2 A map of the
City is provided in Exhibit 6-1.
As the post World War II era progressed, the City began to experience a shift in its
demographics character. In addition, the decline of the manufacturing sector in the
area also contributed to the economic transition that affected the region. According to
the most recent State of California Department of Finance estimates for January 2015,
the City’s population was 59,312 persons.3 Key development and land use patterns
are summarized in the following paragraphs.4
         •	 The City of Huntington Park contains a variety of uses; however, the
             most prominent land use in the City is residential. Extensive residential
             development of varying densities is observed east of Seville Avenue,
             extending east to the City’s easternmost boundary, north to the City’s
             northernmost boundary, and south to the City’s southernmost boundary.
             Residential land uses are also located west of Pacific Avenue and extend as far
             west as Regent Street.
         •	 Commercial development is found along the major roadways that traverse
             the City including Slauson Avenue, Pacific Boulevard, Gage Avenue, Santa
             Fe Avenue, and Florence Avenue. In addition, small pockets of commercial
             development occupy the frontages along many of the residential streets. The
             heaviest concentration of commercial uses is located in the City’s downtown
             area along the Pacific Boulevard corridor which functions as the City’s central
             business district.
1 City of Huntington Park. History of Huntington Park. http://www.hpca.gov/index.aspx?nid=99	
2 Ibid.
3 State of California Dept. of Finance. Table E-5 City/County Population and Housing Estimates, Revised January 1, 2015.
4 Blodgett Baylosis Environmental Planning. Field Survey (the field surveys were completed during vMay and June of 2015).
                                                                                               SECTION 6: HOUSING         6-7

             Exhibit 6-1: A Map of the City of Huntington Park
6-8 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
•	 The City’s industrial areas are located within the northern and western portion
   of the City. Industrial land uses extend from the City’s northern border with
   Vernon along Slauson Avenue and 52nd Street, and westerly to the City’s
   border with unincorporated Los Angeles County along Wilmington Avenue.
   The City’s main industrial district is generally bounded by Santa Fe Avenue,
   Pacific Boulevard, and the City of Vernon to the east and Randolph Street to
   the south.
•	 Alameda Street, a major north-south arterial route, passes through the
   western portion of the City. The Alameda Corridor, a 20-mile long rail cargo
   expressway, extends through the center of Alameda Street. The portion of the
   Alameda Corridor that traverses the City is located within the 33-foot deep
   Mid-Corridor Trench.
                                                           SECTION 6: HOUSING    6-9

PUBLIC PARTICIPATION AND COMMUNITY OUTREACH
Community outreach and engagement, the process where the public participates and
provides input in decision making, is pivotal in the success and sustainability of public
projects. A successfully community outreach effort is integral to building consensus
amongst elected officials, staff, government and the public. Community engagement is
required by state law whenever a general plan is amended; the governing jurisdiction
makes diligent effort to include all economic groups in the process. It is with this
understanding that Tierra West Advisors (“Tierra West”) has taken a ‘boots on the
ground’ approach in executing community outreach efforts for the City of Huntington
Park’s Focused General Plan Update for Circulation, Land Use, and Housing Elements.
There are many crucial reasons to involve the public in the general plan process or in
any other planning process. Some include:
      •	 Providing valuable information leading to more informed policy development
         by decision-makers.
      •	 Insuring the plan’s successful implementation by building a base of long-term
         support with the public.
      •	 Reducing the likelihood of conflict and drawn-out battles by addressing public
6-10  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

   concerns during the general plan process rather than on a case-by-case basis in the
   future.
Public participation can have extremely positive impacts on the entire community,
including:
      •	 Educating the public about community issues.
      •	 Increasing the public’s ability and desire to participate in the community.
      •	 Enhancing trust in government by strengthening the relationship between
         elected officials, government staff, and the public.
      •	 Working towards community consensus and creating a vision for the future.
      •	 Laying the groundwork for community revitalization and increased investment
         in the community.
      •	 Obtaining public input regarding plan policies and community issues
         and objectives.
      •	 Providing the public with opportunities to evaluate alternative plans and to
         participate in developing and choosing a plan that works for their community.
      •	 Informing decision-makers about public opinion.
A general plan process is a valuable opportunity to focus on current issues in the
community. The following are some important points that Tierra West carefully
considered in strategizing a public participation process for PlanHP (the Focused
General Plan Update project name):
      •	 It is critical to understand the issues that are important to different segments
         of the community, including residents, business owners, and elected decision-
         makers. We want to ensure that all stakeholder groups feel that they have an
         opportunity to give input early in the process.
      •	 The process should be simple and transparent; participants should be
         updated frequently as the process moves forward.
      •	 The process should be as engaging, interactive, and fun as possible.
                                                                 SECTION 6: HOUSING    6-11

All affected stakeholders were represented in the public participation process.
Stakeholder groups involved in the Huntington Park General Plan process
have included:
       •	  Community and neighborhood groups;
       •	  Utility and public service providers;
       •	  Educational institutions;
       •	  Industry and business;
       •	  Civic and community service organizations;
       •	  Non-governmental organizations;
       •	  Religious communities; and,
       •	  Other public agencies.
The City sought to engage the complete range of community interests, such as
environmentalists, developers, the elderly, youth, lower-income residents, special
needs populations, and business owners. We believe that inclusive representation is
critical in the outreach process. The process must be open and accessible to the entire
community. PlanHP has collaborated with a variety of stakeholder groups so that their
members feel comfortable participating in the process. Partnerships are valuable
ways to build community awareness and enthusiasm for a general plan process. Civic
groups can encourage their members to participate, hold informational meetings, and
distribute information.
6-12   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Early in the General Plan Update process, Tierra West held a number of meetings with
Communities For a Better Environment (CBE), a respected community organization
located in Huntington Park. Founded in 1978, Communities for a Better Environment is
one of the preeminent environmental justice organizations in the nation. The mission
of CBE is to build the people’s power in California’s ethnically diverse and low-income
communities to achieve environmental health and justice by preventing and reducing
pollution and building green, healthy and sustainable communities and environments.
CBE’s community organizing engages and educates low-income communities of color
to build the power to influence environmental decisions that affect their lives. Through
door-knocking, community meetings, school groups, political education, and other
approaches, CBE’s programs empowers communities to fight local pollution sources
and work for greener, healthier communities through support of initiatives like Green
Zones and locally-controlled alternative energy sources. PlanHP made a series of
presentations to both of the prominent youth and adult advocate groups
organized by CBE:
       •	 Youth For Environmental Justice (Youth EJ). One of the unique
          components of CBE is their youth program, Youth for Environmental Justice.
          Since 1997, Youth for Environmental Justice (Youth EJ) has been organizing
          youth in Southeast Los Angeles around the issues of environmental and
          social justice. Youth EJ is committed to empower youth to take action to
          get educated and involved in their communities for their future. It does this
          through consciousness raising, organizing, and leadership development.
          Youth for Environmental Justice has Youth Action Clubs that meet at lunch
          in Huntington Park High School, South Gate High School, South East High
          School, International High School and Banning High School.
                                                                 SECTION 6: HOUSING    6-13

      •	 United Residents of South East LA (URSELA). URSELA is the adult
          community advocacy group of CBE. URSELA is comprised of concerned
          residents of Huntington Park, South Gate, Bell, Maywood, and unincorporated
          Los Angeles County. URSELA works on different environmental issues in the
          surrounding communities, ranging from environmental propositions during
          the electoral process and fighting polluters to environmental health policy on
          a regional and statewide level.
PlanHP used several methods to help identify community issues and concerns and to
identify residents’ opinions about the strengths and weaknesses of their community,
including an insightful community survey. A survey can help identify issues to be
addressed by the general plan and areas where residents would like more information.
Surveys can be designed to provide statistically accurate data or more qualitative
responses. The PlanHP team worked to distribute information on the survey in a
variety of ways, including:
      •	  Direct Mailing;
      •	  Including them in community newsletters;
      •	  Printing them in local newsletters;
      •	  Leaving them in city hall or county offices, coffee shops, and other community
          gathering places;
      •	 Posting them on the City website;
      •	 Enabling residents to access the survey online; and,
      •	 Hosting community events where attendees could fill out the survey.
The PlanHP community engagement program was designed to include several
stakeholder groups, such as residents, business owners, community organizations,
churches, schools, and others. Our team’s Outreach/Engagement Objectives
have included:
      •	  Educating the public about the City and the General Plan Update;
      •	  Obtain public input;
      •	  Develop an overall vision;
      •	  Generate consensus while alleviating concerns;
      •	  Engaging key stakeholders to foster long-term involvement; and,
      •	  Obtain input from stakeholders.
6-14  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-1
Community Visioning is an inclusive planning process wherein a community creates a
shared vision for its future and begins to make it a reality. A General Plan provides a
guide for community plans, policies, and future actions in the community. The General
Plan Update process for the City of Huntington Park included a holistic series of
community engagement workshops that focused on the following key characteristics:
      •	 Understanding the whole community – The General Plan process has
          promoted an understanding of the whole community and the full range of
          issues shaping its future. It also attempted to engage the participation of the
          entire community and its key stakeholders groups.
      •	 Reflecting core community values – The General Plan Update process has
          identified the community’s core values – those deeply held community beliefs
          and ideals shared by its members. Such values inform the idealistic nature of
          the community’s vision and goals.
      •	 Addressing emerging trends and issues – The process explored the
          emerging trends driving the community’s future and the strategic issues they
          portend. Addressing such trends promoted greater foresight, adding rigor
          and realism to the community’s vision.
      •	 Envisioning a preferred future – The engagement process produced a
          statement articulating the community’s preferred future. The statement
          represents the community’s desired “destination” – a shared image of where it
          would like to be in the upcoming generation.
      •	 Promoting local action – the General Plan Update will also provide detailed
          implementation strategies and polices. This document serves as the
          community’s roadmap, moving it in the direction of its vision in the
          near-term future.
In an effort to achieve these key outreach goals, Plan HP hosted a series of public
workshops, conducted focus groups with community workshops, worked with the
students of schools within the community, presented before Neighborhood Councils,
Council Office, and held interdepartmental meetings with City Staff to analyze and
discuss our results. Tierra West held roundtable meetings on 10/8 and 10/26 to review
planning, background information, and initial strategy for the Community Outreach/
Engagement elements of the project. The consulting team attended the City’s annual
6-16  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Halloween Festival, where team members provided educational project materials,
greeted community members, and solicited feedback from attendees on some key
community issues.
An ongoing emphasis was made to invoke separate strategies for engaging both the
Huntington Park youth and senior groups. The consultant team attended the Youth
Commission meeting at the Parks and Recreation Center on 11/2, and also met with
Marquez High School staff in November to discuss parent/student involvement in
the process. The team also continued planning efforts for a stand-alone Huntington
Park Community Engagement event, which will identify key community issues and
present initial alternatives to solving those issues within the General Plan Update. We
have been working iteratively with Communities for a Better Environment (CBE), a
local environmental health and justice organization with a long history of community
outreach involvement in Huntington Park. They will continue to be involved in our
engagement and their local reach will be invaluable when diagnosing key
community issues.
The consultant team and the City completed a crucial community outreach workshop
in Huntington Park for PlanHP. The team partnered with Communities for a Better
Environment (CBE), a Huntington Park-based organization focusing on environmental
justice and community advocacy. The group has a strong local presence in Huntington
Park, with a devoted young group (YouthEJ) and adult group (United Residents of
Southeast Los Angeles). CBE produced an important community document in 2012,
“Brown To Green Vision for Huntington Park,” which emphasized revitalization of
several underutilized industrial areas in the City. Their longevity and respect within
the community made them an important partner for PlanHP, and their office space on
Pacific Avenue in Huntington Park was perfect for our April 20, 2016 public
outreach meeting.
After input from Huntington Park City Council Members Graciela Ortiz and Karina
Macias, PlanHP launched a Youth Plan Huntington Park (YPHP) program in further
educate and involve the local youth in the General Plan Update process. Its goal was
to assemble a group of students who are interested in learning more about community
outreach, planning, and administering surveys. After learning more about updating
the General Plan and PlanHP, these students became ambassadors for the effort,
helping to collect input for the process from their family, classmates, and peers. They
met weekly over the course of five weekends, and made a final presentation to City
                                                                 SECTION 6: HOUSING    6-17

Council on May 28, 2016, when they are provided certificates from the Mayor for their
advocacy efforts. The consulting team member (Tierra West) led a series of interviews
and meetings with local stakeholders. The consulting team continued meeting with
individuals and groups including City Department Directors and Staff, members of the
6-18  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
City Council, members of City commissions, business community leaders, Chamber of
Commerce representatives, and residents. Meetings and interviews were conducted
with important stakeholders such as:
      •	 Huntington Park Mayor Karina Macias
      •	 Huntington Park Vice Mayor Graciela Ortiz
      •	 Other members of the City Council
      •	 Huntington Park City Manager Edgar Cisneros
      •	 Huntington Park Library staff
      •	 Huntington Park Director of Parks and Recreation
      •	 Marquez High School staff
      •	 Communities for a Better Environment (CBE) staff
      •	 CBE Youth for Environmental Justice (YouthEJ)
      •	 CBE United Residents of South East LA (URSELA)
Websites allow for digital information and idea-sharing between the City and
participants and among participants themselves. It is also a good way to keep people
up-to-date on the project process. Many jurisdictions use their city or county website
to post information about the general plan process, such as progress, meeting dates
and times, and supporting materials. For PlanHP, Tierra West and City Staff decided to
create a separate website specifically for the general plan process. Online technology
offers the opportunity for community members to share ideas and ask questions and
can allow for a greater number of people to participate without having to attend
meetings or workshops. For example, any community who may not have been able to
attend a PlanHP public workshop were able to easily access the same survey online.
E-mail newsletters have also been used to send meeting reminders and updates to
the public, as well as to receive input on planning issues. The consulting team, in
close collaboration with City staff, launched PlanHP.com in Summer 2015. The site
provides 24-hour access to project information for residents and stakeholders in the
City of Huntington Park. The design is clean, modern, minimalist, bilingual (English
and Spanish), and easy to navigate. Its main purpose is to 1) educate public about
the project, 2) advocate involvement in upcoming meetings, and 3) elicit feedback
(through email newsletter signups, polls, and surveys). The web programmers tested
the requisite plug-ins and widgets needed for the Online Poll and Online Survey
functionality of the site. These elements are working properly and are now ready to
compile responses from users.
                                                               SECTION 6: HOUSING    6-19

6-20 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 203
Government Code, Section 65589.7, requires the City to provide water and sewer
purveyors with the opportunity to participate in the Housing Element’s development.
This cooperation is important so that housing production can be coordinated with
infrastructure plans. The City of Huntington Park is served by four water companies
which obtain their supply of water from two sources: groundwater from local wells and
water supplied by the Metropolitan Water District. The four water companies are
listed below.
       •	 Maywood Mutual Water Company. The Maywood Mutual Water Company
          serves the northeastern portion of the City. The service boundaries extend
          east to west from Maywood Avenue to the City’s border with Maywood, and
          north to south from Slauson Avenue to Randolph Avenue. Approximately 70%
          of the Maywood Mutual Water Company’s costumers reside in
          Huntington Park.
       •	 Walnut Park Mutual Water Company. The Walnut Park Mutual Water
          Company serves the odd-numbered side of Walnut Street (addresses 2901-
          3501 Walnut Street).
       •	 Golden State Water Company. The City of Huntington Park is located within
          the Central Basin West service area of the Golden State Water Company.
          Golden State Water Company serves the western portion of the City. The
          service boundaries extend from Slauson Avenue to the north to Florence
          Avenue to the south, and from the City’s western border with Florence-
          Graham to the west to Alameda Street to the east.
       •	 Severn Trent Services. Severn Trent is the City’s main provider of water and
          operates multiple wells in the City, including Well Numbers 12, 14, and 17.
The Water Master Plan acknowledges for these purveyors indicate that water service
for low income households within the service area must be prioritized. Historical
data indicates the Main Basin and Central Basin have been well managed for the full
period of the adjudications, resulting in a stable and reliable water supply. There are
no contemplated basin management changes, other than increasing direct use of
recycled water and the planned use of recycled water for groundwater replenishment
in the Main Basin to reduce the need to import water from other regions. Therefore,
the groundwater supplies are deemed reliable. Following the adoption of this Housing
Element, the City will continue to work with water and sewer providers to coordinate
housing and infrastructure plans.
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING    6-21

6.2 BACKGROUND FOR PLANNING
This section provides an overview of the demographic, housing, and socioeconomic
characteristics of the City of Huntington Park. The information contained in this
section indicates those trends that have occurred in the City in the years following
incorporation. This section of the Element considers the following:
      •	 Population Characteristics includes an analysis of population growth trends,
         age characteristics, and ethnicity of the City’s residents;
      •	 Housing Unit Characteristics focuses on trends in residential development,
         housing unit types, and housing tenure;
      •	 Household Characteristics provides an overview of the key socioeconomic
         characteristics germane to housing need;
      •	 Housing Constraints indicates those factors that may affect the development
         of new housing in the City.
6-22  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

POPULATION CHARACTERISTICS
In 2015, the City’s population was estimated to be 59,312 persons. The City
experienced its most rapid growth during the 1920’s when the City added an additional
20,078 residents. The most recent 2010 Census indicated the City’s population was
58,114 persons at the time the Census was taken (the most recent California State
Department of Finance [DOF]) estimates place the City’s current population at 59,312
persons. In recent years since the 2000 Census, the City’s population growth has
experienced a slight decline. The City’s population trend is shown in Table 6-1 and
illustrated in Exhibit 6-2.
                                                               SECTION 6: HOUSING   6-23

       Exhibit 6-2: City of Huntington Park Population Trends
6-24 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table 6-1: Population Trends 1910-2015
The overall increase in the City’s population since the 1970’s was due to both an
increase in the average household size and new residential construction. Table 6-2
compares the trends in the average household size for Los Angeles County with those
of the City for the years 1990 through 2013. As indicated in Table 6-2, the average
household size for the City is significantly higher compared to Los Angeles County
as a whole. In Huntington Park, the average household size between 1990 and 2013
increased from 4.00 to 4.04 persons per unit.
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING  6-25

                                 Table 6-2: Population Trends 1910-2015
POPULATION AGE CHARACTERISTICS
Census data was reformatted in Table 6-3 to
depict the age statistics arranged according to
specific age categories (preschool-aged, school-
aged, young adults, etc). Table 6-3 charts the
age characteristics of the City’s population for
the years of 2000 and 2013. As is evident from
the examination of Table 6-3, the age cohorts
that experienced the greatest rates of decline
consisted of the school-aged children (5 to 19
years of age) and the working adults (25 to 54
years of age). The age characteristics for the
City’s population are shown in Exhibit 6-3.
In 2000, the median age of the City’s population
was 25.6 years. According to the most recent
2013 American Community Survey data, the
City’s median age was 29.2 years of age.
Corresponding statistics for Los Angeles County
were 32 years of age and 35.1 years of age for
2000 and 2013, respectively.
6-26   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Table 6-3: Age Characteristics 2000-2013
                                         SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-27
      Exhibit 6-3: City of Huntington Park Age Characteristics
        Age of City’s Population - 2000 Age of City’s Population - 2013
6-28 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

RACE AND ETHNICITY
Approximately 72.5% of the City’s population was classified as white while 0.6% was
classified as African-American, 0.7% as Asian, 0.6% as American Native or Alaskan, and
1.3% consisting of two or more races. Hispanics are considered an ethnic group rather
than a racial group. Hispanics may include persons from a variety of races including
Caucasians, African-Americans, and even Asians. Hispanics accounted for 97.8% of the
City’s total population.
Table 6-4: Race and Ethnicity: 2013
HOUSING UNIT CHARACTERISTICS
According to the 2010 Census, there were 15,151 housing units in the City. The most
recent DOF estimates identified 15,178 housing units in the City as of January 1, 2015.
Table 6-5 summarizes housing types derived from the 2010 U.S. Census statistics and
the 2015 State Department of Finance Housing estimates for the City of Huntington
Park. The housing unit types are also illustrated in Exhibit 6-4.
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING   6-29

                              Table 6-5: Housing Characteristics: 2015
HOUSING TENURE
Table 6-6 indicates housing tenure statistics for 2000 and 2013. The percentage
of owner-occupied units in Huntington Park has declined slightly since 2000 when
approximately 27.4% of the housing units were classified as owner-occupied.
Approximately 26.8% of the units in Huntington Park are owner-occupied according to
the 2013 U.S. Census estimates.
6-30  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Exhibit 6-4: City of Huntington Park Housing Unit
Characteristics: 2000-2013
      2000 Housing Units           2013 Housing Units
Table 6-6: Housing Tenure in Huntington Park: 2000-2013
                                            SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-31
HOUSING AGE, CONDITION, AND OVERCROWDING
The most widely referred to variable is related to the age of the housing unit. The use
of this information is based on the premise that the older the units, the more likely they
are to require some form of repair or maintenance. This is not always the case since
many older units have undergone extensive renovation and/or remodeling. As a result,
the housing unit age data should not be exclusively used to determine the overall
condition of housing in the City. Table 6-7 depicts the 2010 U.S. Census statistics
indicating the age of the housing units within the City.
                               Table 6-7: Age of Housing Stock in 2013
6-32   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Housing units that were constructed prior to 1960 are generally considered to be
potential candidates for rehabilitation since the structures are approaching fifty years
in age. As indicated in Table 6-7, a total of 9.948 units were constructed prior to 1960.
This represents 66% of the total housing units in the City.
There are a number of other Census indicators that are useful in identifying potential
dilapidated units. These indicators include units without heating, units lacking
conventional plumbing, or units lacking complete kitchen facilities. The latter variable
may also be an indicator of bootleg units constructed illegally or legal second units.
According to the 2013 ACS Survey, 91 units (0.6%) lacked plumbing and 150 units (1%)
lacked kitchen facilities. Overcrowding may also be a contributor to the deterioration
of housing units.
A household is considered to be overcrowded if the number of persons residing in
the unit exceed 1.01 persons per room. A household is severely overcrowded if the
number of persons residing in the unit exceed 1.51 persons per room. Table 6-8
provides a breakdown in the number of overcrowded units that were identified in
the most recent 2013 ACS, broken down by housing tenure. Of the 14,455 occupied
housing units identified in the 2013 Census estimate, 2,804 units were identified as
being overcrowded (19.4% of the City’s total number of occupied units) and 2,959
units (20.5% of the total occupied units in the City) were identified as being severely
overcrowded. Household overcrowding, rates has decreased from 63% of all renters
in 2000 to 48% a decade later (as documented by the 2007-2011 ACS). Severe
overcrowding (greater than 1.5 persons per room) impacts 27% of renters in the City.
The greatest concentration of overcrowded units include several neighborhoods
with concentrations of severe renter overcrowding (over 45%): north of Florence
immediately east of Santa Fe; the neighborhood on either side of State bound by
Gage and Saturn; both sides of Pacific bound by Randolph and Slauson; and the
northernmost portion of the city directly to the east of Santa Fe.
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING      6-33

    Table 6-8: Large Family and Overcrowded Housing Units in
                                                         Huntington Park - 2013
HOUSEHOLD INCOME
The 2013 median household income in Huntington Park was $36,397. The median
household income for the State was $61,094. According to the 2013 Census, 27% of
the families living in the City had annual incomes that were below the poverty level.
Of this total, 39.6% were under the age of 18 years. Table 6-9 summarizes the annual
household income statistics for the City based on the 2013 Census estimates.
SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS
Special housing needs groups are those households that contain the elderly,
handicapped, large families, overcrowded households, female heads of households,
and persons in need of emergency shelter. Pursuant to the Housing Element
Legislation, a housing element must include an analysis of special housing needs. That
is to say the housing needs of such groups as handicapped, elderly, large families,
farm workers, and families with female heads of households need to be considered. In
addition, an analysis of overcrowded households is also required though this analysis
was included in a previous section.
6-34   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table 6-9: Household Income in 2013
SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS - LARGE FAMILIES
According to the HCD’s definition, the term “large family” refers to a family containing
five or more persons. According to the 2010 Census, a total of 1,776 large family
(45.2% of the total renter occupied households) households lived in owner-occupied
units. The same Census figures also indicated that 3,359 large family households
(31.5% of the total renter occupied households) lived in rental units. This overcrowding
is exacerbated by the large number of renter households in the City as well as the age
of the City’s housing stock.
                                                               SECTION 6: HOUSING     6-35

SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS - FEMALE HEAD OF HOUSEHOLDS
In 2013, there were 3,804 female-headed households, representing 26.3% of the
total number of households in Huntington Park. Of this total, 2,218 or 15.3% of
the total female-headed households in the City included minors, 18 years of age
or less. This number bears importance in relation to social service needs, such as
child care, recreation programs, and health care, which are of special concern to
these households. For purposes of comparison, approximately 15.2% of the total
households in Los Angeles County were female-headed households.
SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS - PERSONS IN NEED OF
EMERGENCY SHELTER
There are two categories of need that should be considered in discussing the
homeless: 1) transient housing providing shelter and usually on a nightly basis; and,
2) short-term housing, usually including a more comprehensive array of social services
to enable families to re-integrate themselves into a stable housing environment.
The issue of homelessness emerged as a major issue in the 1990’s during the
severe economic recession that Southern California was undergoing at that time.
Homelessness was further exacerbated by the closing of mental institutions and the
recent housing dislocation associated with the great recession that began in 2008.
While the Southern California economy is improving, housing costs are once again
rising in response to the growing demand. As a result, homelessness within the larger
Southern California region continues to be a problem. Various circumstances that may
lead to homelessness include the following:
       •	 Single adult transients passing through the City on the way to some
          other destination;
       •	 Seasonal and/or migrant homeless individuals seeking seasonal employment
          in the City;
       •	 The chronically homeless, single adults, including non-institutionalized,
          mentally disabled individuals, alcohol and drug abusers, elderly individuals
          with insufficient incomes, and others who voluntarily, or are forced, due to
          financial circumstances, to live on the streets.
6-36  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

      •	 Minors who have run away from home;
      •	 Low-income families that are temporarily homeless due to financial
         circumstances or are in the process of searching for a home (single-parent
         families, mostly female-headed, are especially prevalent in this group); and,
      •	 Women (with or without children) that are escaping domestic violence.
A citywide housing condition survey was conducted by the preparers of this Housing
Element during August and September of 2016. This survey involved a windshield
survey of every street in the City of Huntington Park. During this survey, the location
and extent of homeless persons were also noted. The surveys identified between
three and ten homeless individuals on each day the survey was conducted. The
majority of these homeless individuals were observed in the Civic Center. Statistical
methods were also used to forecast the balance of the County’s homeless population.
The survey considered the following:
      •	 Unsheltered homeless people, including those found on streets, in vehicles, in
         makeshift shelters (such as tents), and encampments;
      •	 Sheltered homeless people occupying emergency shelters, transitional
         housing, domestic violence shelters, and those using vouchers to stay in
         hotels or motels; and,
      •	 A count of homeless people occupying short-stay institutions such as
         hospitals, residential rehabilitation facilities, and jails was completed.
The Los Angeles Homeless Services Authority (LAHSA) is a joint powers authority
of the City and County of Los Angeles, created in 1993 to address the problems of
homelessness in Los Angeles. The LAHSA is responsible for funding and coordination
of homeless services and housing assistance to support the homeless population of
men, women and children in the City and County of Los Angeles. LAHSA is the lead
agency in the HUD-funded Los Angeles Continuum of Care (which includes 85 cities
and the unincorporated areas of Los Angeles County, excluding the cities of Glendale,
Long Beach and Pasadena), and coordinates and manages more than $132 million
annually in federal, state, county and city funds for programs providing shelter, housing
and services to homeless persons. Since 2005, LAHSA has coordinated six biennial
Greater Los Angeles Homeless Counts. Beginning 2016, the Point-In-Time Count
occurs annually.
                                                                     SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-37

The City of Huntington Park was included in East Los Angeles County (SPA 7). The 2015
survey identified 3,571 homeless persons. Of this total, 907 homeless persons were
“sheltered and 2,664 persons were “unsheltered.” The 2016 survey identified 3,469
homeless persons. Of this total, 987 homeless persons were “sheltered and 2,482
persons were “unsheltered.” Included in the Permanent Supportive Housing count is
Huntington Park’s recently opened Mosaic Gardens which includes 34 beds in 23 units.
The project was developed by LINC Housing with the assistance of Federal HOME
dollars from the City of Huntington Park. Mosaic Gardens in Huntington park includes
15 units that are reserved for households where at least one member has an open
and active case with the Los Angeles Department of Mental Health, meets Transition
Aged Youth designation (including persons between 18-24 years of age), and meets
homeless requirements. The Mosaic Gardens is located at 6337 Middleton Street.
SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS - FARM WORKER HOUSING
Because of the extensive amount of agricultural activity in the State, the Housing
Element law requires the consideration of farm worker housing needs. Currently, there
are no farm worker households residing in Huntington Park.
SPECIAL NEEDS GROUPS - ELDERLY AND HANDICAPPED
The most recent 2010 Census indicated that 1,718 senior households in Huntington
Park representing 19.4% of the total households in the City. Senior-headed households
living in rental units accounted for 7.9% of the total rental households in the City.
Senior-headed owner-occupied housing units accounted for 5.2% of the total
occupied units in the City. According to the Census, there were 7,188 residents in
the City that had a disability (this figure represents approximately 19.7% of the City’s
total population). Of this total, 913 persons with a disability were 20 years of age or
younger. Working aged persons (21 years to 64 years in age) with a disability totaled
5,167 persons. Finally, seniors (65 years or older) with a disability totaled 1,108 persons.
The Los Angeles County Department of Health Services (LACDHS) is the major
provider of health care for more than two million residents in the County without health
insurance. The LACDHS provides hospital and outpatient care, programs and clinics,
emergency medical services and rehabilitative services. Through its university affiliates
(UCLA and USC), the County hospitals conduct postgraduate medical education for
6-38   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

interns, residents, and fellows. The Department operates four acute care hospitals,
a rehabilitation hospital, a multi-specialty ambulatory care center, six comprehensive
health centers, and nine health centers. Additionally, the LACDHS operates two
trauma centers, two pediatric trauma centers, four emergency rooms, and a state-of-
the art burn center.
The City of Huntington Park is located within the service area of the South Central Los
Angeles Regional Center for Persons with Developmental Disabilities, Inc. (SCLARC),
which is a private, non-profit, community based organization. The SCLARC contracts
with the State Department of Developmental Services (DDS) to coordinate services
for individuals with developmental disabilities and their families. According to the
SCLARC, there are currently 310 consumers being served by the regional center. Key
services offered by the SCLARC include the following:
      •	 Adult Day Program. The Adult Development Center (ADC) includes various
          community programs for adults that are in the process of acquiring self-
          help skills. These programs focus on the development and maintenance
          of functional skills required for self-advocacy, community integration,
          employment, and self-care.
      •	 Sheltered Workshops. Participants may also participate in a sheltered, five-
          day per week workshop and perform as if they are working at a regular job for
          which they receive monetary compensation.
      •	 Behavior Management Day Programs. These programs serve adults
          with severe behavior disorder and/or dual diagnosis who, because of their
          behavior problems, are not appropriate for any other community-based
          day program.
      •	 Residential Placement. Residential direct support professionals provide
          services to children and adults who are unable to reside in the family home.
          Temporary placements are utilized in unusual circumstances that may occur
          in emergencies or whenever appropriate placements are not available. There
          are also intermediate care facilities for the developmentally disabled and
          skilled nursing care on an extended basis. Most SCLARC consumers placed in
          residential facilities are eligible for SSI/SSA benefits, as well as Medi-Cal.
                                                                    SECTION 6: HOUSING   6-39

      •	 Supported Living. Adults with developmental disabilities, regardless of the
         degree of the disability, have the right to live in homes of their choice as long
         as they are provided with services that will ensure and enhance their success
         with integration into mainstream society. Supported living services consist of
         services to adults with developmental disabilities that choose to live in homes
         they themselves own or lease in the community.
      •	 Independent Living Training. Independent living services is a six-month
         service available to persons 18 years of age and older who are not enrolled in
         school and have demonstrated potential for living on their own with a minimal
         amount of supervision. Training is provided in all areas of home management
         (budgeting, housekeeping, cooking, etc.) and should not be confused with
         the activities of daily living (bathing, grooming, toileting, etc.).
      •	 Supported Employment. Supported employment programs provide
         support to adults who are interested in competitive employment. Supported
         employment programs are funded by the Department of Rehabilitation.
The City of Huntington Park requires that all new residential developments comply
with California building standards (Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations)
and Federal requirements for accessibility. Other City efforts designed to promote
reasonable accommodation include the following:
      •	 Procedures for Ensuring Reasonable Accommodations. Minor building
         improvements, such as ramps, rails, and wheelchair lifts, may be handled
         through an administrative review process to evaluate such development
         requirements applicable to housing for persons with disabilities.
      •	 Efforts to Remove Regulatory Constraints for Persons with Disabilities.
         The State has removed any City discretion for review of small group homes for
         persons with disabilities (six or fewer residents). The City of Huntington Park
         does not impose additional zoning, building code, or permitting procedures
         other than those allowed by State law. There are no constraints on housing for
         persons with disabilities caused or controlled by the City.
      •	 Retrofitting Requirements. The City also allows residential retrofitting to
         increase the suitability of homes for persons with disabilities in compliance
6-40  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

          with accessibility requirements. In addition, the City works with applicants who
          need special accommodations in their homes to ensure that application of
          building code requirements does not create a constraint.
       •	 Information Regarding Accommodation for Zoning, Permit Processing,
          and Building Codes. The City implements and enforces the current California
          Building Code. The City provides information to all interested parties
          regarding accommodations in zoning, permit processes, and application of
          building codes for housing for persons with disabilities.
This Housing Element references an existing program that includes the provision of a
new Reasonable Accommodation Program. Under this program, the City will continue
to implement a reasonable accommodation ordinance to provide exception in zoning
and land-use regulations for housing for persons with disabilities. The procedures
related to the program’s implementation are ministerial in nature with minimal or no
processing fee. Improvements may be approved by the Community Development
Director as long as a number of findings may be made. First, the request for
reasonable accommodation must be used by an individual with a disability protected
under fair housing laws. Second, the requested accommodation is necessary to
make housing available to an individual with a disability protected under fair housing
laws. Third, the requested accommodation would not impose an undue financial or
administrative burden on the City. Finally, the requested accommodation would not
require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the City’s General Plan and
 Zoning Ordinance.
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY - HOUSING COSTS IN THE CITY
Housing costs in the City, while lower when compared to some other Southern
California communities, are still relatively high when considering the prevailing wages
that local residents typically earn. Table 6-10 summarizes the housing values.
                                                                 SECTION 6: HOUSING     6-41

            Table 6-10: Housing Values in Huntington Park (2015)
More recent home sales data for the City is provided by Zillow.com. According to
home sales data collected in March 2017, a total of 38 units were for sale of sold. The
average asking price was approximately $542,000 and ranged in the asking price of
between $208,000 and $870,000. Table 6-11 indicates the Fair Market Rent (FMR)
data for Los Angeles County between 1980 and 2013. The data shown in Table 6-11
indicates that rents for two, three, and four bedroom units steadily increased through
the mid-1990s where a one year decline was registered. Rents in the latter 1990s and
the early 2000s continued to increase. The HUD-formulated FMR schedule serves as a
guide for the maximum rents allowable for those units receiving Section 8 assistance.
HUD uses the Consumer Price Index (CPI) and the Census Bureau housing survey data
to calculate the FMRs for each area.
6-42  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table 6-11: HUD Fair Market Rents Los Angeles-Long
Beach SMSA
                                         SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-43
            Table 6-11: HUD Fair Market Rents Los Angeles-Long
                                                     Beach SMSA (continued)
Surveys of rents in the City were also conducted during the 2015 Census. Table
6-12 indicates the average monthly rents for those units identified in the survey. The
median rent in the City according to the 2010 Census was $1,053 per month.
HOUSING AFFORDABILITY - OVERPAYMENT FOR HOUSING IN
HUNTINGTON PARK
Table 6-13 summarizes 2010 Census figures that indicate the percentage a household
paid for housing in 2009 (as indicated in the 2010 Census). As indicated previously,
those households that paid more than 30% of their monthly gross income for rent or a
mortgage are considered to be overpaying for housing.
6-44  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table 6-12: Contract Rents in Huntington Park (2015)
Table 6-13: Overpayment 2010
                                          SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-45
Table 6-14 provides a breakdown of the housing cost affordability standards for
various housing unit types based on the number of bedrooms. The housing cost
affordability standards are identified according to the following income categories:
       •	 Very-Low incomes refer to those household incomes that are 50% of the Los
          Angeles County median;
       •	 Low incomes refer to those household incomes that are between 50% and
          80% of the Los Angeles County median; and,
       •	 Moderate incomes refer to those households that are between 80% and 120%
          of the Los Angeles County median household income.
The figures shown in Table 6-14 indicate the rents and mortgage payment thresholds
for various housing unit sizes for the aforementioned income categories.
Table 6-15 indicates the household income ranges for the various income categories
(very low, low, and moderate) as well as the median household income. These figures
are arranged according to the number of persons that comprise a household. As is
evident from examination of Table 6-15, the income limits increase as the number of
persons living in a household increase. For example, a household with one person
is considered to be low income if the annual household income is $39,050 while
a household containing five persons is considered to be low income if its annual
household income is $60,200. The information included in Table 6-15 may be used to
determine what percentage of a household’s income will be expended on a monthly
basis for housing. For example, a household consisting of three persons with an
annual income of $23,450 ideally should not spend more than $645 per month. This
figure represents 30% of that household’s annual income.
6-46   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Table 6-14: Housing Affordability Standards in
(dollars/month)
                                          SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-47
    Table 6-15: Annual Income Limits for the Los Angeles-Long
                                                                      Beach SMSA
The Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) data are used by HOME
and CDBG jurisdictions to prepare their consolidated plans. Data showing housing
problems and the availability of affordable housing are available through the CHAS
website for all counties, places, and CDBG/HOME jurisdictions. The CHAS data
concerning overpayment for housing in the City of Huntington Park is summarized
in Table 6-16. The table indicates the overpayment for extremely low income
households (<30% of the County median), very low income households (30% to 50% of
the County median), low income households (50% to 80% of the County median), and
all of the households in the City. The households that are overpaying for housing are
further identified by tenure (owner-occupied and renter-occupied households). Finally,
the table indicates senior households and large-family households that are overpaying
for housing.
6-48   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table 6-16: Overpayment for Housing in Huntington Park
                                         SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-49
     Table 6-16: Overpayment for Housing in Huntington Park
                                                (continued)
6-50 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table 6-16: Overpayment for Housing in Huntington Park
(continued)
                                         SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-51
GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS - PROCESSING PROCEDURES
The City works closely with developers to expedite approval procedures so as not
to put any unnecessary timing constraints on development. For a typical project, an
initial pre-consultation meeting with the Community Development Department, Public
Works, and the Fire Department is arranged to discuss the development proposal.
Then a tentative parcel map application or a description of project must be filed with a
site plan, which is first reviewed by the planning department and other agencies, such
as public works, for consistency with City ordinances and General Plan guidelines.
The City also encourages the joint processing of related applications for a multiple-
family project. For example, a request for a rezoning may be reviewed in conjunction
with the site plan, a tentative tract map, and any variances. Such procedures save
time, money, and lowers the cost to the developer. As indicated previously, the City
works closely with developers to expedite approval procedures so as not to put any
unnecessary timing constraints on development. In addition, the City makes full use of
the CEQA Infill Housing Exemption.
For a typical housing project, an initial pre-consultation meeting with the Community
Development Department, Public Works, and the Fire Department is arranged to
discuss the development proposal. After the project is approved, the building
department performs plan checks and issues building permits. Throughout the
construction of a multiple-family development, the Building Department will perform
building checks to monitor the progress of the project. This process does not put
an undue time constraint on most developments because of the close working
relationship between City staff, developers, and the decision-making body. The
developer must also determine if the proposed project is a “Priority Project” and
subject to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit’s
6-52    HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Standard Urban Stormwater Mitigation Plan (SUSMP) requirements. If the project is
subject to these requirements, it must meet SUSMP requirements prior to issuance of
grading and building permits. In addition, school fees must be paid to school districts
prior to issuance of building permits. School fees for Los Angeles School District is
$4.00 per livable square-foot, the fee varies between school districts.
Table 6-17 identifies the typical processing time most common in the entitlement
process. It should be noted that each project does not necessarily have to complete
each step in the process (i.e., small scale projects consistent with General Plan and
Zoning designations do not generally require Environmental Impact Reports [EIR],
General Plan Amendments, Rezones, or Variances).
Table 6-17: Permit Review Timelines for the City of
Huntington Park
                                                                 SECTION 6: HOUSING   6-53
Table 6-18 compares the City’s plan check fees with those of the neighboring cities. As
indicated in the table, the City’s fees are not substantially greater than that compared
to other cities in the area.
                           Table 6-18: Comparison of Plan Check Fees
The City of Huntington Park Housing and Community Development Division is
responsible for ensuring that all new construction is performed and completed in a
safe and proper manner using the correct materials and methods. Permits are required
for any changes, including electrical, plumbing, or building changes to any property.
Applicants and/or contractors are required to bring their plans to City Hall where a
plan checker or building inspector will examine the plans for approval. The building
permit provides evidence that the contractor has complied with the Building Code and
the City has approved the proposed construction. Table 6-19 estimates the building
fees for a typical residential development.
6-54  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Table 6-19: Typical Planning and Processing Fees
The City’s permit fees are based on the valuation of the proposed project that utilizes
the Los Angeles County fee schedule. The fees shown in Table 6-19 are applicable
to both single-family and multiple-family development. The processing fees are well
under 1% of the total development cost. Assuming a 1,000 square-foot unit, the total
development fees (including school district fees) would be approximately $4,879 per
unit. This assumes 20 electrical fixtures, five plumbing fixtures, one sewer connection,
and one thousand square feet of floor area. The permit fees account for approximately
2.2% of a residential unit costing $225,000. Permit fees and approval time frames do
not pose a constraint to the development of housing in Huntington Park. The City
employs a plan check process that applies to all residential development including
multi-family housing. Plan check for the processing of building permits typically
require seven to ten working days, depending on the City’s work load. The City of
Huntington Park has adopted the 2016 California Building Code (CBC) with 2017 Los
Angeles County Amendments, which establishes the minimum standards for
new construction.
There are no extraordinary regulations applied by the City that would hinder future
                                                                 SECTION 6: HOUSING   6-55

housing development. The entitlement process for discretionary permits, a zone
change, general plan amendment, tract map, and conditional use permit application
typically require 60 to 90 days to receive final approval. Zone changes and general
plan amendments are first heard by the City Council (which also acts as the Planning
Commission). For the majority of these cases, the City Council will review the item and
render a decision within 90 days of application submittal.
OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS
For a typical single-family home there are no off-site fees related to the construction
of new infrastructure, park fees, or Mello-Roos fees. The City may require that
damaged ROW be replaced/repaired though the basic street system and supporting
infrastructure has been installed as part of the area’s historic development. The City’s
requirements for off-site improvements related to multiple-family developments
are not overly or unnecessarily restrictive. The density, setback, and other standards
regulating development within Huntington Park are consistent with those being used
by other surrounding communities and will not inhibit the development of a range of
housing types within the City. The City has not imposed any moratoria, open-space
requirements, or prohibitions against multi-family housing that would potentially
inhibit the development of new housing. The City will continue to review the general
development standards such as street width, parking lanes, and sidewalks.
LAND USE CONTROLS - BASE ZONE DISTRICTS
The Huntington Park Zoning Code and Zoning Map are the primary implementation
ordinances of the land use element. The zoning map and ordinance indicates the
specific land uses allowed in the City and establishes regulations and standards for
use and development. The City’s Zoning Code consists of eight base zone districts
that include the following: R-L, R-M, R-H, C-P, C-N, C-G, MPD, and OS.5 Five zones,
R-L, R-M, and R-H, C-P, and C-N are applicable to residential development. The
R-L (Residential, Low) zone generally applies to single-family detached residential
development. The R-M (Residential, Medium) zone generally applies to higher density
single-family residential development, duplexes, and lower density multiple-family
developments. Finally, the R-H (Residential, High) zone applies to higher density
multiple-family developments. 6
5 City of Huntington Park Municipal Code. Title 9 Zoning. 	
6 City of Huntington Park Municipal Code. Title 9 Zoning, Chapter 4, Zoning Districts, Article 1 Residential Zones.	
6-56     HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Table 6-20: City of Huntington Park Zoning Ordinance,
Base Zone Districts
LAND USE CONTROLS - OVERLAY ZONE DISTRICTS
In addition to the aforementioned base zone districts, the City of Huntington Park
Zoning Code includes a number of overlay zones. Special regulations or incentives are
included in the overlay zone to facilitate certain regulations in the geographic area that
is subject to the overlay zone. The overlay zones included in the City of Huntington
Park Zoning Code are outlined below:
         •	 Medium Density Overlay Zone. The purpose of this overlay zoning district
             is to provide for multi-family residential units up to 17.424 units per acre
             within the underlying commercial zoning district. The Medium Density
             Overlay zoning district identifies parcels that are suitable for the development
             of medium density housing, either as the primary use on the parcel or in
             conjunction with other permitted uses.7
         •	 Senior Citizen Housing Overlay Zone. The purpose of this overlay zoning
             district is to provide for senior citizen housing at up to 225 dwelling units per
             acre, generally located in high-rise developments with shared open space,
7 City of Huntington Park Municipal Code. Title 9 Zoning, Chapter 4, Zoning Districts, Article 5 Overlay Zones.	
                                                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-57

             meeting facilities and reduced parking requirements. Single Room Occupancy
             (SRO) facilities are also allowed at up to 400 units per acre.8	
         •	 Single Room Occupancy Overlay Zone. The purpose of this overlay zoning
             district is to provide for alternative types of residential living opportunities
             to help meet the needs of the community. All Single Room Occupancy
             (SRO) facilities allowed under this overlay zoning district shall be developed/
             operated in compliance with the provisions/standards contained in Chapter 3,
             Article 1 (Single Room Occupancy Facilities).9
         •	 Affordable Housing Overlay Zone. The purpose of this zoning district is
             to facilitate the development of affordable family housing at densities up to
             seventy (70) dwelling units per acre. Senior citizen housing at a density of 225
             units per acre and single room occupancy (SRO) facilities at a density of 400
             units per acre is also permitted.
The City’s overlay zones are summarized in Table 6-21.
              Table 6-21: City of Huntington Park Zoning Ordinance,
                                                 Special and Overlay Zones for Housing
8 Ibid.	
9 City of Huntington Park Municipal Code. Title 9 Zoning, Chapter 4, Zoning Districts, Article 5 Overlay Zones.	
6-58     HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

LAND USE CONTROLS - SPECIFIC PLAN
The purpose of a specific plan is to provide a policy and regulatory bridge between
the City of Huntington Park General Plan and individual project-level development.
Specific plans are designed to provide specific land use regulations and development
guidelines that govern the land use and development standards for a particular
geographic area. The City has adopted a single specific plan, the Downtown Specific
Plan (DTSP) that is applicable to the central business district or downtown.10 The DTSP
builds upon and refines economic development strategies developed specifically for
the downtown area focusing on beautification of public spaces and streetscapes and
storefront. An overall goal of the DTSP is the orderly development of downtown area
consistent with the City’s General Plan along with the community’s vision for the area.
The DTSP covers an area of approximately 85 acres in the City of Huntington Park’s
Downtown. The DTSP area extends from Randolph Street in the north to Florence
Avenue in the south. The eastern boundary is generally Seville Avenue, except for an
area that extends along Zoe Avenue to Miles Avenue, and the western boundary is
Rugby Avenue. Pacific Boulevard occupies the central portion of the DTSP area and
is considered the City’s Central Business District. The DTSP divides the downtown
area into four Districts (refer to Exhibit 6-5). Within each District there is particular
vision for future development. Land use and development standards, as well as
design guidelines, give direction for each of these Districts to achieve the future state
envisioned by the community.11 The four Districts are as follows:
        •	 District A – Gateway. District A encompasses parcels at the intersections of
             Randolph Street with Pacific Boulevard and Rita Avenue, and Florence Avenue
             with Rugby Avenue, Pacific Boulevard, Rita Avenue, and Seville Avenue.
        •	 District B – Festival. District B encompasses all parcels fronting on Pacific
             Boulevard, except those parcels at the intersections with Randolph Street and
             Florence Avenue contained in District A as described above.
        •	 District C – Neighborhood. All parcels between Rugby Avenue and Seville
             Avenue that are not included in District A or District B are part of District C,
             except for select parcels at the intersection of Seville Avenue and Zoe Avenue.
10 RRM Design Group. Downtown Huntington Park Specific Plan. Plan dated August 4, 2008.	
11 City of Huntington Park Municipal Code. Title 9 Zoning, Chapter 4, Zoning Districts, Article 5 Overlay Zones.	
                                                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-59

     •	 District D – Zoe [Avenue]. District D encompasses those parcels bordering
        Zoe Avenue from the alley separating Rita Avenue and Seville Avenue to the
        intersection with Miles Avenue.
6-60 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Exhibit 6-5: Map of the Downtown Specific Plan (DTSP)
                                        SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-61
Specific land uses and development that is permitted in the R-L, R-M, and R-H zone
districts are listed below in Table 6-22.
   Table 6-22: Housing Types Permitted Under the Zone Districts
Residential development standards in the residential zone districts are summarized
below in Table 6-23.
6-62   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
Table 6-23: Residential Development Standards
NON-GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS TO HOUSING
DEVELOPMENT
Three market factors are cited by State law as a necessary part of the constraints
analysis: 1) land cost; 2) construction costs; and, 3) financing availability. Housing costs
as a constraint on affordability must be examined in light of the rental and ownership
costs within the means of various economic segments. State law identifies four
economic segments: Very low-income; Low-income; Moderate-Income; and High-
Income. The annual income limits of these four groups are further defined by the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development in reference to the median income
for Los Angeles County and household size.
NON-GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS - MARKET
CONSTRAINTS
Affordable housing costs are computed on a basis of 30% of monthly income. The
affordable ownership costs, or purchase price of a home, are calculated on the basis of
the rule of thumb of 2.5 times the annual household income. These affordable housing
costs then can be compared to the prevailing costs in Huntington Park to confirm the
existence of market constraints. A household is generally considered to be overpaying
for housing if it is paying more than 30% of its gross monthly income for housing.
                                                                  SECTION 6: HOUSING     6-63
One of the major problems facing households in the City of Huntington Park, and
the broader regional housing market, is affordability. This problem is related to the
match between household income and the size and cost of owning or renting a
home. The Census data indicated that for owner-occupied housing units, median
mortgage and selected monthly service costs in 2010 were $1,829. In 2010, owner-
occupied households (50.7%) expended more than 35% of their income for housing.
These housing expenditures reflected the sum of mortgages, real estate taxes,
insurance, association fees, and utilities. Monthly payments for homeowners more
than quadrupled in the ten years between 1980 and 2010, and the percentage of
households paying 30% or more for housing nearly doubled during this same period.
For renters, the median gross rent per month increased from $211 in 1980 to $979 in
2010. This dollar amount refers to the contract rent (i.e., monthly rent agreed to, or
contracted for) plus the estimated average cost of utilities if paid for by the renter.
This definition was used by the Census in an attempt to eliminate differentials due
to varying practices in rent structuring. According to the most recent Census, a total
of 3,309 renter-occupied households (47.8%) paid in excess of 30% of their monthly
incomes for housing.
Although private financing is generally available at market rates, low- and moderate-
income households usually need below market rate financing to enable them to repair
existing homes or purchase resale or new housing units. Also, all potential developers
of housing projects are provided information on the various Los Angeles County
financing programs available for low-income rental construction or rehabilitation
projects. Additionally, a survey of local banking institutions completed as part of
this Housing Element’s preparation revealed that redlining does not appear to be
occuring in Huntington Park. In fact, a number of banks have established programs
to encourage lower-income residents to purchase homes, and to improve homes that
they already own.
NON-GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS - LAND PRICES
Land costs are a major contributor to overall housing production prices. The balance
of the City’s housing production will occur in the infill areas. In these areas, the land
costs are, in part, associated with the costs of the single-family dwellings now on
the sites. Land prices for new residential construction range from $20 to $25 per
6-64  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

square-foot. The practical effect of land prices relates primarily on infill sites that are
underutilized. Consequently, the land costs (i.e., resale homes) would need to be
adjusted to per-unit land costs based on the existing density.
NON-GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS - CONSTRUCTION
COSTS
Construction costs include the materials and labor necessary to build the structure.
These costs will vary widely depending on the quality features (e.g., size, roofing,
carpeting, etc.) that are incorporated in the structure. The cost for the construction of
a single-family home is in the area of $50 to $75 per square-foot.
NON-GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS - ENVIRONMENTAL
CONSTRAINTS
Every hazardous material handler is required to submit a business plan and an
inventory of hazardous substances and acutely hazardous materials to the Huntington
Park Police Department and the Los Angeles County Fire Department on a yearly
basis. If the hazardous materials inventory of a business should change, a revised
business plan must be submitted. Hazardous material users and generators in the
City include gasoline stations, auto repairs shops, printers and photo labs, clinics, dry
cleaners, schools, fire stations, and a variety of other commercial and industrial
land uses.
The State of California defines a hazardous material as a substance that is toxic,
ignitable or flammable, or reactive and/or corrosive. An extremely hazardous material
is defined as a substance that shows high acute or chronic toxicity, carcinogenicity, bio-
cumulative properties, persistence in the environment, or is water reactive (California
Code of Regulations, Title 22). The Uniform Fire Code includes criteria designed to
minimize the risk of an accident. These guidelines are to be followed when storing,
using, or transporting hazardous materials, and include secondary containment of
substances, segregation of chemicals to reduce reactivity during a release, sprinkler
and alarm systems, monitoring, venting and auto shut-off equipment, and treatment
requirements for toxic gas releases.
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING        6-65
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS - SEISMICITY
Major faults in the region include the Whittier Elsinore, Norwalk, Newport Inglewood,
Santa Monica, Sierra Madre, Palos Verdes, and San Andreas Faults. According to the
Los Angeles County Safety Element, no known or suspected active fault traces pass
through or are located near the City. There are no designated Alquist-Priolo Special
Studies Zones found within the City. The City is located within an area that may be
subject to liquefaction hazards. However, the level of risk within the City is no greater
than that anticipated for the region.
The four largest recent earthquakes that have caused major damage in the Los
Angeles basin include the 1933 Long Beach (Magnitude 6.3), 1971 San Fernando
(Magnitude 6.4), the 1987 Whittier Narrows (Magnitude 5.9), and the 1994 Northridge
(Magnitude 6.7) earthquakes. The 1933 Long Beach earthquake occurred on the
southern segment of the Newport-Inglewood fault, from Newport Beach to Signal
Hill. The 1971 San Fernando earthquake occurred along the San Fernando segment
of the Sierra Madre fault zone. The Whittier Narrows earthquake occurred on the
Elysian thrust fault in 1987. Finally, the most recent major earthquake, the Northridge
earthquake, occurred on the Oakridge fault in the San Fernando Valley in January
1994. A study of earthquake hazards by the United States Geological Survey (USGS)
indicates that the Huntington Park area has moderate to high potential for liquefaction.
Areas containing shallow groundwater within 30 feet or less of the ground surface are
susceptible to liquefaction hazards during seismic shaking.
The Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zoning Act’s main purpose is to prevent the
construction of buildings used for human occupancy on the surface trace of active
faults.12 A list of cities and counties subject to the Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault
Zones is available on the State’s Department of Conservation website. The City of
Huntington Park was not included in the list; therefore, no risk from potential fault
rupture is expected.13 However, the City is located in an area that is at risk for ground
shaking. Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) determined that if a
7.2 earthquake were to strike to Newport Inglewood Fault, Huntington Park would
experience very strong to severe ground shaking. Huntington Park is located in a
12 California Department of Conservation. What is the Alquist-Priolo Act http://www.conservation.ca.gov /cgs/rghm/ap/Pages/main.
aspx. 	
13 California Department of Conservation. Table 4, Cities and Counties Affected by Alquist-Priolo Earthquake Fault Zones as of
January 2010.	
6-66    HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

liquefaction zone. Liquefaction is the process by which the ground soil loses strength
due to an increase in water pressure following seismic activity. The liquefaction risk is
no greater for the project site than it is for the surrounding areas and cities; therefore,
the potential impacts regarding liquefaction are anticipated to be less than significant.
Conformity to the most current State and City building codes will reduce the impacts
of ground shaking to levels that are less than significant. Lastly, the potential for
landslides is non-existent since the site and surrounding areas are generally level. The
potential impacts are expected to be less than significant with adherence to the most
stringent and pertinent build code requirements.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONSTRAINTS - FLOODING AND
INUNDATION
According to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) flood insurance
map obtained from the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works, the City is
located in Zone X (refer to Exhibit 3-5). This flood zone has an annual probability of
flooding of less than 0.2 percent and represents areas outside the 500-year flood plain.
Thus, properties located in Zone X are not located within a 100-year flood plain.14
Large areas downstream of the Hansen and Sepulveda Dams, including the City of
Huntington Park, are at risk of inundation in the event of dam failure. The Hansen and
Sepulveda Dams are operated by the Army Corps of Engineers and were constructed
primarily for flood control. The flood hazards associated with dam failure will affect
most areas south of the dams.
The Hansen Dam is located on the northern edge of the San Fernando Valley,
approximately four miles west of Sunland. The inundation area of the Hansen Dam
include areas along the Tujunga Creek and several communities in the valley, the City
of Los Angeles, cities in south central Los Angeles, and areas along the Los Angeles
and San Gabriel Rivers. The City of Huntington Park is located approximately 25
miles south of the dam but dam failure will affect the entire City of Huntington Park.
Flood waters will arrive 17.75 hours after failure with a maximum depth of 1 foot
approximately 21 hours after failure.
14 FEMA. Flood Zones, Definition/Description. http://www.fema.gov/floodplain-management/flood-zones	
                                                                                         SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-67
The Sepulveda Dam is located on the Los Angeles River near the intersection of the
Ventura and San Diego Freeways near the City of Van Nuys. The probable maximum
flood from the Sepulveda Dam is expected to last four days with a total volume of
163,200 acre-feet. The flood will affect areas along the Los Angeles River, and the cities
of Los Angeles, Huntington Park, South Gate, Compton, Lynwood, Maywood, and Bell
Gardens. The flood waters are anticipated to reach the City approximately ten hours
after failure. A maximum flood elevation of 2 feet is expected approximately 12 hours
after failure.
INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRAINTS - WATER SYSTEM
The City of Huntington Park is served by four water companies, which obtain their
supply of water from two sources: groundwater from local wells and water supplied by
the Metropolitan Water District. The four water companies are listed below.15
        •	 Maywood Mutual Water Company – The Maywood Mutual Water Company
             serves the northeast portion of the City. The service boundaries extend east
             to west from Maywood Avenue to the City’s border with Maywood, and north
             to south from Slauson Avenue to Randolph Avenue. Approximately 70% of
             the Maywood Mutual Water Company’s costumers reside in Huntington Park.
        •	 Walnut Park Mutual Water Company – Walnut Park Mutual Water Company
             serves the odd side of Walnut Street (addresses 2901-3501 Walnut Street).
        •	 Golden State Water Company – The City of Huntington Park is located within
             the Central Basin West service area of the Golden State Water Company.
             Golden State Water Company serves the western portion of the City. The
             service boundaries extend from Slauson Avenue to the north to Florence
             Avenue to the south, and from the City’s western border with Florence-
             Graham to west to Alameda Street to the east.
        •	 Severn Trent Services – Severn Trent is the City’s main provider of water and
             operates multiple wells in the City, including Wells Number 12, 14, and 17.
15 City of Huntington Park.	
6-68    HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRAINTS - SEWERS
The City of Huntington Park Public Works Department maintains the City’s sewer
system. Sewage generated by the City is conveyed to regional sewage treatment
facilities maintained and operated by the Los Angeles County Sanitation District.
Wastewater collected by the LACSD is conveyed to the Joint Water Pollution Control
Plant located at 24501 Figueroa Street in Carson. This treatment plant provides
primary and secondary treatment for approximately 280 million gallons per day (mgd)
and has a total permitted capacity of 400 mgd. Thus, a remaining capacity of 120 mgd
is available for future development in the region.
INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRAINTS - STORM DRAINAGE
There is minimal flood risk in the City of Huntington Park (Zone X), as indicated in the
Federal Emergency Management Agency’s Flood Insurance Rate Program. The Los
Angeles River Channel is a 500-foot wide concrete channel that is designed to handle
the storm water runoff from the Los Angeles area. The river is located north and east
of the City approximately 1.90 miles to the east. The maintenance of the river is the
responsibility of the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works, Flood Control
District.16 Flooding and inundation hazards are described in the Safety Element. The
majority of the storm drains in the City are owned and maintained by the Los Angeles
County Flood Control District that connects directly to the Los Angeles River to the
east. There are storm drains along the major arterials.
INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRAINTS - UTILITIES AND
COMMUNICATIONS
Natural gas service to the City is provided by the Southern California Gas Company
(a subsidiary of SEMPRA Energy) and electricity is provided by the Southern California
Edison (SCE) Company. Southern California Gas Company serves more than 21 million
residents throughout Central and Southern California. Electrical power service to the
City is provided by Southern California Edison (SCE). SCE maintains overhead and
underground lines in the City to serve the energy demands of local residents and
businesses.
16 Los Angeles Department of Public Works. Flood Zone Determination Website. http://dpw.lacounty.gov/wmd/floodzone/	
                                                                                          SECTION 6: HOUSING         6-69

PUBLIC HOUSING AND THE RISK OF CONVERSION
Huntington Park has an active history of supporting affordable housing development.
The City has facilitated the development of eight residential developments, and the
acquisition/rehabilitation of six projects with long-term affordability covenants on all or
some of the units. These projects include: Concord Huntington Park, Seville Gardens,
Casa Rita, Rugby Senior Apartments, Casa Bonita, Rita Court, Santa Fe Village,
and Casa Bella (new construction), and Bissell Apartments, Bissell II, Bissell III, 6700
Middleton Street, 6822 Malabar Street, and the Mosaic Gardens projects (acquisition/
rehabilitation). These 14 projects provide a total of 557 affordable units, including 361
very low income (30% MFI), 149 low income (50% MFI) units, and 47 moderate income
(80% MFI) units. Of the total 557 units, 361 are senior units, 185 are family units, and 11
are family, transitional age youth units.
The City’s affordable projects are financed through a variety of funding sources,
including tax credits and HOME funds, which require long-term affordability controls.
None of these projects are at risk of conversion to market rate for at least 15 years. In
6-70  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

1999, the 162-unit Concord Huntington Park development pre-paid its HUD mortgage
and converted to market rate. However, the City utilized a Multifamily Mortgage
Revenue Bond to maintain project affordability for an additional 30 years.
The Housing Choice Voucher (HCV) program, formerly the Section 8 program, is
HUD’s largest program that helps low-income families, the elderly, and the disabled
find affordable decent, safe, and sanitary housing in the private market. Participants
receive federally subsidized vouchers that they can use to rent the home or apartment
of their choosing, provided that it meets the requirements of the program and
agreement of the landlord. The funding assistance is provided to the family or
individual, the voucher holder, and can move with the family or individual rather than
being tied to the property or unit.
The Housing Authority of the County of Los Angeles (HACoLA) is the local public
agency providing Housing Choice Vouchers within Huntington Park. According to
a special data run conducted by HACoLA for the City, as of September 2014, there
were a total of 458 Huntington Park households receiving tenant-based Housing
Choice Vouchers. Nearly 90% of the City’s Section 8 recipients are of Hispanic origin,
consistent with the ethnic make-up of the City’s population, which is 97% Hispanic.
Elderly households comprise approximately two-thirds of the City’s Section 8 recipients
(295 households), indicative of several large senior housing complexes with significant
numbers of Section 8 tenants. The City also has a high proportion of disabled
households receiving Section 8 (265 households), although many of these households
are also likely to be seniors. There are no public housing projects located within
Huntington Park.
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING   6-71

6.3 PLANNING VISION
The City of Huntington Park, with the implementation of the Housing Element, seeks
to promote an orderly pattern of quality future development to achieve a complete
and controlled balance of growth among land uses. The following objectives will be
realized through the implementation of the policies and programs contained in the
Housing Element:
      •	 To promote the conservation of housing within the City while;
      •	 To provide for the development of new housing in the City of
         Huntington Park;
      •	 To continue to identify adequate sites for new residential in the City;
      •	 To strive to remove those constraints that may impede new housing
         development in Huntington Park; and,
      •	 To ensure that fair and equal housing practices are observed at all times.
6-72  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

The City’s Housing Element policies are outlined in the section that follows. The
policies are arranged under each of the issue areas discussed above. The following
policies will establish the policy framework for the Housing Element.
HOUSING ELEMENT POLICIES
ISSUE AREA: HOUSING CONSERVATION
      •	 Housing Element Policy 1. The City of Huntington Park shall promote the
         maintenance of the existing housing units and shall require property owners
         to maintain their housing so the units are safe, healthful, and aesthetically
         pleasing.
      •	 Housing Element Policy 2. The City of Huntington Park shall minimize
         housing displacement and require expeditious and equitable relocation in the
         event units are demolished.
      •	 Housing Element Policy 3. The City of Huntington Park shall vigorously
         oppose any public agency initiative that would result in the removal of existing
         housing units without the provision of replacement housing.
      •	 Housing Element Policy 4. The City of Huntington Park, where possible,
         shall work with property owners to bring any illegal additions or building
         construction up to the current Building Code and other health and safety
         code requirements.
ISSUE AREA: DEVELOPMENT OF NEW HOUSING
      •	 Housing Element Policy 5. The City of Huntington Park shall encourage an
         adequate supply of dwelling units to meet the needs of all income groups
         through its General Plan.
      •	 Housing Element Policy 6. The City of Huntington Park shall promote the
         development of new owner-occupied housing units to meet the housing
         demand for moderate and upper income households.
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING     6-73

     •	 Housing Element Policy 7. The City of Huntington Park shall continue to
        cooperate with other public agencies and NGOs as a means to maintain and
        preserve the existing emergency and transitional housing in certain areas of
        the City.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 8. The City of Huntington Park shall ensure that new
        higher-density residential projects are kept at a scale (number of units, height,
        etc.) compatible in design with adjacent residential areas.
ISSUE AREA: IDENTIFICATION OF ADEQUATE SITES
     •	 Housing Element Policy 9. The City of Huntington Park shall assist
        developers in the identification of land suitable for housing developments for
        medium- and lower-income families and individuals.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 10. The City of Huntington Park shall explore
        opportunities for new residential development within those areas of the City
        occupied by vacant and obsolete commercial and industrial uses.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 11. The City of Huntington Park shall work to ensure
        that potential sites for residential development, located in those areas that
        were previously occupied by non-residential land uses, are investigated to
        determine whether or not previous on-site uses present potential health risks.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 12. The City of Huntington Park shall implement
        new land use designations, such as Mixed Use, for key areas of the City that
        could accommodate such development.
ISSUE AREA: REMOVAL OF GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
     •	 Housing Element Policy 13. The City of Huntington Park shall continue to
        review and streamline administrative procedures for processing development
        permits and establish finite time limits for such approvals so as to minimize the
        time, costs, and uncertainty associated with development.
6-74 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

     •	 Housing Element Policy 14. The City of Huntington Park shall periodically
         review and update development codes and standards to minimize their
         impact on new development.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 15. The City of Huntington Park shall explore
         innovative strategies that will facilitate the planning and design review process
         while providing clear and consistent direction to housing developers and
         property owners.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 16. The City of Huntington Park shall continue to
         cooperate with other public agencies and the adjacent cities in identifying
         strategies to promote and facilitate new housing construction.
ISSUE AREA: EQUAL HOUSING
     •	 Housing Element Policy 17. The City of Huntington Park shall ensure that
         all persons with special housing needs, such as the elderly and handicapped,
         have an adequate choice of suitable dwelling units.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 18. The City of Huntington Park shall ensure
         adequate housing and high quality community services for all persons
         regardless of income, age, race, sex, marital status, or ethnic background.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 19. The City of Huntington Park shall vigorously
         oppose those prejudices, practices, and market behaviors that result in
         housing discrimination.
     •	 Housing Element Policy 20. The City of Huntington Park shall cooperate
         with other public agencies involved in the enforcement of laws aimed at
         promoting access to housing (fair housing laws) and non-discrimination.
HOUSING PROGRAMS
Federal funds play a crucial role in implementing the Consolidated Plan. Local private
and non-federal funds are usually insufficient to meet the heavy demand for housing
and services in our community. Agencies receiving CDBG and HOME funds use those
                                                                  SECTION 6: HOUSING   6-75

funds as a commitment to receiving other funding sources. Likewise, the City also
leverages other resources among the formula grant programs. For example, the
HOME program is matched by a variety of sources, including: private investment,
public investment, and tax credits. The HOME Program requires a match of every
dollar drawn; however, the City remains exempt from meeting this mandate. Since
its inception, the City of Huntington Park has received a 100% match reduction, and
expects to receive such a reduction until otherwise indicated by HUD. Huntington
Park’s primary source of funds used to address the community’s housing needs are
HOME and Section 8. CDBG funds are directed almost entirely towards community
development activities. Huntington Park’s priority non-community development
needs include unmet community facility, infrastructure, public service, economic
development, and planning needs. Identified needs and priorities reflect the results of
input from various City departments, as well as input from agency consultations and
the citizen participation process.
PROGRAM #1 - HUNTINGTON PARK CODE ENFORCEMENT
Under this program, the City will continue proactive enforcement of existing Municipal
Code provisions relating to the appropriate use and development of properties
throughout the City. The Code Enforcement Program is designed to bring properties
up to City Code requirements and to clean up and improve unsightly or unsafe
properties. Under this program, City Code Enforcement personnel will continue to
refer property owners cited for Code violations to the housing rehabilitation assistance
programs as a means to provide financial assistance to qualifying households.
The majority of the Code violations in the City were related to property maintenance
and outdoor storage. No additional funding and/or staffing will be required or are
anticipated with this program’s continued implementation. The code enforcement
efforts will be linked with the housing rehabilitation programs in that property
owners of substandard units receiving code violation notices will also be informed of
rehabilitation programs. Under this Housing Element, the program will be continued
over the entire planning period applicable to this Housing Element update. This
program’s implementation strategy is summarized below:
6-76   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

       •	 Source of Funding. General Fund and Community Development Block Grant
          (CDBG).
       •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
       •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community Development
          Department.
       •	 Implementation Schedule. The program is ongoing and will be continued.
PROGRAM #2 - EMERGENCY SHELTER
Angeles Homeless Count for the Los Angeles County/City Continuum of Care (LA
CoC) as part of the national effort required by HUD to enumerate the homeless
population. For purposes of reporting homeless count data to HUD, all Continua of
Care use a “literal homeless” definition: “Men, women, and children who are:
       •	 Sleeping in places not meant for human habitation, including on the street, in
          parks, along rivers, in backyards, unconverted garages, cars and vans, along
          freeways or under overpasses, and the like; or
       •	 Sleeping in emergency shelters, safe havens, or transitional housing programs
          and were homeless upon entry to the program.”
As required by SB-2, the City will provide for an Emergency Shelter Program
that includes the identification of a geographic area where such facilities will be
permitted by right. The City will continue to inform those special service agencies
and organizations of the grants through mailing and brochures. The implementation
strategy is summarized below:
       •	 Source of Funding. General Fund.
       •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
       •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
          Development Department.
       •	 Implementation Schedule. The program is ongoing and will be continued.
                                                               SECTION 6: HOUSING    6-77

PROGRAM #3 - EQUAL HOUSING
The City will continue to refer equal housing-related complaints to the Fair Housing
Council of Los Angeles County which acts as an independent third-party to
discrimination complaints. The City will make available literature on the Program at
the Huntington Park City Hall, Chamber of Commerce, Library, City of Huntington Park
website and other areas that the Community gathers information.
This program is currently in existence. Therefore, additional funding and/or staffing
will not be required or are anticipated with this program’s continued implementation.
This program will be continued over the entire planning period applicable to this
element. The City will continue to provide these services to Huntington Park residents
and will advertise the availability of this program through brochures. Brochures
describing the services of Fair Housing are available in the Community Development
Department. Further marketing of the services available from Fair Housing will occur
through informational pieces in the City-wide newsletter and through information
provided on the City’s official website. This program’s implementation strategy is
summarized below:
       •	 Source of Funding. General Fund.
       •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
       •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
          Development Department.
       •	 Implementation Schedule. The program is ongoing and will be continued.
PROGRAM #4 - HOUSING REHABILITATION
The City will continue this program which is supported through the Community
Development Block Program (CDBG). The City of Huntington Park provides qualified
City homeowners assistance with their property maintenance through two Federally
funded programs: The Housing Rehabilitation Program and the Handyworker Program.
The Housing Rehabilitation Program provides grants to low- and moderate-income
homeowners. The single-family residential homeowners who qualify can receive a
maximum of $15,000 for eligible improvements and mobile home owners may be
granted a maximum of $8,000. The City’s Housing Rehabilitation Program offers
homeowners the opportunity to make repairs and improvements. This program’s
implementation strategy is summarized below:
6-78  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

      •	 Source of Funding. Community Development Block Grant (CDBG).
      •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
      •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community Services Department.
      •	 Implementation Schedule. The program is ongoing and will be continued.
PROGRAM #5 - LAND USE AND ZONING CONFORMITY
The City of Huntington Park will continue to review the Zoning Ordinance to ensure
that the development standards are consistent with those identified in the Land Use
Element. The City will initiate appropriate changes to the Zoning Map to ensure
conformity between the Land Use Element and Zoning Map. The City will also update
its General Plan in coming months to ensure the land use designations conform to the
State’s density requirements.
No additional funding and/or staffing will be required or are anticipated with this
program’s continued implementation. Under this Housing Element, the program will
be continued over the entire planning period. This program’s implementation strategy
is summarized below:
      •	 Source of Funding. General Fund.
      •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: Not Applicable.
      •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
         Development Department.
      •	 Implementation Schedule. The City’s Zoning Ordinance will undergo an
         annual review.
                                                               SECTION 6: HOUSING   6-79

PROGRAM #6 - REVIEW OF GOVERNMENTAL CONSTRAINTS
AND THE ZONING ORDINANCE
This program is an existing program that will be continued through the 2013-2021
Planning Period. In 2012, the City reduced its plan check fees by 23%-58% plus its
building permit fees by 23%. This program involves the comprehensive review of the
City’s Zoning Ordinance. The review will also include development standards related
to building height, setbacks, and Density Bonus requirements for qualified affordable
housing. The zoning requirements will be revised to ensure that it conforms to the
Density Bonus requirements outlined in Government Code Section 65915. This section
requires the City to undertake the following:
       •	 The City must adopt an ordinance to implement the requirements of Section
          65915 regarding Density Bonuses.
       •	 The City must adopt a procedure to waive or modify development standards
          which preclude or interfere with the effect of the Density Bonus.
       •	 The Zoning Ordinance revision will eliminate the definition of “family” as part
          of the current revision.
       •	 The development standards for the residential zones will be reviewed to make
          sure they do not serve as a constraint to residential development.
       •	 The Zoning Ordinance must be revised to address single room occupancy
          (SRO) housing and supportive housing.
 This program’s implementation strategy is summarized below:
       •	 Source of Funding. General Fund.
       •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
       •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
           Development Department.
       •	 Implementation Schedule. The review will be completed by the fourth
           quarter of 2015.
6-80   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

PROGRAM #7 - TRANSITIONAL HOUSING
Transitional housing is a type of supportive housing used to facilitate the movement
of homeless individuals and families to permanent housing. A person may live in a
transitional housing unit for up to two years while receiving supportive services that
enable independent living. The City will continue to permit the existing Huntington
Park Shelter, which includes a transitional housing facility, to operate.
The City intends to comply with State law regarding the provision of transitional
housing. The existing Huntington Park Salvation Army Shelter located in the City
includes a transitional housing facility. The following will be applicable to
transitional housing:
      •	 Transitional housing will be subject to the same permitting procedures as
          that required for other permitted uses for the zone without undue special
          regulatory requirements.
      •	 The residential zones are in close proximity to transportation service providers,
          schools, parks, and other public services and facilities.
      •	 Parking requirements, fire regulations, and design standards for transitional
          housing will be the same as that required for the corresponding residential
          zone districts. As a result, the applicable development standards will not
          impede the efficient use of the site as transitional housing.
The implementation strategy is summarized below:
      •	 Source of Funding. Community Development Block Grant (CDBG).
      •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: To maintain the existing service level.
      •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
          Development Department.
      •	 Implementation Schedule. The review will be completed by the fourth
          quarter of 2015.
                                                                  SECTION 6: HOUSING   6-81

PROGRAM #8 - ACCESSORY (SECOND) UNIT ORDINANCE
This new Second Unit Ordinance permits the construction of second units pursuant
to the City’s Zoning Code as required in Section 65852.2 of the State of California
Government Code. The current Zoning Ordinance provides for a “guest house or
accessory use.” However, the City’s Zoning Ordinance will need to be updated to
conform to current State requirements. This program provides for the preparation,
adoption, and subsequent implementation of a new Second Unit Ordinance that is
required under State law. The Ordinance will enable owners of single-family properties
to construct accessory units. The Ordinance will also enable the City to establish
development standards for such units.
The implementation of this program will begin with the preparation and review of the
new Second Unit Ordinance that will be included in the City’s Zoning Ordinance. Once
the ordinance meets all pertinent State and local requirements, it will be adopted
by the City Council. Finally, the Second Unit Ordinance will be advertised on the
City’s website and printed handouts will be prepared and provided at the Planning
Department counter. This program’s implementation strategy is summarized below:
       •	 Source of Funding. General Fund.
       •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: The City will revise its Zoning Ordinance
          consistent with State law.
       •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
          Development Department.
       •	 Implementation Schedule. The City’s Zoning Ordinance will be amended by
          the end of 2014 to provide for the Second Unit Ordinance.
6-82   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

PROGRAM #9 - DENSITY BONUS
The City is required under State law to have adopted density bonus regulations in
its Zoning Ordinance. This new program provides for the incorporation of density
bonuses and other incentives in the City’s Zoning Ordinance to developers who
construct projects with qualifying percentages of affordable housing units. The City
has adopted a “Density Bonus Ordinance (Section 9-3.203 [Allowable Bonuses] that
contains the following elements:
      “The following list outlines the development bonuses that may be allowed by
      the Commission, based on the number and extent of amenities, public facilities,
      and other positive development characteristics, outlined above and/or by the
      Commission, that are included in a project.
             1.	 Increased allowable floor area ratio (FAR);
             2.	 Increased building height;
             3.	 Reduced building setback requirements;
             4.	 Increased lot coverage percentage;
             5.	 Reduced parking requirements;
             6.	 Increased density;
             7.	 Reduction of fees; and
             8.	 Other development bonuses as determined by the Commission.
      The amount of development bonus shall be determined by the Planning
      Commission in accordance with reasonable standards or criteria such as by
      Community Development Department or City policy, ordinance, or a special
      nexus or fiscal impact study as part of the project application.”
As indicated previously, the Density Bonus Law (found in California Government Code
Sections 65915—65918), is a State mandate. A developer who meets the requirements
of the State law is entitled to receive the density bonus and other benefits. In addition
to the density bonus, the City is also required to provide one or more “incentives”
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING     6-83

or “concessions” to each project which qualifies for the density bonus. Cities and
counties are required to grant a Density Bonus and other incentives or concessions to
housing projects that contain one of the following:
       •	 At least 5% of the housing units are restricted to very low-income residents;
       •	 At least 10% of the housing units are restricted to lower income residents;
       •	 At least 10% of the housing units in a for-sale common interest development
          are restricted to moderate-income residents;
       •	 The project donates at least one acre of land to the City or County for very
          low-income units, and the land has the appropriate general plan designation,
          zoning permits and approvals, and access to public facilities needed for
          such housing;
       •	 The project is a senior citizen housing development (no affordable units
          required); and,
       •	 The project is a mobile-home park age-restricted to senior citizens (no
          affordable units required).
The amount of the Density Bonus is set on a sliding scale, based upon the percentage
of affordable units at certain prescribed income levels. In addition to the Density
Bonus, the City is also required to provide one or more ‘incentives’ or “concessions”
to each project which qualifies for the Density Bonus (except that market rate senior
citizen projects with no affordable units, and land donated for very low-income
housing, do not appear to be entitled to incentives or concessions). A concession or
incentive is defined as:
       •	 A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code or
          architectural design requirements, such as a reduction in setback or minimum
          square footage requirements;
       •	 Approval of mixed use zoning; or
       •	 Other regulatory incentives or concessions which actually result in identifiable
          and financially sufficient cost reductions.
6-84  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

The number of required incentives or concessions is based on the percentage of
affordable units in the project:
      •	 For projects with at least 5% very low-income, 10% lower income or 10%
          moderate-income units, one incentive or concession is required;
      •	 For projects with at least 10% very low-income, 20% lower income or 20%
          moderate-income units, two incentives or concessions are required; and,
      •	 For projects with at least 15% very low-income, 30% lower income or 30%
          moderate-income units, three incentives or concessions are required.
The City is required to grant the concession or incentive proposed by the developer
unless it finds that the proposed concession or incentive is not required in order to
achieve the required affordable housing costs or rents, or would cause a public health
or safety problem, cause an environmental problem, harm historical property, or would
be contrary to law. Financial incentives, fee waivers and reductions in dedication
requirements may be, but are not required to be, provided by the City.
The City’s existing Density Bonus does include provisions related to the granting of
Density Bonuses for affordable housing (refer to Subsection 13, Affordable housing;
(Also see Subsection 9-4.103.E). The City will then promote the program by providing
brochures describing the program and its benefits, and making them available at
the counter and information desk in City Hall. Promotion of this program will be
accomplished by verbally communicating information regarding housing bonuses to
housing developers as they are assisted by the Planning Department at the public
counter or over the telephone. Under this Housing Element, the program will be
continued over the entire planning period applicable to this Housing Element update.
This program’s implementation strategy is summarized below:
      •	 Source of Funding. General Fund.
      •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: The City will advertise this program through
          handout materials and communication with developers.
      •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
          Development Department.
      •	 Implementation Schedule. The program is a new program. The new
          Affordable Housing Density Bonus Ordinance will be adopted by the end of
          2014. The brochure materials and handouts will be provided by the end of the
          second quarter of 2015.
                                                               SECTION 6: HOUSING     6-85

PROGRAM #10 - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION HOUSING
The State now requires all cities to maintain a “reasonable accommodation
ordinance” to ensure that a city’s zoning and development requirements do not
hinder the implementation of housing improvements that aid disabled persons.
These improvements may include ramps, wider doorways, hand rails, etc. The City of
Huntington Park does not have any such constraints though this commitment needs
to be established through an amendment to the Zoning Ordinance that addresses
reasonable accommodation. This program is a new program that will be implemented
during the 2013 through 2021 planning period. Not all of the disability categories
require physical alterations to the housing unit to better accommodate the disabled
resident. However, many residents will benefit from specific improvements that would
better accommodate a disabled person.
The City of Huntington Park has adopted a “Reasonable Accommodation Ordinance’
that is included in Section 9-3.1901 in the City of Huntington Park Municipal Code. The
stated purpose is to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation
in regulations and procedures to ensure equal access to housing, and to facilitate the
development of housing. The purpose of this section is to provide a procedure under
which a disabled person may request a reasonable accommodation in the application
of zoning requirements. Under this program, the City will continue to review the
Ordinance to ensure it meets current State requirements. The review related to the
implementation of the Ordinance will be ministerial in nature with minimal or no
processing fee. Improvements may be approved by the Community Development
Director as long as a number of findings may be made. First, the request for
reasonable accommodation must be used by an individual with a disability protected
under fair housing laws. Second, the requested accommodation is necessary to
make housing available to an individual with a disability protected under fair housing
laws. Third, the requested accommodation would not impose an undue financial or
administrative burden on the City. Finally, the requested accommodation would not
require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the City’s General Plan
and Zoning Ordinance.
6-86   HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

       •	 Source of Funding. General Fund.
       •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: Facilitate the development, maintenance
           and improvement of housing for persons with disabilities; reduce processing
           time for reasonable accommodation requests by 50 percent.
       •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
           Development Department.
       •	 Implementation Schedule.The Zoning Ordinance revision will be completed
           by the second quarter of 2014.
PROGRAM #11 - ENERGY CONSERVATION
Under this program, the City will review the City’s Zoning Ordinance and subdivision
requirements, as well as other applicable codes, to promote energy conservation
in housing rehabilitation and in the construction of new housing. This program will
supplement existing City efforts in the enforcement of the State’s construction codes
requiring energy efficiency in new construction. The City of Huntington Park will adopt
a “Green City” ordinance in conformance to current State requirements. This program
will ensure that developers and/or architects incorporate certain State-mandated
energy and water conserving equipment in any new development. The City’s website
will be expanded to include a “Green City” section that will refer users to a wide range
of initiatives from other energy and water providers that will be effective in helping
to conserve these resources. The programs will include rebates from other energy
providers for energy conserving refrigerators, water heaters, and other household
appliances. The key elements of this program include the following:
       •	 The City will encourage and support cost-effective energy technologies
           (passive solar space heating and cooling and water conservation) in the review
           of new residential development. The City shall permit the installation of
           photovoltaic/solar and solar water heating systems on new
           residential construction.
       •	 The City will establish an information kiosk in Civic Center near the planning
           counter that will include brochures and handouts promoting energy
           conservation from local utility providers. In addition, the City’s website will be
           updated to publicize the availability of the various rebate programs and tax
           incentives that will reduce the cost of installing energy-saving devices.
                                                                   SECTION 6: HOUSING      6-87

      •	 City of Huntington Park will update the Zoning Ordinance and subdivision
         requirements and other applicable codes to promote energy conservation in
         housing rehabilitation and in the construction of new housing.
      •	 The City shall support ongoing programs from SCE and Sempra Energy
         that promote energy conservation. The programs sponsored by the utility
         providers include rebates for energy conserving refrigerators, water heaters,
         and other household appliances.
      •	 The City will review the Zoning Ordinance to ensure that there are no
         requirements that are overly restrictive concerning the installation of solar
         panels. The City will then amend the Zoning Ordinance to ensure that solar
         panels are permitted in all Zone Districts.
      •	 Title 24 of the California Building Code requires phasing out older, less energy
         efficient toilets by replacing them with toilets that use only 1.6 gallons per
         flush. The City will continue to ensure that this requirement is
         being implemented.
      •	 The City shall promote water conservation (drought-tolerant landscaping,
         water conserving plumbing fixtures, etc.) in the review of new development.
No additional funding and/or staffing will be required or are anticipated with this
program’s continued implementation. Under this Housing Element, the program will
be continued over the entire planning period. This program’s implementation strategy
is summarized below:
      •	 Source of Funding. General Fund.
      •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: The City will revise its ordinance consistent
         with State law and advertise it through handout materials available at
         the public counter through the City’s web page and through periodic
         advertisements in the City newsletter.
      •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
         Development Department.
      •	 Implementation Schedule.The program is ongoing and will be continued.
6-88  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

PROGRAM #12 - SINGLE ROOM OCCUPANCY HOUSING
The State requires all cities to update their zoning ordinances to provide for SRO
housing. A single-room occupancy (SRO) development may serve as an important
source of affordable housing for lower-income individuals, seniors, and persons
with disabilities. A SRO unit usually is small ranging in size from 200 square feet to
350 square feet. Many of the older SROs have been lost due to deterioration, hotel
conversions, and demolition.
The City has adopted a SRO Ordinance (Title 9, Chapter 3, Article 13 [Single Room
Occupancy Facilities]). The purpose of this Article is to provide location, development,
and operational standards for SRO facilities. The key elements of the SRO Ordinance
include the following:
      “Single room occupancy (SRO) facilities, allowable only in the SRO Overlay
      District and within specified Districts in the Huntington Park Downtown Specific
      Plan (DTSP) subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit, shall be located/
      developed/operated in the following manner:
             •	 The parcel upon which the single room occupancy facility is to be
                established shall conform to all standards of the R-H and the Huntington
                Park Downtown Specific Plan (DTSP) zoning districts, as applicable.
             •	 SROs shall not be located within 250 feet of a parcel which has a school
                for children, adult bookstore or theater, bar or liquor store; and existing
                motels, hotels or apartments shall not be permitted to convert to SROs.
             •	 SROs shall be located within one-quarter mile of a bus stop or transit
                station.
             •	 SROs shall not exceed a maximum density of seventy (70) units per gross
                acre in the DTSP or 400 units per gross acre in the SRO Overlay District.
             •	 Off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with Article 8 of this
                Chapter (Off-Street Parking Standards). Secured bicycle or motorcycle
                spaces shall be provided at a minimum ratio of one space for each ten
                (10) tenants. A permanent, continuously available temporary parking/
                loading area shall be provided adjacent to the main entrance.
                                                                  SECTION 6: HOUSING     6-89

              •	 The design of a SRO project shall coordinate with and complement the
                 existing architectural style and standards of the surrounding land uses.
                 If a design theme has been established in the proposed area, the theme
                 should be reflected in the design and scale of the SRO project;
              •	 Exterior common areas and/or open courtyards should be provided
                 throughout the project. These areas should be designed to provide
                 passive open space with tables, chairs, planters or small garden spaces
                 to make these areas useful and functional for the tenants. Exterior
                 common areas, including parking areas, shall be illuminated with a
                 minimum of two (2) footcandles by low pressure sodium lighting from
                 dusk to dawn. The exterior lighting shall be stationary and directed away
                 from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.”
This program will involve the updating of the SRO Ordinance as required during this
planning period. The implementation elements are outlined below:
        •	 Source of Funding. General Fund (for the rezoning).
        •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: The City will amend the Zoning Ordinance
           as required by State law.
        •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
            Development Department.
        •	 Implementation Schedule.Within 12 months of Housing Element Adoption.
PROGRAM #13 - SUPPORTIVE HOUSING
The State requires all cities to update their zoning ordinances to provide for supportive
housing. Supportive housing refers to permanent rental housing that also provides a
wide array of support services that are designed to enable residents to maintain stable
housing and lead more productive lives. Supportive housing is most often targeted
to persons that have greater risk factors such as mental illness or drug dependence
that could ultimately lead to prolonged homelessness. The types of support services
that may be provided include medical and mental health care, vocational and
employment training, substance abuse counseling, childcare, and independent living
skills training. Most supportive housing is constructed and managed by non-profit
housing developers in partnership with non-profit service providers. However, the
State requires that local governments take a proactive role in facilitating the review and
6-90    HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

approval process. As a result, the City will be required to amend its Zoning Ordinance
to permit such housing in its residential zone districts. Such housing is already located
in the City though this program will enable the Huntington Park Planning Department
and other City agencies to better track and monitor such uses.
The State requires this Housing Element to identify zones that allow supportive
housing development and demonstrate that zoning, local regulations (standards
and the permit process) encourage and facilitate supportive housing. Supportive
housing may include a single family detached unit or an apartment building. The
City of Huntington Park will permit supportive housing within all of the residential
Zone districts. The City will comply with all State requirements governing supportive
housing. The implementation strategy is summarized below:
      •	 Source of Funding. Community Development Block Grant (CDBG).
      •	 2014-2021 Program Objectives: The City will amend the Zoning Ordinance
          as required by State law.
      •	 Agency Responsible for Implementation. Community
          Development Department.
      •	 Implementation Schedule.Within 12 months of Housing Element Adoption.
REGIONAL HOUSING NEEDS ASSESSMENT
This section of the City of Huntington Park Housing Element compares the housing
need projections developed by the Southern California Association of Governments
(SCAG) as part of the Regional Housing Needs Assessment (RHNA), with historic
population, housing, and employment growth in the City. The projections were
derived from population, housing, and employment figures developed by SCAG as
part of the earlier planning process undertaken to develop the RHNA. The authority
to determine housing needs for the various income groups for cities within the
region has been delegated to the Southern California Association of Governments
(SCAG), pursuant to Section 65584 of the Government Code. The housing needs are
categorized according to income groups. The income categories include Very low,
Low, Moderate, and Above moderate-income households, and the incomes of the
selected income groups are based upon percentages of the median household income
for the larger Los Angeles County region. The RHNA housing need for Huntington
Park is categorized according to the following income groups:
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING     6-91

      •	 The Very-Low-income households are those households whose income does
         not exceed 50% of the median household income for the greater Los Angeles
         area. The City’s RHNA for this category is 216 units.
      •	 The Low-income households earn from 51% to 80% of the median. The City’s
         RHNA for this category is 128 households.
      •	 The Moderate-income groups earn from 81% to 120% of the median and the
         City’s RHNA for this category is 149 households.
      •	 The Above-Moderate households earn over 120% of the median income and
         the City’s RHNA for this category is 402 households.
The total projected construction need for Huntington Park during the 2014 to 2021
planning period is 895 units. Table 6-24 illustrate the distribution of the projected
housing needs for the four income categories.
  Table 6-24: RHNA Allocation for Huntington Park 2014-2021
The HCD indicates that the projected need for extremely low-income households
may be calculated by assuming that such households represent 50% of the very low-
income households. In other words, the future house need for extremely low-income
households in Huntington Park is projected to be 5 units. The State Legislature also
requires local governments to consider the projected needs for extremely low-income
households. As indicated previously, those households that have incomes of 30% of
6-92  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

the County median would fall into this category. Based on a 2010 Los Angeles County
median income ($61,632), an extremely low-income household would have a median
annual income of $18,490 or less.
LAND AVAILABLE TO ACCOMMODATE RHNA HOUSING NEED
The City of Huntington Park is fully developed and, as a result, any new residential
development will consist of infill development within properties that are currently
vacant or underutilized. New residential development may also occur within
residentially zoned properties where the existing land uses are non-residential at the
present time. The Land Use Element contains two residential land use categories and
a single category each for commercial, industrial, open space, and institutional.
      •	 Residential, Low-Density. This land use designation contemplates lower
         density residential development, including single-family homes, within those
         properties that are so designated. The maximum development density is 8.71
         dwelling units per acre. (One unit per parcel is permitted with a minimum lot
         size of 5,000 square feet.) This designation is limited to properties improved
         with existing single-family (detached) dwelling units.
      •	 Residential, Medium-Density. This land use designation permits higher
         density residential development that includes multiple-family development
         (town homes, condominiums, and apartments). The maximum development
         density is 21.78 units per acre. The corresponding zone districts include R-1,
         R-2, R-3, and C-3R zones.
The primary infill housing strategy focuses on the identification of a specific area of the
City that could be developed in residential uses. Three available sites were identified
as potential candidates that would enable the City to accommodate its RHNA
allocation. The sites are identified in Appendix A.
                                                                SECTION 6: HOUSING      6-93

QUANTIFIED OBJECTIVES
Table 6-25 indicates the department responsible for overseeing the administration
and/or implementation of the aforementioned programs. Table 3-4 also indicates
the funding source for the program, the schedule for the program’s implementation,
and finally, where appropriate, the number of units that will be assisted through the
implementation of the housing program.
              Table 6-25: 5-Year Housing Program Implementation
                                                                 Matrix, 2014-2012
6-94  HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030

Table 6-25: 5-Year Housing Program Implementation
Matrix, 2014-2012 (continued)
                                        SECTION 6: HOUSING 6-95
      THIS PAGE HAS BEEN INTENTIONALLY LEFT BLANK.
6-96 HUNTINGTON PARK GENERAL PLAN 2030
